


















































March 31, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 31, 1989 
 

417 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some guests in the Speaker’s gallery. We 
have a number of people from Radville and area in southern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a number of people here, parents and some children, 
but I would particularly like to introduce four women. Together 
these women have created an innovative magazine called Kid 
Proof, which encourages our children to read and write. They 
recently celebrated their first year of publication, and this 
magazine is now circulated across Canada and the United 
States. And as I introduce them, I’d ask them to stand, Mr. 
Speaker. They are: Lynn MacDonald, who is a lawyer and a 
school trustee from Radville area; Geeta McLeod, who is a farm 
wife; Lynne Hall, who is a farm wife and a school trustee; and 
Therese Durston, who is a grade 1 teacher. 
 
I want to congratulate them on being awarded the Hilroy 
Fellowship sponsored by the Canadian Teachers’ Federation. 
This award recognizes innovative education projects. It should 
also be pointed out that Debby Noble of Deschambault won the 
award of great merit for her slide library about native art. It is 
this type of leadership and devotion that continue to make 
Saskatchewan such a great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome and to congratulate and to acknowledge these women 
on their fantastic achievement, and as well to welcome the other 
guests from Radville and area, who I would also ask to stand at 
this time and be greeted by all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure this morning, Mr. Speaker, as I introduce to you and to 
the members of the Assembly, one student from grade 6 
elementary school at Craik, from Craik, Saskatchewan, the 
school that I attended. This student is a very important student 
to me this morning. He happens to be my grandson, Trevor 
Muirhead. Trevor has been spending the holidays with us, Mr. 
Speaker. He has shown a great interest in the proceedings. He 
attended the budget yesterday, and it wouldn’t surprise me at 
all, Mr. Speaker, that Trevor might be a future Progressive 
Conservative candidate for the great constituency of Arm River. 
 
I would ask all members to please welcome my grandson, 
Trevor Muirhead. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland, I  

would like to introduce a group that is sitting in your gallery, 
the 52nd Sutherland Ventures Company. These are four young 
people — Don Lepard, Karen Orman, James Gregory and Jamie 
Wilkesheski, and their leader, Neil Gregory. 
 
They had a tour of the Legislative Assembly last fall but 
decided to come back, tour Regina and a number of sites here, 
including the barracks, but thought they would like to take in 
question period. 
 
They have a trip planned for this summer to the Maritimes, and 
so they’ve had some great learning experiences, and look 
forward to question period today. I would invite all members of 
the Assembly, in their usual manner, to warmly welcome this 
group today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increases in Taxation 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 
question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, yesterday you 
presented your annual tax grab, which you call the budget, in 
this House. Once again, in your budget you have added to the 
crushing tax burden on Saskatchewan families, which your 
government created. Saskatchewan’s families’ purchasing 
power has been shrinking dramatically over recent years, and 
you only need to go to any business place in Saskatchewan and 
they will tell you what impact that’s had on them. And while 
that’s happening, Mr. Minister, the profits of Canadian 
corporations have increased in 1988 by 59 per cent. 
 
In view of this, Mr. Minister, how do you justify increasing 
your tax revenues from individuals and families in 
Saskatchewan in this year by $145 million, but only $23.6 
million from the corporate sector? Where is the fairness in that 
kind of budget making, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I appreciate the questions from the 
new Finance critic of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. But let me 
indicate to the hon. member that when we began tax reform last 
year, as we made it abundantly clear, we were making our 
corporate tax side competitive with Alberta because that is the 
main competitor for the province of Saskatchewan, and with all 
of the adjustments we would in fact see an increase in the 
revenues from corporations. And of course, that in fact shows 
up in the budget, Mr. Speaker, that the tax revenues from 
corporations increased. 
 
Let me also suggest to the hon. member, because he will 
remember this, he will remember this better than anyone else in 
the Assembly as a former Finance minister, that in his last 
budget, Mr. Speaker, corporate taxes paid 4.2 per cent of the 
provincial budget revenues. Under this government, Mr. 
Speaker, corporate taxes are up to 6.1 per cent, a 50 per cent 
increase in revenues from corporations by this government over 
what the NDP did.  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

418 
 

And I’m not including in that, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 
businesses are paying the fuel tax; individuals are not. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member to also say, as he is alluding to, 
that the tax in liquor and the tax on cigarettes hits the poor 
people; that it’s the poor people that are the drinkers of this 
province, I frankly would think is an insult to the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the Minister of Finance. 
Mr. Speaker, I find it rather interesting that he is so unable to 
defend his budget today that he’s got to hearken back to a 
period seven years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It doesn’t say much for his budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, you, better than anyone else, will recall that you 
promised the people of Saskatchewan a 10 per cent decrease in 
their personal income tax. The Premier promised it, you 
promised it, every member of that House promised it. You 
broke that promise and you betrayed the people of 
Saskatchewan, and instead what we have is your imposition of a 
2 per cent flat tax which is causing people’s taxes to go up even 
more. 
 
Why then, Mr. Minister, I ask you, did you give a 2 per cent tax 
decrease to large corporations this year, while you are 
increasing the taxes on people who are struggling to make a 
living on the farms and the homes in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already answered that a tax policy, Mr. 
Speaker, that is designed to both maintain Saskatchewan’s 
competitive position, vis-a-vis the province of Alberta, which 
we did because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . whether the hon. 
member from Quill Lakes likes to hear it or not, the province of 
Alberta is a main competitor of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and we have to give our corporations, as close as possible, an 
equal opportunity to compete with Alberta corporations. 
 
We went through this debate last year. It was fundamental to 
last year’s budget. But what we did indicate that the changes we 
made in the corporate tax structure last year would in fact 
increase the revenues from corporations, and we made that 
clear, and that is precisely what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t think it unfair. As a matter of fact, I think it fair to 
say that when we take a look at the budget I tabled yesterday, 
that corporation taxes are now 6.1 per cent of the budgetary 
revenues, compared to 4.2 per cent under NDP, a 50 per cent 
increase, tells us that our tax system is increasingly fair, Mr. 
Speaker; that the initiatives we took yesterday are reasonable, 
and, Mr. Speaker, the initiatives we took yesterday help pay for 
health care increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, if you are that concerned about 
competitiveness, why in Heaven’s name have you not removed 
the education and health tax which you promised to remove in 
1982 in the election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a 
question about fairness. For every dollar in tax that is paid by 
the corporations, by individuals . . . for every dollar in tax paid 
by individuals, the corporations in Saskatchewan pay only 17 
cents. Ever since you’ve been in power there has been a steady 
shift of the tax burden from corporations to individuals. The 
numbers show that this year alone, $145 million increase in 
income tax is paid by individuals. 
 
Why then, Mr. Minister, do the people on your side of the 
House and you and the Premier not realize that tax reform 
means a fairer tax system and some fairness in the tax system, 
and not tax breaks for the wealthy and tax breaks for the 
corporation at the expense of the families in Saskatchewan who 
are struggling to make ends meet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, it makes eminent sense to 
most fair-minded people that corporations in fact pay more tax 
and a higher percentage of government revenues today than did 
they under the NDP. Secondly, I think it makes eminent sense 
to the people of this province when we’re trying to attract 
businesses that we should be competitive with the province of 
Alberta. So, Mr. Speaker, yes, we are trying to get it both ways: 
we’re trying to get more total revenue, at the same time be 
competitive. 
 
But let me remind the hon. member, as well, that it was this 
government, Mr. Speaker, that took the sales tax off clothing 
under $250. You voted against it; you and the NDP voted 
against that. We took the sales tax off power utilities and the 
NDP voted against that. Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta 
pays health care premiums; the province of Saskatchewan does 
not. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member: you voted against the reductions 
of sales tax in this province, not for them, and I suggest the 
hypocrisy we’ve seen since the beginning of this session is 
continued today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax on Gasoline 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I have an offer to 
extend to the minister after yesterday’s budget. If you need your 
nose wiped let me know; I think I can do it from my chair over 
here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about one 
of your many broken promises, the gas tax. This is the tax you 
recall, Mr. Minister, that you castigated when you were in 
opposition because it was too high and it was  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

419 
 

unfair. Mr. Minister, it’s now 72 per cent higher than it was 
when you took office. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you think that’s fair to the public of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, let me remind the people of 
this province that Saskatchewan individuals that keep their 
receipts do not pay the gas tax. Let me indicate and remind the 
people of this province of two positions by the New Democratic 
Party and its leader. One, the member from Saskatoon 
University has publicly stated that the New Democratic Party 
would bring back the total gas tax. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, let me remind the people of this 
province that it was the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me remind the NDP that prior to the 
rebatable gas tax that it was the NDP . . . Here’s what the NDP 
said, that Saskatchewan people should not have to pay the tax, 
but truckers, tourists and out-of-province people should pay the 
tax. That is precisely what happens with the rebatable gas tax, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me also indicate to the hon. member that the criticism of the 
now Finance critic — and I ask him to remember this — when 
he complained that there was no gas tax and the major benefit 
did not go to Saskatchewan people but went to the trucking 
companies, you cannot have it both way, hon. member. You 
can’t say you want the tax on and then complain when it comes 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to get off the issue of your broken 
promises, Mr. Minister. The public of Saskatchewan don’t 
believe it any more than we do. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk about this gas tax, which might 
have been called the tax on small businesses, municipalities, 
and school boards because it is they who are going to pay the 
bulk of this tax in the long run. Mr. Minister, we checked with a 
cab driver who works 246 days a year, will pay $5,000 in a 
non-refundable tax. 
 
We checked with a trucking firm, relatively small, 12 diesel 
units. They’ll pay $107,000 in your tax. 
 
A school bus company, a relatively small one with 12 buses, 
they’ll pay 20,000 a year in non-refundable tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d tell this Assembly whether or 
not you believe this is an appropriate time to levy such a sharp 
tax on small business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Understand, Mr. Speaker, what the 
opposition today . . . on the one hand they’re complaining that 
corporations are not paying enough tax, and then when they pay 
the gas tax, it’s too much. Mr. Speaker, we have seen 
inconsistency — inconsistency — since the  

day this House started. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member, and I simply remind him of 
December 2, 1982, when he himself said in this Assembly: the 
major benefit from the cut in gas tax went to trucking 
companies. That’s what he said in 1982. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns last year with the 
rebatable system is that propane was increased. And that was a 
concern to school boards, many transportation companies, cab 
companies, and what not. It’s noticeable in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, that the propane did not increase under the budget, so 
they do have the alternate use. I’m sorry the hon. member 
missed that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member seems to find it impossible to 
distinguish between small Saskatchewan businesses and large 
corporations. Let me see, Mr. Minister, if you have any more 
ability to deal with municipalities. 
 
Last night you and I appeared on a television show and you 
complained that the federal government was going to transfer 
its deficit to this level of government by reducing transfer 
payments. Mr. Minister, I wonder if it has occurred to you that 
you’re doing precisely that when you levy this gas tax on the 
municipalities. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has told us that it will pay $697,000 in 
gas tax, all of it non-refundable. The school boards are going to 
pay $2.7 million in non-refundable tax. That’s going to result in 
an increase in property taxes for those municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, if it isn’t fair to you, why is it fair to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me remind the hon. member, because 
we’ve now been through this debate, and I’m very pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, as Finance minister, to stand up today and realize that 
all of the questions that the NDP have are one’s that they had 
from last year, Mr. Speaker. And I think that says a great deal 
about the budget I brought down yesterday. 
 
Let me remind the hon. member what was said by the city of 
Saskatoon when the gas tax was removed in total. What they 
said was there should be some assistance to the city of 
Saskatoon because bus ridership dropped because people were 
driving. You can’t have that both ways. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is, and we did maintain at the request of 
municipalities and school boards, the lower differential on 
propane, and the gas tax increase was not extended to propane. 
There is an option, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that most 
municipalities will use it. 
 
Secondly, let me remind the hon. member that for the first time 
in the history of this province a government has brought in a 
capital program for rural municipalities, something ignored by 
the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

420 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the new 
municipal capital programs and assistance for communities. 
 

Hospital Tax on Gambling 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we ask questions about taxes 
every year because every year this minister increases the taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — My question is a question to the Finance 
minister, and it’s a very straightforward question. Mr. Minister, 
how is it that you intend to collect your new gambling tax, 
particularly in the bingo halls? Is it your intention that the bingo 
players should be paying an extra 10 cents when they buy the 
dollar card, or is your plan that the charities should be taking 
from their proceeds to fund your budget deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday and 
indicated on numerous occasions, that the hospital’s tax on 
gambling will come into effect July 1. We have some proposals 
that I’ve indicated publicly that we will take to the charitable 
organizations and Sask Sport Trust. We will discuss those 
proposals with them. It is not designed to have a serious impact 
on the charities, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the intent of the 
legislation. I believe that our proposals will be workable and 
accepted by the charities, but let me remind the hon. member, 
Mr. Speaker, that this government believes fundamentally that 
more of the gambling revenue should in fact go to hospitals, 
and we intend to carry out that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the minister has just said 
to the House he doesn’t know how he’s going to do this. He’s 
floated this trial balloon for some months, and then he comes 
into the House today and says he doesn’t know how he’s going 
to do it. But, Mr. Minister, can you explain to me how 
yesterday, in this House, you indicated that this new tax was 
going to raise $26.5 million, when today you’re telling us you 
don’t even know how you’re going to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll try and talk a little slower, Mr. Speaker, 
because I’m having difficulty explaining to the hon. member 
what I said. What I said was that we have proposals that we are 
going to take, and I think properly so, to Sask Sport Trust and 
the charities. I’ve indicated as well that we will sit down and 
discuss with them and try and minimize the impact, if any 
impact, on the charities. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we base our estimates on our 
proposals. I can assure the hon. member that the proposals we 
have are cautious, like our revenue projections right through the 
whole budget, Mr. Speaker, and we are extremely comfortable 
with the numbers that we have placed in the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. But there will  

be consultation. I’ve said that; I’m sorry he wasn’t listening. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the minister does not 
have a clue how he intends to collect this tax, and, Mr. Minister, 
we’ve learned that it is a gamble to trust this minister’s 
estimates in revenue. 
 
Mr. Minister, a new question, and this is — I’d ask you to listen 
carefully, Mr. Minister. The Regina hospital foundation has a 
lottery in place to fund hospitals in this city because of your 
government’s underfunding. Now you introduce a lottery tax to 
raise money for hospitals, so the Regina hospital foundation 
now has to pay a hospital tax for money it raises for hospitals. 
Now, Mr. Minister, isn’t that clever? 
 
Question, Mr. Minister: have you named this the hospital tax 
because you intend to tax hospital foundations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me remind the hon. member that it is 
base . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me remind 
the hon. member that it is base . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I once more ask the hon. 
members to allow the House to hear the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is base 
hospitals that have the foundations to raise revenues for their 
purposes. Let me explain to the hon. member how that arose. 
 
It is the base hospitals that used to have to put up capital 
moneys to get a new hospital. That’s the way it was under the 
previous administration. At the request of the base hospitals, 
they asked the provincial government to put up the capital cost, 
that they would try and raise their equivalent share for 
equipment and other uses. They thought it would be easier for 
them to come up with the money through the alternate methods 
that they brought forward, Mr. Speaker. It was at their request. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I said at the outset, and I’ve now 
repeated three times, we do not expect much of an impact, if 
any, on the charities with the way the tax will be imposed. And 
I’ve said that several times. And I’ve indicated that we have 
proposals that we’re going to take to the charities and to Sask 
Sport Trust. Now he doesn’t want to listen to that. I’ve said 
there’ll be a minimum impact, if any. 
 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also to the Minister of Finance and, Mr. Minister, I see that 
you’ve given the people of Saskatchewan yet another hidden 
tax increase. You have failed to increase the revenue sharing 
pool for urban and rural municipalities even to the level of 
inflation. This will  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

421 
 

leave municipalities with no choice but to increase taxes and/or 
to cut services. 
 
Mr. Minster, are you going to tell our municipalities that they 
should do what you have been unable to do, and that is to hold 
the line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I do not expect any tax 
increases by municipalities as a result of this budget. And I 
remind the people of this province and the hon. member, that 
the NDP government in the city of Regina — the city council of 
Regina, Saskatchewan’s only NDP government, has made the 
commitment that it wouldn’t raise taxes well in advance about 
any speculation about a provincial budget, Mr. Speaker. They 
made that firm commitment. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the 
communities . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I know it’s Friday 
morning and people are enjoying themselves with question and 
answer, and it’s after the budget, but we’re having a little 
difficulty actually hearing the member. We’re having a little 
difficulty hearing the member so I ask for your co-operation. 
Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. We did, and 
I remind the hon. member again, and even your NDP colleague, 
the mayor of the city of Regina, welcomed the announcement of 
a municipal capital program which will be of assistance. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe and I can show in terms of the Regina 
city council that it has ample opportunities to save money in its 
operation, and I’m prepared to discuss that publicly at any time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well that’s one of the municipalities in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder about the other 845 
organized municipalities, and I wonder if the minister has any 
words for them. But I might say that any words coming from 
the author of the biggest fiscal boo boo in the history of the 
Commonwealth are really not well received by municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is, by extending your new capital 
fund to include rural municipalities, urban municipalities will 
be receiving less for capital projects than they did in 1986. 
When you cut the same pie into more slices, each municipality 
gets a lot less. Have you figured that out, or does that elude 
your masterly control of mathematics, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, it’s nice to get the slow and painful 
unveiling of NDP party policies, and we’ve had some consistent 
examples of inconsistent policies having been brought forward 
since the session started, and I want everyone to remember what 
this hon. member has just said. The NDP today has stood up 
and disagreed with the first capital program for rural 
municipalities in the history of this province. He didn’t like it. 
 
We have just had the attack, Mr. Speaker, on a capital program 
for rural communities. At the very time that rural communities 
need assistance because of the farm crisis, Mr. Speaker, this 
government came forward with a plan to try and keep rural 
communities viable. And today the NDP said no to that plan, 
Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you and your government will know that 
municipalities since 1982 have been on your back for more 
operating funds, for more capital funds. You have denied them. 
And the question I have for you is a simple one: why have you 
turned a deaf ear to municipalities in his province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you want to know what an MLA sounds 
like when he’s mortally wounded, I think we just heard it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I do say to the hon. member that we have 
announced in the budget yesterday a municipal capital 
financing program. We have announced, Mr. Speaker, 
initiatives, particularly in the smaller areas, the smaller 
communities, to try and ensure their viability and survival. 
We’ve done that with extending the rural development 
corporations’ eligibility for the venture capital, business 
associations for smaller communities, the rural capital program, 
the new capital program for recreational facilities and cultural 
facilities, Mr. Speaker; and, Mr. Speaker, the previously 
announced Saskatchewan government growth fund to get $100 
million into primarily rural Saskatchewan to diversify their 
economy, and above all, Mr. Speaker, to ensure their viability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Review of The Occupational Health and Safety Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce today that I have asked for a review of The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act and the way it functions in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act was first enacted in 
1972. Now despite efforts to reduce injuries since that time, 
there are still approximately 30 lives lost each year in industrial 
accidents, and an additional 20 in agricultural accidents in 
Saskatchewan. This causes a great deal of grief to families in 
Saskatchewan. It also costs money to employers, and the 
workers’ compensation fund annually spends in excess of $100 
million to assist and rehabilitate workers who’ve been injured. 
 
So there’s a lot more that we can do in this area. And therefore 
I’ve asked the Saskatchewan Occupational Health and Safety 
Council to undertake a review and to get the comments and the 
commitment of employees to protect employees; to promote 
healthier life-styles by reducing injury, illness, and disease 
related from work; to promote increased employer, employee, 
and private sector involvement in work place health and safety. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

422 
 

I’ve asked the occupational health and safety council to 
undertake this review and make recommendations to me early 
this fall. In particular, I’ve asked them to focus on employer 
commitment to occupational health and safety, employee 
involvement, enforcement of the Act, and program delivery 
issues. 
 
During this spring and summer the occupational health and 
safety council, consisting of 12 members representative of 
labour, management, agriculture, medicine, and government, 
will be soliciting written briefs and entertaining oral 
representations. It is my understanding that they will be holding 
hearings in the month of June. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I await on behalf of the members here their 
recommendations, so that this fall we can formulate changes 
and improvements to occupational health and safety, and enact 
those through the legislature. 
 
So I ask the public to put their input into this review, and I 
encourage everyone to participate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
interesting that when the minister announces a review of 
occupational health and safety, that what he chooses to focus on 
is the Act and not the administration. 
 
It is well-known within this nation, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan already leads this nation, has provided leadership 
through its occupational health and safety legislation, largely, I 
would add, Mr. Speaker, because of the initiatives of the New 
Democratic Party government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Because the New Democrat government, Mr. 
Speaker, has recognized the importance of safety for workers in 
the work place, it has been a priority to ensure that through 
legislation. I just refer for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the 
cynical application of occupational health and safety legislation 
as exemplified by the minister opposite. 
 
Last year in this Assembly, with unanimous consent of the 
Assembly, the work place hazardous material information 
system amendments were made to the current Occupational 
Health and Safety Act. And as I get around the province of 
Saskatchewan, despite the fact that it was to be ensured through 
that change in legislation that WHMIS (work place hazardous 
material information system) was to be implemented by 
October 31, in many, many . . . in fact, the majority of work 
places around the province of Saskatchewan that should be 
implementing it have yet not. And why is that? The reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is because that minister opposite does not have the 
commitment to even enforce the legislation that’s in place, 
including the legislation amendments that he brought to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
So if we want to review occupational health and safety, and I 
concur it needs reviewing, the minister has focused on the 
wrong thing. The Act doesn’t need improvement;  

what needs improvement is the administration of the Act. If 
he’s really concerned about occupational health and safety for 
the workers of Saskatchewan, all that minister needs to do is to 
enforce the legislation that’s in place today. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when this commission 
starts to receive input from people in Saskatchewan, that if it is 
reported honestly, and we have reason to doubt the pure honesty 
that oftentimes comes from the other side, then that will be 
precisely the point that the working people of the province of 
Saskatchewan will say the Act does not need major review, but 
what needs review is the administration and the political will of 
this government to make the current legislation work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Appointment of Acting Clerk 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to inform the 
Assembly that our Deputy Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, has been 
appointed Acting Clerk of this Legislative Assembly effective 
April 1, 1989. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before beginning 
the main text of my remarks, I want to join my colleague from 
Moose Jaw North in commenting on the proposed revisions to 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act. I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, a chill goes up my spine whenever the current Minister 
of Labour decides he’s going to do anything. The member from 
Yorkton undertook to review The Trade Union Act, and the 
trade unions in this province have never recovered from that. 
 
The current Minister of Labour reviewed The Labour Standards 
Act, and the war goes on. It may well be that this government 
has experienced something akin to a blinding light on the road 
to Damascus, but I for one wait to see it, and I for one am 
concerned about what he’s doing with The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act. 
 
With respect to the comments, the monologue of the minister 
yesterday, let me say that I was struck by a couple of things — 
struck by the false way that that minister had presented his 
deficit. I’ll get into more of that later. I was struck with the 
cruelty of the taxes, particularly as they relate to small 
businesses, to municipalities, to school boards, and to people 
who drive older vehicles — by and  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

423 
 

large, lower income people. I was struck with its incompetence, 
its failure to deal with the key issues in Saskatchewan — 
agriculture, the jobless, education, young people. 
 
If there is a single statement which sums up this government’s 
approach to administration, it’s the Premier’s comments of 
some 10 years ago almost, when he said that Saskatchewan was 
so rich you could afford to mismanage it and still come out 
ahead. 
 
In those days many of us were prepared to be a good deal more 
generous to the member from Estevan than we are today. In 
those days we assumed it was hyperbole, the sort of thing we all 
engage in, exaggeration for the purposes of emphasis, not 
intended to deceive. No one expected it to be a guiding 
principle for this government in office, but that is what it has 
become. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If, Mr. Minister, this government has 
proved nothing else, it’s proved two things: one, that at least 
they were deceived, they took it seriously; secondly, they could 
not have been more wrong. Certainly, Mr. Minister, this 
government opposite gave that comment the acid test. If ever it 
should have succeeded, it should have been under the 
mismanagement of members opposite. 
 
Let’s just for a moment briefly review this government’s 
record. You repealed the gas tax, reduced oil royalties, ran up 
an enormous deficit. Now they’ve reinstituted the gas tax at a 
rate which is 72 per cent higher than it was when they took 
office. Thanks to interest payments, we still have deteriorating 
services and an accumulated deficit of $3.9 billion, the highest 
per capita in Canada — all accumulated within seven years. 
 
But the government didn’t stop at rifling the province’s finances 
which had been well managed through a number of 
administrations. They went on and fired a large number of 
career public servants who were competent administrators and 
replaced them with political hacks who had no idea of what 
they were doing. There’s an endless number of examples. I’ll 
mention the name of Paul Schoenhals whose experience 
consisted of kicking a ball around a field for several years, then 
he got elected . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Without a helmet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then when he got defeated . . . The 
member from Moose Jaw North opines that it must have been 
without a helmet. Then when he got defeated he was appointed 
chairman of one of Canada’s largest mining corporations, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — could not have been 
less qualified for the job. 
 
If the management of the province’s fiscal affairs could only be 
described as irresponsible, if they were cruel with respect to the 
treatment of public servants, the stewardship of this province’s 
Crown corporations is completely irrational — irrational, unless 
you assume that members opposite were engaging in a scorched 
earth  

policy; irrational, unless you believe that members opposite 
were attempting to discredit the Crown corporations so that the 
public would accept their sale. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And a pretty good job of it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, they’ve done half of a pretty good 
job. They’ve wrecked the Crown corporations. But the public, 
Mr. Speaker, of this province are more determined than ever 
that they shall not succeed in selling the Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Fiscal mismanagement, destruction of the 
public service, an intentional overt effort to discredit the Crown 
corporations — all of this pales beside their record with respect 
to patronage. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, that’s normally a sign of old 
age, normally a sign of a government that’s getting long in the 
tooth when it’s more concerned about its friends than it is about 
those who elect them. This government has made patronage a 
cornerstone of its policy from the very beginning. There are any 
number of examples, people who could be held up, people of 
marginal competence, hired at exorbitant salaries. 
 
The patronage doesn’t stop there. Examples continue to pour 
out. The latest example, Remai, who was hired as a consultant 
to do a study to tell the government whether or not they ought 
to lease some over-priced space from him. Lo and behold, what 
did the study say? That they ought to lease the Renaissance 
Hotel; they did. They left it vacant for a period of time. When 
that became an embarrassment, they emptied other space, filled 
up the Renaissance Hotel, and now the other space is vacant. 
Hundreds of thousands, if not millions of dollars; for what 
purpose? To help out a pal, nothing more. 
 
Since this government has taken office, its spending has gone 
up by 57 per cent. Our rate of inflation has only been 38 per 
cent. Spending has gone up by almost half again as fast as 
inflation, while services have deteriorated badly. One might ask 
why that’s happened. It’s happened because patronage is a very, 
very expensive way to run a government, and that’s how this 
government has run this government. 
 
There’s an old Scottish proverb, “Wilful waste makes woeful 
want.” 
 
If members opposite see their inability to respond to the needs 
of this province, its educational system and their silence on it; if 
the pleas from farmers who are going bankrupt are unheard; if 
you notice the complete neglect of the joblessness, then you’re 
reaping the results of a naive and foolish boast that 
Saskatchewan is so rich you can afford to mismanage it and still 
come out ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn briefly to what has become an 
absolutely fixed in the firmaments, an absolutely fixed feature 
of this government, and that is its deficit budget. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

424 
 

Unlike the minister, I propose that we face reality for a moment. 
Mr. Minister, our deficit did not decrease last year, it increased. 
It has increased to the point where it is Canada’s . . . it is the 
highest per capita deficit in Canada, a fact noted by the director 
of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business last night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget adds to that. It’s brought in a deficit of 
226 million. All this has happened in a very short period of 
time, and we can recount in a moment the progression of this 
deficit. 
 
The first budget brought in by this government put the 
government 227 million in debt. That single deficit was almost 
three times the total accumulative deficits of the province since 
confederation. Then, Mr. Minister and Mr. Speaker, the next 
budget after that increased it to 558 million, and the one after 
that to 938 million. Then on the fourth try we broke the billion 
dollar mark and ended up 1.5 billion. The minister would like 
us to believe . . . But the next one really caught him off guard, it 
took us up to 2.7 billion. The 1987 budget brought us up to 3.2 
billion, the 1988 to 3.6 billion, and now it’s 3.9 billion. 
 
This minister apparently says he’s getting his deficit down. A 
strange way. Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Speaker, I kind of like that 
logic. I had a birthday recently, and I’ve been telling everybody 
I’m getting younger every day. I’m getting some assistance in 
that logic from the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and even if you accept the distorted view of the 
minister opposite in his comment that he’s reducing the deficit, 
it’s only applicable if you believe his figures, and quite frankly 
I say to the minister, who does? Who believes you? It’s 
apparent, at a casual glance at this budget, two things are 
apparent: one is that the deficit is reduced only by a highly 
artificial mechanism of taking money from the Crown 
corporations, which isn’t available on a sustained basis. It’s also 
apparent, Mr. Speaker, that this government is a good deal 
further from an honest balanced budget this year than it was last 
year. 
 
I note with interest that the minister’s claiming that he doesn’t 
anticipate a decrease in established program funding. I’d like to 
recommend something to the minister. I’d like to recommend a 
telephone. He might then call his deputy Finance minister who 
has told us that the province does expect a decrease in equity 
funding. This minister, in fact, says he anticipates an increase. 
Despite everything said to the contrary by Michael Wilson and 
his own deputy, he just goes on anticipating increases in 
revenue. 
 
I’d also like to point out that in a period when alcohol 
consumption is decreasing, they anticipate a 40 per cent . . . 43 
per cent increase in revenue from the Liquor Board. As with the 
dividends from the Crown corporations, which I’ll get to in a 
moment, you can do it once, but you can’t do it twice, and the 
minister is being dishonest with the public of Saskatchewan and 
this Assembly when he claims that that kind of a mechanism, 
that the use of those mechanisms is reducing the deficit on 
anything like a sustained basis. 
 
I want to address for a moment the curious transfer of 200 
million in revenues from the Crown corporation. He  

refers to it as a dividend. As his own documents show, no such 
dividend was taken in previous years. The question then arises 
as to whether or not such a dividend is going to be available 
year after year. Is it sustainable? 
 
A review of the minister’s actions, and that of his officials, 
suggest that it is not sustainable. The minister has expressed 
alarm at the level of indebtedness of Crown corporations. 
Indeed, two years ago he relieved the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan of all its indebtedness on the basis that that 
indebtedness was more than the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan could carry. The taxpayers are substantially stuck 
with that debt. 
 
Recently, Mr. George Hill, chairman of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, justified the selling of SaskEnergy on the 
basis that SPC needed to reduce its debt. 
 
They’re back in the market, Mr. Speaker, according to their 
own documents, borrowing another 700 . . . $689 million for the 
Crowns which are apparently already groaning under the weight 
of an unsustainable debt. 
 
All of this suggests that the slightest touch of good management 
would lead you to use the 200 million that’s available, not as a 
dividend but to reduce some of that debt and to avoid further 
borrowings. You are in effect borrowing, you are in effect 
taking money from the Crown corporations which must then 
borrow at a level which is already unhealthy. In those Crown 
corporations . . . in these circumstances, to take $200,000 from 
the Crown corporations is a phoney and dishonest way to 
reduce this year’s deficit. It certainly is a method that can’t be 
sustained in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But then this government opposite doesn’t 
care if it can be sustained in the future. All this government 
cares about is getting past the next election. The integrity of 
your budgeting process doesn’t concern you a bit. 
 
Let’s just grant, for the moment, the Minister of Finance a very 
rare privilege: let’s believe what he says. I’m getting howls of 
disagreement. No one’s prepared to do that. But for the sake of 
discussion, let’s just grant the Minister of Finance this very 
ever-so-rare privilege. Let’s accept what he says. Let’s accept 
that there is $200,000 available from the Crown corporations 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 200 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — . . . two hundred million, thank you. Let’s 
accept there’s $200 million available from the Crown 
corporations on a sustained basis, and that can be done year 
after year. If you accept that then what, pray heaven, is your 
argument for selling the Crown corporations which make the 
most money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Surely it must be obvious, even to the 
Minister of Finance who has such difficulty with grade 2 
arithmetic, surely it must be obvious to him that if you sell such 
a rich cash cow you can only watch your deficit  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

425 
 

balloon upwards. 
 
I say to members opposite, you can’t have it both ways. Is it an 
unsustainable, one-time-only grab of money from the Crown 
corporations, which they cannot afford to give up, or is it 
sustainable? In which case, the obvious question is: why sell off 
the Crown corporations which are making the most money? 
 
You owe it, I say to members opposite, you owe it to be honest 
with the public of Saskatchewan, as you have not done in the 
past, and if you don’t do it in the future you do so at your peril. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I say, Mr. Speaker, to members opposite, 
that I think both are accurate. I think this budget is cooked, and 
I think your privatization rationale is nothing but a deception. I 
think you’re wrong on both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think an honest bookkeeper would look at the 
figures presented by the Minster of Finance and conclude that 
this deficit is really very close to $500 million. I invite you to 
draw, and I invite members of the public and members 
opposite, to draw their own conclusions, and draw their own 
conclusions as to why the minister cites such a different figure. 
 
I point out that he tried in 1986 to cook the books so that the 
public of Saskatchewan going to the polls would not know how 
badly he mismanaged the economy. I think the revelations 
which have come from the Public Accounts Committee are 
nothing short of incredible. I cannot imagine a Minister of 
Finance in any other government surviving those sort of 
revelations. We have it from his own department that he knew 
the figures were inflated when he presented them. His 
department described the inflation as ministerial discretion. 
 
I may say, Mr. Minister, I think . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
a grave injustice was done to the former member from Wilkie 
who resigned when he misled this House on a trifling point by 
comparison. I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can you . . . how 
could this government have asked the former minister of 
Highways, the member from Wilkie, to resign with respect to a 
$200 airplane ride when this minister has apparently been guilty 
of ministerial discretion with respect to hundreds of millions of 
dollars. I say this minister cannot continue in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s also apparent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that this minister knew throughout the year that those figures 
were inflated, and he knew throughout the year that the 
expenditure side of the ledger had also increased beyond what 
they had stated, yet he continued to maintain that that deficit 
was accurate. I say to the public of Saskatchewan, this 
government doesn’t place any value on the integrity of its 
budgetary process. I don’t expect this minister to resign. 
 
And if the public are despairing of this government ever getting 
its financial house in order, I say a time will come to balance 
the books, and it’s not going to be that far  

away. 
 
I’d like to make a comment as well on the question of taxes. 
With respect to that monotone yesterday, I’ll venture to say that 
within an hour of the speech being given there wasn’t a half a 
dozen people in this province who could repeat a single 
sentence of it. It’s largely forgotten. 
 
But I’ll tell you what isn’t forgotten, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
isn’t forgotten is the increase in taxes. The public of 
Saskatchewan know that as of 12:01 this morning their gasoline 
tax, which they were promised by members opposite would not 
exist as long as this government was in office, went up again. 
 
(1100) 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
are disheartened. I doubt, however, that they’re shocked, 
coming from this government. They’ve learned just how far 
they can trust this government and this Minister of Finance. 
Everyone in this province has been put in the position of paying 
a 10 cents a litre gas tax and a 45 cent a gallon tax. They say 
they’ll rebate it, but that’s 12 to 14 months down the road, and 
that assumes they’d have no use for the money in the meantime. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a goodly number of 
people in Saskatchewan who desperately hope that in 12 to 14 
months down the road, when those cheques arrive, they arrive 
bearing a different signature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I have to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Minister of Finance wants the people of this province to believe 
that only out-of-province guests — one should question the 
wisdom of taxing tourists — but only out-of-province guests 
will end up paying this. Nothing could be further from the truth; 
nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
I pointed out in the question period that a taxi driver, perhaps a 
very typical Saskatchewan small business, working 246 days a 
year, taking off weekends and three week holiday, will pay 
$5,000 in gas tax. He’s not in any immediate sense able to pass 
that on. That comes right out of his pocket as a small-business 
person. 
 
A trucking firm with 12 diesel units per year will pay $107,000 
in gas tax. They may be able to pass it on more readily. A bus 
company with 12 buses will pay $20,000 a year. That’s going to 
get passed on; it’s going to get passed on to you and I as 
ratepayers and as taxpayers. The city of Saskatchewan will pay 
an additional . . . will pay $695,000 a year. School boards will 
pay 2.7 million a year. None of these people are going to find 
this gas tax to be revenue neutral, to use the expression of the 
minister opposite. 
 
Some businesses will be able to raise their prices, and to that 
extent they pass it on to us as consumers. Local governments 
will raise property taxes and we, as ratepayers, will pay it. It’s 
passed on to the average family and the average person in this 
province, where the  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

426 
 

minister would have us believe it’s been left unscarred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want for a moment to turn briefly to the inherent 
unfairness in this tax system, an unfairness which gets worse as 
each year goes by, foisted on the people of this province by a 
government that feels it has to pay its dues to big business 
which bankroll its election campaigns. Taxes on individuals’ 
income, sales tax, fuel, gambling, will increase by $145 million. 
At the same time this government has the audacity to give a 2 
per cent tax decrease to large corporations — this in a year 
when Saskatchewan people are seeing their purchasing power 
shrink; at a time when big business — if one is to believe the 
Globe and Mail — enjoyed an increase in profits of 59 per cent. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, that’s wrong. Moreover we say it shows 
an unparalleled contempt for the now less than one million 
people in this province who elected this government in the past 
and, I suggest, are unlikely to do so again in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This minister and his predecessors often 
spoke of tax reform. If he asked anyone in the street what they 
thought of as tax reform, they’d think of it as making the tax 
system fairer, not dreaming up ways to sock it to relatively low 
income people while letting big business off paying less taxes. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the so-called hospital tax on 
the hospital tax which was introduced this year — the 
Byzantine complexity of a tax called a hospital tax which taxes 
lotteries which are said to raise revenue for hospitals. It’s 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I assume, a safe assumption that it’s 
called a hospital tax because it’s taxing hospitals. I assume that 
that’s the rationale. It certainly can’t be called a hospital tax 
because the revenues go to hospitals. They don’t, of course; 
they go into general revenues. 
 
This raises $26.5 million in tax, a tax that the government 
admits it has no idea how it’s going to collect. And there’s some 
interest in that. Almost all forms of gambling in this province, 
whether it be the Progressive Conservative pull-a-ticket, which 
I saw the other day — I didn’t buy one; didn’t support that 
charity — or whether it be the Kinsmen selling 6-49 tickets or 
the church bingos — almost all forms of raffles, bingos, 
lotteries in this province are conducted by charities, very, very 
few of whom are geared up in an accounting sense to collect the 
tax, account for it, and remit it. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this tax is going to be an enormous 
nuisance for many of those charities who are already struggling 
to pick up and fill the vacancy left by the government opposite 
as the social net collapses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to agriculture. I don’t 
need to state the situation is critical. Saskatchewan is losing 
1,000 family farms a year. Faced with ever increasing debt 
loads and a plummeting income, farm families need predictable 
. . . Yes, and faced also with some vicious creditors, some of 
whom are agents of the Crown in the right of the province. 

Two of the most difficult creditors that farm families deal with 
are the Farm Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, a federal 
Crown corporation, and the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, a provincial Crown corporation, the Premier 
himself being the minister in charge — two of the most difficult 
creditors. 
 
In this sort of an atmosphere farm families need predictable, 
rational, well-planned agricultural programs. What has this 
government done, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This government 
constantly tells people of this province that farm families, rural 
people, rural communities, agriculture are at the very top of its 
priorities. What’s it done though, as distinct from what it says? 
What it has done is cut spending in the departments of 
Agriculture and Rural Development by $50 million. If you 
believe next year’s estimates, then the amount spent next year 
will be $50 million less on agriculture. The buck was spent last 
year — a budget cut of $50 million at a time of crisis for our 
family farms and rural communities. 
 
Did the budget mention this trifling fact, Mr. Speaker? No, it 
did not. The drought, the rising interest rates, low commodity 
prices, high input costs, excessive subsidization by the United 
States and the European Economic Community, our family 
farms are falling by the wayside. And what has this government 
done for farmers and farm families? Nothing. This government 
can find no money for families severely affected by last year’s 
drought, but it does have $9 million for a birthday party that 
everybody says they don’t want. And the people who are most 
vociferous in making those comments live in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This government offers no programs aimed 
at reducing the high interest rates that are strangling many farm 
families, but there’s millions of dollars for PC public 
advertising. 
 
There’s nothing to address the income stability crisis, nor is 
there a mechanism aimed at reducing the crushing debt load, 
but there’s $34,000 a day to rent empty office space from John 
Remai, a friend of this government. Outright incompetence, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, outright incompetence, waste and 
mismanagement of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The only thing this budget gives is a clutter of ineffective 
programs which are not in any sense co-ordinated. 
 
I want to mention one of them, and that’s equity financing. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, some of the financial institutions — they will 
now go mercifully unnamed — tried to sell equity financing 
and they didn’t succeed; they gave up, with good reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my family left Ireland 180 years ago to escape just 
this sort of a land-owning system, and so did the . . . and the 
member from Saskatoon and Moose Jaw North left central 
Europe for those very same reasons. They came half-way 
around the world, faced incredible hardships with no hope of 
ever returning. Why? One word served as a magnet — land! 
Land; they owned their  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

427 
 

own land. Now, less than a century later, this government wants 
to return us to the same land-holding system whereby those 
who work the land don’t own it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The people of this province say no. And if 
you persist with this idea, they’re going to say no in a very 
convincing way when you call the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — When asked in Moose Jaw . . . and just to 
make the scene complete, when asked in Moose Jaw, who on 
earth would want to invest in Saskatchewan land when we can’t 
make any money on it? the Premier’s response was accurate but 
tragic, and that is that overseas investors would be attracted by 
cheap land and cheap labour. 
 
Well I say to the members opposite that this party will offer the 
public of Saskatchewan something but cheap land and cheap 
labour. We won’t be offering them equity financing; we’ll be 
resisting this one all the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to deal for a moment with another 
failing of this budget. I would not have thought in a period 
when we had the highest unemployment, I think, in this 
province’s history, that we would have — and the highest 
out-migration in this province’s history — we would have a 
Minister of Finance bring in a budget in which the word “jobs” 
never appeared. The word was never in the budget. 
 
This budget made absolutely no mention of the hundreds of 
men and women who are unemployed. Today in Saskatchewan 
one in 11 people is without a job — one in 11 — and this 
government didn’t even mention it in the budget. Not one new 
job created in this budget — 43,000 people unemployed and not 
one new job creation program — and the result in graphic terms 
is out-migration. Last month over 6,000 people left this 
province in search of jobs and economic opportunities in other 
parts of the country. I venture to say that most of those people 
are the young, the bright, the energetic — the people that we 
can least afford to lose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s response was to cut 
opportunities, the opportunities student summer program by 22 
per cent. That in itself is a loss of a thousand jobs and will soon 
show up as a loss of a thousand people. Instead of 
implementing programs to provide young people with jobs and 
opportunities in this province, this government drastically cuts 
funding for one of the very few job creation programs it has. 
Given how little this budget offers in the way of job creation 
and employment opportunities, the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to be driven out of the province in ever record numbers. 
 
(1115) 
 
Perhaps, though, Mr. Speaker, there’s one bright cloud in all of 
this. Someone has thought of a way of balancing the budget for 
the Minister of Finance — just levy a head tax  

on people who are leaving the province, the only growth 
industry we’ve got. 
 
I want to mention education as well. With apologies to Winston 
Churchill, never have we seen so little spread so thinly among 
so many. Indeed, after all the rhetoric in that budget, education 
didn’t make any gains financially; education lost ground 
financially. 
 
There’s been a miserly 3.8 per cent increase in operating grants 
to primary and secondary schools, 2 per cent to universities, and 
in the area where I think that the greatest congestion exists, the 
technical institutes, less than 2 per cent — 1.3 per cent. With 
respect to all of these education institutes, after inflation, that’s 
a decrease. 
 
Over the years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the share of provincial 
funding for primary and secondary education has declined. In 
1980, the provincial government’s grants accounted for 56.7 per 
cent of school funding. By 1987, the last year for which figures 
are available, this had dropped to 49 per cent. And this is 
having some very serious consequences, and not just for 
property owners. 
 
Members of this side of the Assembly, at least, were shocked 
this month to read an internal study produced by the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association which showed that 
the grade eight to grade 12 drop-out rate had increased by 50 
per cent during that same period of time since 1980-81. This 
budget makes no reference to young people leaving school 
before completing grade 12, and it takes no action to reverse 
this. In today’s rapidly changing world, a high school education 
is an absolute minimum. Without it, the future opportunities are 
going to be very rare and very limited, and this budget has done 
nothing to address that alarming trend. 
 
The situation is essentially the same in the universities. The 
quality of the universities is under threat as never before. 
Hundreds of young people are denied access every year. Tuition 
fees rise. All of this because the government would rather spend 
money on advertising — buying lease space from John Remai, 
birthday parties — than spend money giving young people the 
education they deserve. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this shouldn’t need to be stated because this 
should be accepted among all decent people, but it’s our 
position that every young person should have access to as much 
education as they can use. That’s our position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were not to 
deal with the problem which we insist must be done, if we were 
just to try to hold the line, the report on accessibility released by 
the University of Saskatchewan pointed out that an increase of 
$11 million in operating grants was absolutely necessary this 
year. This is simply to maintain the present number of students 
and allow access to students in the future. 
 
This budget provides a 2 per cent increase in operating budget, 
and that means an increase in the number of students who are 
going to be denied access. I recognize  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

428 
 

the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 
Weyburn wants some assistance in dealing with his own 
budget. Well the members of this side are quite prepared to give 
him some assistance. 
 
What the universities need is not program enhancement, which 
is what that money’s certainly designed for. What the 
universities need is more money to pay the profs, to sweep the 
floor, to clean out the garbage, to maintain the buildings. They 
need operating money, and that’s what is not in this budget. 
 
If it’s bad in schools and it is worse in universities, it’s going to 
be really tragic in the technical institutes which now go under 
the name of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology). It is a fact that one in five young people who 
apply to enter Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon are being denied 
the opportunity. And this situation is only going to grow worse, 
given the fact that this government has increased funding for 
SIAST by only 1.3 per cent on the operating side. 
 
This budget ensures that that tragic 50 per cent figure is going 
to go higher. There’ll be more young people dropping out of 
high school in record numbers, and even greater numbers of 
young people being denied access to universities and technical 
schools. In short, this government is denying young people the 
future they deserve, the hope and opportunity which has always 
been the birthright of young people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time is going on. Other members will have 
comments they want to make. I want to just conclude with one 
observation that I think is becoming increasingly apparent to 
members here and members opposite. We have a government 
that is so tired and so worn out that it won’t even go through the 
motions of paying lip-service to this province’s number one 
problem, the jobless. It silently slashes the one miserly job 
creation program which we had. This government is so 
bankrupt it offers rural Saskatchewan only a confused clutter of 
ineffective programs, and that to these people who have 
sustained this government in office. Indeed it’s cut $50 million 
from its spending in rural Saskatchewan at a time when rural 
Saskatchewan legitimately cries out for help. 
 
It’s a government which is so obsessed with its own impending 
defeat it’s apparently unaware of the crisis in agriculture, blind 
to the young people who stare into a future devoid of hope. 
 
It’s a government which shows its contempt for the public and 
for the basic principles of integrity which have traditionally 
governed the presentation of budgets. 
 
I’ve been asked so many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I think 
this is an election budget. My response is: my, how I hope it is 
an election budget! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me make two facts which are 
becoming increasingly obvious. This is a budget which will 
defeat this government, and this is a government which 
deserves to be defeated. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The young, the jobless, rural 
Saskatchewan, small business, all deserve better. And when this 
government is finally forced to call an election, I’m satisfied 
they’re going to elect a new government led by the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In five days this Assembly will pass its 
judgement on this budget. I’ll be here and I’ll be joining the 
majority of people in Saskatchewan. I’ll be expressing my 
dissatisfaction; I’ll be voting against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure to participate this morning 
in this debate on the budget that was so eloquently delivered to 
the people of Saskatchewan yesterday by the Minister of 
Finance. And I certainly look forward to expressing my 
viewpoint on this budget and also reacting somewhat to the 
criticisms brought forth by the critic on the opposite side. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we started the day 
off in typical fashion in Saskatchewan. It was foggy, it was 
cloudy, a typical Saskatchewan day. But I must say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that as the day progressed, it became very, very 
positive for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I took particular delight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday, along 
with the visitors in the galleries and indeed, I suspect, with most 
of the viewers on television watching the proceedings, as we 
watched the members opposite during question period trying to 
set up the Minister of Finance as they knew that he was going to 
be momentarily delivering his budget. And I took a great deal 
of delight seeing how member after member had to sit down in 
embarrassment after trying to corner the Minister of Finance 
and then in turn fall victim to his masterful debating skills. 
 
But I say that with a bit of caution lest I get carried away in my 
compliments and be accused of collusion with the minister. But 
I have to admit that it was a relatively easy thing for him to do, 
considering the material that he had to work with and the 
opposition critics that he was facing. 
 
Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the budget speech unfolded, I 
must admit that I took some chauvinistic delight as the 
opposition faces became longer and longer as the significance 
and the positiveness of the budget speech became apparent to 
all. 
 
In fairness to the member opposite, I think it is difficult to 
always be negative, to always find some negativism even in 
some things as positive as this speech was. And I enjoyed, with 
my colleagues, watching the opposition financial critic tearing 
up his prepared text, his prepared notes, as he was trying 
desperately to come up with some credible response to this 
budget speech that obviously took them by surprise. And I have 
to submit to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he failed in his 
attempt to do so. 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

429 
 

And of particular significance was the fact that there was no 
criticism in his preliminary remarks yesterday, none 
whatsoever, in the field of education and in the field of health. 
His total silence on those vital issues was deafening. And I 
submit to you that only feverishly, working all night long trying 
to find something negative about it, was he able to come up 
with some statements, limited as they were, this morning. 
 
I understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from some of my colleagues 
that the financial critic on the opposite side took the opportunity 
in the media yesterday, as he did this morning as well, to 
indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that he felt that this was 
an election budget. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m glad to note 
that he was so impressed with the positive tone of the budget 
speech that he felt it was leaning in that direction. I submit that 
the Premier is the only individual who knows when this election 
is going to be called, but I submit to you that if this is a 
mid-term budget, just imagine what we are going to be able to 
do in a year or two from now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I commend the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance, 
on his budget speech. It is a budget speech that underwrites and 
underscores this government’s continued commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And our commitments speak for 
themselves. 
 
The budget speech exemplifies the high priority that we put on 
issues such as education, health, agriculture, and the 
environment. We’ve always placed a high priority on these 
areas and we will, we will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a moment here I want to reflect on issues 
concerning health. Now as you may know, I am the chairman of 
the government caucus committee on health, and as such I am 
very cognizant of some of the developments that we have been 
pursuing over the last while. And I, along with my colleagues, 
am particularly proud of our accomplishments in health. 
 
Our government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the first to break the 
billion barrier, the billion dollar barrier for health care 
expenditures. And this budget, Mr. Speaker, carries forward 
that strong and undeniable commitment — expenditures of $1.4 
billion. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a sum that has never been 
matched. 
 
Health care funding has increased by over $130 million. That, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, relates to an 11 per cent increase in this 
one year, an 11 per cent increase, and since 1981 it represents a 
91 per cent increase in health care funding. That is almost 
double in that brief period of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — That has almost doubled, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and takes up over one-third of the entire budget of this 
provincial government. And I submit to you, Mr.  

Deputy Speaker, that is commitment. We are continuing to 
build in this province. Upwards of $64 million is being 
provided for the construction and renovation of hospitals and 
special care facilities in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget includes $646 million for nurses and 
support staff salaries, including funding for 370 new additional 
positions. That, in addition to 746 positions that we have 
already done, means 1,116 new nursing department positions, 
and I submit to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Further, $12.3 million has been allotted for 
equipment purchases to ensure that hospitals can upgrade 
equipment and purchase high technology equipment to keep 
pace with the fast-advancing technologies that are available in 
medical care. 
 
Our government has a long list of first time accomplishments 
that are recognized throughout this country. We have the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, a state of the art facility, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a centre which is unsurpassed, I suggest, 
anywhere in all of Canada. We have the new cancer clinic in 
Saskatoon which, I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our family 
is only too familiar with, but we are grateful that it is there. It is 
one of the most modern in Canada. The cancer clinic contains 
world class equipment, Mr. Speaker, and it’s doing a world 
class job. 
 
Look at our centres of excellence in that same city, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, hospitals that are highly specialized in varying fields 
of medicine, and new hospitals at that, I might add, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Our government built all those centres of excellence. 
 
Look at our computerized health card. In January of this year, 
that card was distributed to all Saskatchewan residents. That 
health card holds more potential, I believe, than most people 
realize. It has the capability to retain, on that one tiny magnetic 
strip, its holder’s entire medical history. That tiny plastic card, 
through technology, has the potential to save someone’s life. In 
the future it is capable of telling doctors in an emergency that 
the patient may be allergic to penicillin, or whatever the case 
may happen to be. It will have on it your medical history. 
 
And this has caught world attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
world is literally knocking on our door, trying to find out what, 
number one, prompted the Government of Saskatchewan to do 
this, how we are going about it. They want to follow suit. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we are leaders. 
 
Speaking of health care, I feel compelled to discuss another 
important program that was initiated by this government. The 
Everyone Wins promotional program: emphasis on preventative 
health. This program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will benefit all of 
Saskatchewan today, not only today but also in the future. It’s 
an important program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with its main 
purpose being to motivate individuals, not only individuals but 
also communities in Saskatchewan, towards healthy life-styles. 
It will improve the overall health of our  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

430 
 

citizens. This government promotes preventative health care. 
 
We look forwards towards providing solutions to the ever-rising 
and ever-increasing costs in supplying health care to our 
residents in Saskatchewan. We listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan and we go to them for suggestions. The 
Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care is 
doing exactly that, and we are receiving invaluable input from 
health care professionals and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In my viewpoint of this commission, as I go around the 
province sitting in on many of the hearings in Saskatoon, 
Regina, Melfort, Swift Current — you name the areas where 
this commission has been — and I continually see sincere 
professionals, volunteers, both consumers of our health care 
system and also the providers of the health care system putting 
in their input, making their suggestions to give guidance to the 
commission on its report which will be presented later on, 
perhaps at the end of this year, to the province of Saskatchewan, 
to the Government of Saskatchewan, so we can make sure that 
we are going in the right direction. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t my intention to dedicate 
this entirely to health, so I’ll go on to a few more areas that I 
want to address. Mr. Speaker, our government is continuing to 
pursue long-term solutions to that nagging problem of farm 
debt. 
 
This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, provides financing initiatives 
to assist farm families and to encourage our province’s young 
men and young women to choose farming as a career. 
Twenty-two million dollars has been allocated to agriculture 
R&D, to research and development in agriculture. And 7.7 
million has been allotted for irrigation grants to farm families, 
agricultural biotechnology and food processing, and 
commercialization. 
 
This budget provides funds for a three-year, $54 million soil 
conservation agreement with the federal government. And I 
think all members on this side are fully aware of the 
significance of soil conservation, particularly during the tough, 
drought-stricken times that we are finding ourselves in. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that agriculture 
undoubtedly is the foundation of our provincial economy, and 
our government is committed to the farm families of this 
province. It goes without saying, that as goes the agricultural 
economy, so goes the economy of this province. That’s 
inescapable. And so this government has adopted a strong 
commitment to agriculture. We have pursued our own 
innovative policies and lobbied aggressively for federal, 
national policies which will help to strengthen the industry and 
protect our province’s family farms. 
 
I’d like to draw your attention to a program that we established 
in 1986, and I refer to the production loan program. Now the 
production loan program affects literally every farmer in this 
province. For some perhaps, like myself, it was not necessarily 
needed, and I did not take advantage of it, but even there, even 
for these  

farmers, the fact that it is there, the fact that that protection is 
there gives these farmers that peace of mind, that security of 
knowing that the security is there. And we provided over a 
billion dollars, $1.1 billion in low interest loans. 
 
The production loan program offered a three-year repayment 
program originally, and when some farm families, through no 
fault of their own, found it difficult to make those payments, we 
offered them an alternative. A repayment option accommodated 
the farm families that were having difficulty, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I submit to you that this government cares about 
farm families. 
 
The agricultural credit corporation was established to provide 
low interest loans to Saskatchewan farm families. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the mandate of the ACC, or Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, will be extended to include debt 
financing for viable farm operations. It will include financing 
for home quarter and necessary farm related facilities. It will 
also include long-term financing to cover the first year’s 
start-up costs. 
 
The ag credit corporation’s restriction on off-farm income will 
be removed, and this will eliminate any disadvantage to farmers 
with off-farm employment, an extremely critical decision, I 
believe, made by this government to address changing needs, to 
address the changing conditions on the farm. 
 
And through this corporation our government will also be 
initiating a vendor mortgage guaranteed program, and that is an 
exciting prospect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It will provide financial 
security for retiring farmers, and it will facilitate this 
inter-generational transfer of farm lands, a problem that has 
always existed with dad wanting to retire and yet having the 
problem and the difficulty of passing this land on to the younger 
generation and still give him some security in terms of his life’s 
works, his investment that is tied up in the farm. This, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, will facilitate that inter-generational transfer. 
 
In addition we also established The Farm Land Security Act to 
protect our farm families. We responded to drought conditions, 
high feed costs by introducing the livestock cash advance 
program. Money — $125 for beef, 25 for hogs, 3 for sheep, 
cash advance, operating capital, Mr. Deputy Speaker — interest 
free, a program saving producers an estimated $22.4 million 
interest costs every year, every year of that program. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we protect our farmers in rough times. 
 
And I can go on and on with our government’s initiatives in the 
agricultural scene, but I do believe I have made my point. We 
do care. We do care. And I would like to conclude that section 
by indicating once more that this government has done more for 
agriculture than any other government. 
 
We have made tremendous achievements in other areas as well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; for example, education. The list in 
education is lengthy. The PALS (Principle of the Alphabet 
Literacy System) program, I could go into that. Distance 
education, I could go into that — extremely vital and important 
to our rural communities. SCAN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network)  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

431 
 

program, I could go into that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all of these programs were initiated by our 
government. And as a former educator, a teacher, I am very 
proud of this government’s education record. And certainly I’m 
looking very enthusiastically toward the future, and some of the 
programs that we are intending, through the direction of the 
Minister of Education, to implement. We have made education 
more accessible to the people of this province by implementing 
some of the programs that I’ve just made reference to. 
 
This budget reaffirms our commitment to education. We will 
spend $841 million this year to ensure our citizens have access 
to top quality, basic schooling, skills training, and other 
educational opportunities. That is an increase, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of $52 million over last year’s budget. To put it in 
terms that many of our listeners can perhaps relate to a little bit 
more, that is a doubling, a doubling of our educational 
expenditures since 1981. So I submit to you once more, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this government recognizes the 
importance of education. 
 
To assist welfare recipients to obtain job skills, training, the 
New Careers Corporation will invest about $5.5 million in 
training projects, and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an increase 
of 50 per cent. 
 
(1145) 
 
This budget provides nearly $31 million for the construction 
and the renovation of schools. Our government’s commitment 
to education is reflected in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
the constituency of Rosthern. And I’m going to list a few of the 
things. And I’m almost embarrassed, I must admit, to list some 
of these things, simply because I think the list is so impressive. 
And for a while there, I thought that everything in the 
province’s budget was going toward the constituency of 
Rosthern, until I did a little bit of investigating and I find out 
that even my colleague here from Lloydminster is getting his 
fair share. It’s indicative, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
what this government is doing, not only in the constituency of 
Rosthern but indeed throughout all of the 64 constituencies in 
this great province of ours. 
 
So in the constituency of Rosthern, I have since 1982 seen the 
construction of five new schools in my constituency — five, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — with another one approved for the town 
of Martensville in 1990. Our government’s contribution to this 
$3 million project is estimated to be $2.56 million. 
 
And while I’m mentioning Martensville, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the fair town where I have my office as well, I can report 
another 11 per cent increase affecting that town. This 11 per 
cent increase is not for health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
instead 11 per cent increase in revenue sharing for the town of 
Martensville. And that in itself means an increase of $366,000 
for the residents of the town of Martensville. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not all. In my constituency, a 
number of schools have been making extensive renovations in 
their institutions. I could mention Clavet, I could mention 
Hague, Rosthern, Dalmeny. And over $9  

million has been contributed by the government to the 
constituency of Rosthern from ’82 to ’87 for renovation and 
construction of our schools, and I have not even tabulated last 
year’s figures and numbers into that figure — over $9 million, 
and another school on the way for the constituency of Rosthern. 
 
This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, builds. Not only do we 
build schools but we build health care facilities. In June of 1986 
the new Dalmeny nursing home was completed, a new 36-bed 
facility, and our government contributed substantially over $2 
million to this $2,223,000 project. 
 
A 30-bed addition has been approved for the Rosthern 
Mennonite Nursing Home at an estimated cost of substantially 
more than $3 million. 
 
The Rosthern Union Hospital has undergone numerous 
renovation projects since 1982. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud of those additions; my 
constituents are proud of those additions. In my constituency of 
Rosthern, 432 new jobs have been created through our 
government’s home program, and wherever I go in the small 
towns in my constituency, carpenters, drywallers, lumber yard 
owners are saying, hey, I didn’t have to go on pogey this 
summer or this winter. I had a job; there are things; there is 
activity; there is economic activity being created, new jobs 
being created by some of the programs that this government has 
come forth with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there 
were 1,361 home improvement loans approved in my area, 
those loans almost $9 million. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these loans 
are 6 per cent money, 6 per cent money for the home owners in 
this province. These have been made available to all residents 
of the province. 
 
A total of 4,850 home improvement grants have been 
processed. These are matching $1,500 grants, not give-aways. 
Not give-aways, because we believe that the people of this 
province are also dedicated to putting forth their best foot, and 
so this is a matching grant. 
 
The government says, we want to stimulate the economy; we 
will put up $1,500 if you put up $1,500 — a buck for a buck. 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s fair, and that’s what the 
citizens of this province like to see where there has to be some 
initiative on their part before you can access moneys being 
spent by the government. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those matching grants are over $4 
million in my constituency, and they go, they go directly to the 
people of my constituency. Imagine, 432 jobs created by one 
program in the constituency of Rosthern. And all home owners 
have access to these two programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
submit to you and to the people of Saskatchewan that this 
government is building, and this is evident in my constituency. 
 
Further, Warman, Martensville have both received enriched 
housing units. Both have received six-unit  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

432 
 

facilities and there are more to come, units that were designed 
and specifically built for the use of elderly in these communities 
to keep these elderly people out of the intensive, high-cost 
nursing home situations or perhaps in the acute care hospital 
situation, and allow these people a life of dignity within their 
home communities. 
 
I might add that the town of Langham is receiving a 10-unit 
subsidized housing complex. Construction is now beginning. 
We have just had the sod-turning ceremony. 
 
In February of this year another innovative housing project was 
slated for my constituency. In fact, in this case my home town 
of Hague is going to be receiving a 12-unit innovative housing 
project — $794,000 for a senior citizens’ project in the town of 
Hague. And I’m glad to say that on April 7 we will be 
conducting the sod turning ceremony on that particular project. 
Innovative housing under the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. 
 
Then I might just add that an official opening will be taking 
place in Rosthern on an innovative housing project there on 
April 16. And if I can persuade the Minister of Health to come 
with me to Waldheim on April 28, we will also be having 
another official opening there of the Menno Home Industries in 
the town of Waldheim. And I could go on and on and on, but I 
think once more I have made my point. 
 
These projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, indicate how this 
government builds. We are protecting the seniors of this 
province. We are ensuring that they have proper facilities. And I 
know that many of my constituents are also concerned about 
interest rates, but I also know that my constituents, along with 
the rest of the people of this province, are protected. We know 
that their mortgage rates will never go above nine and 
three-quarter per cent. Our government, this government, has 
ensured that that will never happen again. We made it law, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We protect the people of this province. 
 
In 1987-88 almost $1 million was committed to highway 
improvements in my area — the money provided for grading 
near Langham and Laird. We’re currently involved in the 
twinning of the No. 16 Highway from Saskatoon, and it will be 
getting to Langham. And for these kinds of things I’m very 
grateful to our very efficient and wonderful Minister of 
Highways. So I would like to thank him for that. 
 
We also have huge stockpiles — glaring evidence of the 
commitment of this government — huge stockpiles of 
gravelling material between the towns of Hague and Osler in 
preparation for another highway project that the constituency of 
Rosthern will be the recipient of. The list goes on and on. Our 
commitment in that particular . . . has more than tripled in just 
one year. 
 
But not only people in my constituency will benefit from these 
highway improvements. Anyone driving on our roads, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, anyone driving on our roads, tourists, will be 
benefitting, and Saskatchewan residents will all benefit from 
that. 
 
Tourism is a big industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy  

Speaker, and we’re building on it. 
 
In Rosthern, through the Department of Economic 
Development and Tourism, an old CPR station is now being 
turned into a tourist information centre. And that old CPR 
station, instead of standing as a derelict, will now also be 
containing a museum, a museum that will contain artefacts of a 
past resident of Saskatchewan, a resident whose contributions to 
agriculture are still being used today. And I refer to a 
world-known figure in agriculture, a Mr. Seager Wheeler, 
Seager Wheeler who farmed in the Rosthern area for the better 
part of his life. 
 
And I remember as a young child in grade 4 or 5 in school, in 
our science text there was this picture of a man, a farmer, and 
the caption underneath said, “The Wheat Wizard of Rosthern.” 
And I can still retain the impact that that had on my young mind 
to actually see a man from a neighbouring town being in a 
school text book, and the impact that it had on me. Well 
certainly this “Wheat Wizard of Rosthern” has had an impact, 
not only on Rosthern or Saskatchewan, but indeed throughout 
the world with his many accomplishments. 
 
And the area of Rosthern, following an activity this summer 
where Parks Canada saw fit to pay tribute to this man, we are 
now going to be establishing the Seager Wheeler tourism area 
in Rosthern where his whole farm will be once more established 
so that the students of the Rosthern area and the students, 
indeed, of Saskatchewan will be able to delve into their past, 
into the history, and see the tremendous figures that we have in 
our province, figures that have an impact in the world and that 
we can indeed be proud of, that we can build upon this heritage 
that has been passed to us. 
 
So the renovation of the CPR station into a tourist booth and 
museum was made possible through the community tourism 
awareness program. It’s a provincially funded program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Tourism must be developed to its fullest extent 
in Saskatchewan and we are doing just that. 
 
The final area I would like to discuss is the environment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I want to spend a few moments on the 
environment and how our government is committed to the 
protection and preservation of it. This budget allocated $22 
million toward this, but in the past some governments 
disregarded environmentally dangerous situations. I don’t want 
to point any particular fingers at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but it is a fact. For example, in 1976 the government of the day 
chose to ignore a spill of 21,000 litres of PCB (polychlorinated 
biphenyl) fluids in a Regina plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this spill could have occurred in any city in this 
province; it could have occurred in my own constituency of 
Rosthern. The fact remains that it took two years — two years 
— for that government to react to the situation. Even then, after 
two years, that government was slow to adapt and to adopt an 
appropriate response. They waited nearly five years before 
dealing with it responsibly before implementing a monitoring 
and a site surveillance program. 
 
I’m pleased to say that this government, through this  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

433 
 

budget, has acted to address the problem. Funding will be 
provided to safely centralize PCBs in the Boundary dam storage 
facility. Presently throughout Saskatchewan there are, I would 
say, over 100 PCB storage sites. By centralizing the storage of 
PCBs in a facility that has been specifically designed to receive 
and safely store these wastes, the government will be able to 
deal with this problem until a high temperature incinerator 
facility becomes available to us. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be implementing a program to 
collect and dispose of hazardous agricultural chemicals. As 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year a comprehensive hazardous 
waste handling and disposable system will be developed in this 
province. It will be developed in harmonization and 
co-operation of a number of groups in this province, and as a 
first step this government intends to consult with the people of 
this province through public meetings. Our people’s opinions 
are important to us. They are a valuable resource. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could not possibly outline all the 
important initiatives our government is implementing toward 
the protection of our environment, but I must outline one final 
area, and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is our government’s 
commitment to ensure that this province’s water resources are 
protected. That’s important to my constituents. It’s important 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve already established seven regional offices throughout the 
province. These offices provide communities with technical 
advice and assistance regarding water quality. To provide 
further protection for Saskatchewan’s water resources, our 
government has allocated money in this budget to implement a 
water quality management system. This system, Mr. Speaker, 
will ensure the safety of drinking water in our communities. It’s 
designed to upgrade the monitoring and the control of industrial 
waste water. And among other things, Mr. Speaker, it will 
develop water quality objectives for our water basins. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, this budget has allocated over $22 million 
toward environmental initiatives. We must continue our efforts 
to preserve the environment for our future generations. And 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker, our government will introduce 
legislation to protect the ozone layer. Legislation will also be 
introduced to allow for the environmental tax on 
environmentally harmful products. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would have many other areas that 
I would like to discuss, but I know that there are many of my 
colleagues that are also looking with great anticipation in 
becoming involved in this debate, so I will leave some of those 
other topics to them. 
 
But in closing I would like to say that this budget effectively 
reflects our government’s commitment, our government’s 
commitment to health, to education, to agriculture and, indeed, 
to our environment. And it reflects our commitment to the 
people of Rosthern constituency and the people of this 
province. 

As I indicated at the outset, yesterday dawned as a foggy and 
cloudy day, but I couldn’t help but notice that after the Minister 
of Finance had delivered his budget and I went and looked out 
the window, the sun was shining. And I think that was very 
indicative, Mr. Speaker, of the direction which I am sure that 
this tremendous budget will lead the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would just like to encourage all of the members of this 
legislature to get behind the Minister of Finance and his 
proposed budget so that indeed we can continue to build this 
great province of ours. Mr. Speaker, I thank you for this 
opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to take part in 
this budget debate this morning. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when 
I examined the budget last night and I realized the negative 
impact it would have on those who are poor and who are less 
fortunate in our society, I was very anxious to get into this 
debate. 
 
The PC government and the Minister of Social Services claim 
to be supporters of the family, and in fact with this budget 
document they’ve gone so far as to publish a booklet entitled 
Helping You and Your Family. But when you examine the 
details of the Social Services estimates in this budget, you 
quickly realize that on so many fronts this government, far from 
helping, is instead failing to support families and is consciously 
attacking those who are most vulnerable in our society. My 
colleague, the member for Regina Centre, called this budget 
cruel, and that’s precisely what it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me begin by addressing the issue of hunger and poverty in 
our society. For the past nine months since this legislature 
prorogued in June of 1988, I’ve been travelling the province, 
meeting with people who are on social assistance, who are 
relying on food banks, who are unemployed, and also meeting 
with non-government organizations and charities that are 
attempting to provide those people with services. 
 
And our party has been sponsoring public forums at which the 
issue of poverty and how it can be eliminated in our society has 
been discussed. In the course of those meetings, Mr. Speaker, it 
has become clear that not only has this government not made it 
a priority to help the less fortunate and the poor in our society, 
but rather it has intentionally created a social safety system that 
will keep people poor despite all its rhetoric about supporting 
families and helping those on welfare get off welfare and into 
the work place. 
 
I want to give you a couple of personal examples of what I 
mean, Mr. Speaker, before I return to the text of my comments. 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, I met with one woman a few months 
ago who had wanted to get off welfare and go to university, and 
she and her husband and their children had been on welfare for 
some time. And her husband was enrolled in the Saskatchewan 
skills development program and she was wanting to take 
university classes. And, Mr. Speaker, they had several children 
to support, and they were getting from the  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

434 
 

Department of Social Services in the range of $1,100 a month. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when that woman chose to go to university, 
her family was automatically cut off social welfare. Her 
husband, who was enrolled in the Saskatchewan skills 
development program course, was kicked out of that course. He 
was no longer eligible to be enrolled in it. And all that she was 
able to get through student loans, Mr. Speaker, was a total of 
$8,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I use this example to show how unfair the 
system that the PC government has created is. If this woman 
was to separate from her husband, Mr. Speaker, this woman, 
instead of getting $800 a month, would be eligible as a single 
parent caring for her family for some $1,100 a month from the 
government for her and her family in the form of student loans. 
And in addition to that, her husband would have been eligible 
for social welfare and, Mr. Speaker, would have been able to 
continue taking his Saskatchewan skills development program. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, this family, had they combined 
their student loans and the welfare that he would have received, 
could have received in excess of $1,600 a month had they 
separated. But staying together, they’re only given $800 a 
month from this government, and had that woman chosen not to 
go to university and had she stayed instead on social welfare, 
she and her family would have gotten $1,100 a month. So she is 
penalized for going to university. 
 
And if they’d separated, they could make twice as much money 
as a family, Mr. Speaker, under the policies of this government 
than they would have had they stayed together. Now don’t you 
find that incredible, Mr. Speaker? I certainly do. And I think it 
shows how this government has designed a social safety net to 
keep people poor. 
 
I want to take another example, Mr. Speaker, and this is of a 
severely handicapped woman — a wonderful lady when you 
meet her, who, despite her enormous handicaps, has chosen to 
go out and try to find work on a part-time basis. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, this woman, under the policies that this government 
has brought down in the past year, is being penalized for 
working. She faces a prospect of being on social assistance on a 
permanent basis, Mr. Speaker, because her handicaps are so 
severe. She has gone out and she has gotten part-time work, and 
she is earning several hundred dollars a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before this government changed their policies 
with respect to the amount of money that people were allowed 
to keep when they were working but on welfare, she was able to 
keep 25 per cent of her earnings. And that meant, Mr. Speaker, 
that she was able to keep in the range of 3 to $400 a month, 
depending on how much part-time work she could get. Now this 
same woman, Mr. Speaker, because the government has 
changed the regulations with respect to the maximum amount 
that disabled people who are on welfare and work part time can 
keep, she’s only allowed to keep $150 a month. So here’s a 
woman going out and working half time and keeping $150 a 
month; that’s all she’s allowed to keep  

from her earnings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has created a structure for a woman who will 
be on social assistance all her life, where it doesn’t matter how 
hard she works she can’t get ahead. And I say to members 
opposite, shame that you would create a system like this that 
creates such disincentives for people working. By the time she’s 
purchased her new clothes and covered her extra transportation 
costs to get to her source of employment, she’s got very little 
extra left at the end of a month from working, Mr. Speaker. 
What a disgrace that is — this from a government that claims to 
be creating a system whereby welfare recipients are encouraged 
to go out and work. And I’ll have more to say about that in 
minute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what this budget does is it continues that 
intentional plan that I’ve just described and given two examples 
of, and I want to now give some general policy examples of 
how this intentional plan to keep those who are low-income 
poor is being implemented by this budget. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I hoped that at long last we might see some 
response from the government to the plight of the thousands of 
children in our province who are going to school hungry. The 
evidence of this reality is all around us. Food bank use in the 
province of Saskatchewan is up 30 per cent over the past 12 
months — over 40,000 had to rely on a food bank in 
Saskatchewan in 1988 — over 18,000 children had to rely on 
the services of a food bank in 1988. 
 
I visited with all the food banks in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I’ve chatted with the people 
who’ve been running them. I’ve examined their statistics now 
over the last several years, and every year there’s a sharp rise in 
the demand on their services to the point where they’re not — 
in many cases — they’re not even able to stock the food any 
more that is required to meet the nutritional needs of the 
families who are coming to seek their help. 
 
And they know, Mr. Speaker, that their services are no solution 
to the problem. They’re just a temporary band-aid. Until we get 
a government in this province that cares enough about people, 
the people won’t have to go to food banks in the province of 
Saskatchewan any more. But their services are desperately 
needed and are very much appreciated by the people of 
Saskatchewan because when people are hurt and bleeding, a 
band-aid is the first step to resolving their problem, Mr. 
Speaker. Long-term solutions will have to wait, unfortunately, it 
seems, until another government, and, I hope, not wait long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit more about the evidence 
that I’ve seen in the past few months about the problem of 
poverty and hunger in our province. I visited with dozens of 
schools that have had to set up ad hoc feeding programs for 
hungry children often funded by donations from community 
service agencies. 
 
I visited in small cities like the city of Lloydminster, Mr. 
Speaker, which, believe it or not, now has had to have a food 
bank in place for more than two years, and that food  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

435 
 

bank, Mr. Speaker, in the last year provided over 1,000 orders 
to children alone. Rural communities like Lashburn have had to 
set up food banks. 
 
I just found it remarkable, Mr. Speaker, that a community of 
only 850 people, community of Lashburn between North 
Battleford and Lloydminster on the Yellowhead Highway, 
would have reached the point where poverty was so severe in 
that community that the clergy in that community took the 
responsible step of establishing a food bank. And over 50 per 
cent of the people that they are delivering food to are children, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government had an ounce of compassion, it 
would have come forward with some kind of response to this 
problem. At the very least, it might have announced a breakfast 
program or a lunch program in schools where hunger is a 
demonstrated problem. It might have created a fund from which 
schools could apply for help with a meal program if that school 
felt that children in their school were suffering from a lack of 
food to eat. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, regrettably the government has not 
announced any such initiative, and there’s nothing in the budget 
for such an initiative. And I say regrettably, Mr. Speaker, 
because this urgent issue cannot wait for resolution until the 
next election. It goes beyond partisan politics. It needed to be 
tackled immediately in this budget, yet clearly the government 
plans instead to do nothing and to continue pretending that the 
problem does not exist. 
 
(1215) 
 
What this budget means is that thousands of children in this 
province will go to bed hungry on many, many more occasions 
in the next year, Mr. Speaker. And I think that all members on 
this side of the House join me in saying, shame, Mr. Speaker, 
that any government would allow this situation to continue. 
 
Not only has the Minister of Social Services and his PC 
colleagues chosen not to respond to this crisis, Mr. Speaker, but 
they are actually implementing measures in this budget that will 
make the crisis worse. It’s difficult to believe that it could get 
much worse, Mr. Speaker. We already have the second-highest 
rate of family poverty and the second-highest rate of child 
poverty in all of Canada. 
 
According to the national body who keeps such statistics, Mr. 
Speaker, the National Council on Welfare, that council is telling 
us that 25 per cent of Saskatchewan children — or to be precise, 
25.7 per cent of Saskatchewan children — are living in poverty. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the National Council on 
Welfare’s statistics actually understate the problem. And I want 
to explain why, Mr. Speaker, because the national statistics that 
are kept by the National Council on Welfare exclude families 
living on Indian reserves — they exclude those families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Newfoundland, which has 
only a slightly higher rate of child poverty than us, and the 
highest rate in Canada according to the  

national statistics, just over 26 per cent, there are very few 
Indian people living in the province of Newfoundland, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a very large Indian population, in fact the 
largest in Canada on a percentage basis, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Those families are left out of the 
statistics. Anyone who has visited a reserve in this province 
knows that well over 50 per cent of the people living on Indian 
reserves are living far below the poverty line. 
 
And so what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that I believe in reality 
the province of Saskatchewan, when Indian families are 
included in the statistics, has the highest rate of child poverty in 
the country — the highest rate. That is truly a disgrace, Mr. 
Speaker, and something that we cannot continue to tolerate. 
 
But this budget, Mr. Speaker, as I said, will worsen the situation 
because it is designed to ensure that those who are already 
living below the poverty line will get even poorer because of 
the new tax increases announced in the budget, and because no 
account has been taken of inflation and cost of living increases 
when it comes to the allocations in this budget for the family 
income plan and for social assistance payments. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, measures like the increase in the gas 
tax will hit low income working people very hard, Mr. Speaker. 
And my colleague, the member for Regina Centre, gave the 
example of the taxi driver. And most people driving taxis, Mr. 
Speaker, don’t make very much money. They work long hours 
to earn little pay. And the example that my colleague, the 
member for Regina Centre gave, I thought was very apt. He 
pointed to a taxi driver who, if he drives 260 days a year, will 
pay $5,000 in the next fiscal year for the gas tax alone, and 
none of that money will be rebatable. And what a difference 
that would make to the earnings of that taxi driver, Mr. Speaker, 
if the gas tax had not been increased in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget allocation for the family income plan is 
exactly the same as it was last year, and the year before that, 
and the year before that, and the year before that, Mr. Speaker, 
because this government has chosen to freeze the budget for the 
family income plan for at least four years now. 
 
What that means, Mr. Speaker, is that low income working 
families, who are working but are earning wages that are not 
high enough to adequately meet their needs and those of their 
children, will get no increase at all in benefits from this 
government in this budget, even though inflation has exceeded 
15 per cent over the past four years. A four-year freeze in the 
family income plan, Mr. Speaker — how unfair for those 
working families. 
 
The family income plan is intended specifically to benefit 
children, Mr. Speaker. Payments are based on the number of 
children in a family. What better way to alleviate poverty, to 
alleviate child poverty in Saskatchewan, than to increase 
benefits under the family income plan. What better way, Mr. 
Speaker, to support families than to increase benefits under the 
family income plan, yet the government has frozen funding to 
the family income plan for yet another year, and I say that that  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

436 
 

speaks volumes about their priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly this government intends to keep children who are poor 
living in poverty, and it has no intention of even advertising the 
existence of the family income plan, which it hasn’t advertised 
now for years, Mr. Speaker, because we have a situation now in 
which fewer and fewer families who are poor even know that 
the family income plan exists and thus cannot take advantage of 
it. Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that more than half the families 
in this province who are working and would be eligible for the 
family income plan aren’t applying for it because they don’t 
know about it, Mr. Speaker? This government never advertises 
it and takes virtually no steps to make people aware of the fact 
that the plan exists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family income plan is not the only income 
security program this government has chosen to place a freeze 
on. For the eighth consecutive year, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is choosing to freeze social assistance rates for 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at first glance it appears that this new budget 
provides a small increase for those on social assistance, but 
upon closer examination, this is unlikely to be the case. When 
the spending in the supplementary estimates for 1988 are 
combined with the allocation in the blue book estimates for last 
year, the spending on social assistance in 1988 is well in excess 
of $193 million, meaning there will be an increase in budget 
allocation for the Saskatchewan assistance plan of less than a 
million dollars in the fiscal year 1989-90. 
 
That in itself, Mr. Speaker, would not be so terrible if the rates 
were to increase while the number of people who no longer 
required assistance because they had jobs were to decrease. 
Unfortunately, experience during every year this government 
has been in office has shown that this is not the case. 
 
We now, Mr. Speaker, have an eight-year freeze in the rates. A 
single mother and two children who were getting $917 a month 
from the New Democratic Party government in 1981 are getting 
$917 a month today, eight years later, Mr. Speaker. But the 
difference is, Mr. Speaker, that the cost of living in the interim 
has risen by over 40 per cent. In fact, the latest labour report for 
the province of Saskatchewan for the spring of ’89 shows that a 
family, in order to have the same purchasing power in 
Saskatchewan as they did in 1981, would have to earn 143 per 
cent of what they earned in 1981 just to keep pace with 
inflation, Mr. Speaker. Yet families on social assistance with 
children are not receiving any more than they did in 1981, and 
that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the major reasons why there are 
line-ups at food banks in Saskatchewan and why those line-ups 
will get even longer as a result of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that there is a reference to a proposed small 
increase in the shelter allowance in this budget for those who 
are on the Saskatchewan assistance plan and living in the larger 
urban centres. But, Mr. Speaker, I hold out little hope for a real 
increase in rates for those people. We will wait and see when 
the minister makes his formal announcement, but to date every 
time the minister has increased some allowance for social 
assistance  

recipients, he has at the same time simultaneously cut some 
other allowance for social assistance recipients, so that in the 
end they were no further ahead. 
 
Fourteen months ago, Mr. Speaker, I recall the minister 
increased, by a small measure, the basic allowance for 
recipients in this province, but at the same time, he eliminated 
their travel allowance and their utility . . . their laundry 
allowance, rather, so that after the travel allowance and the 
laundry allowance had been eliminated, they were not a penny 
further ahead even though their basic allowance had gone up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will have to wait and see whether this 
proposed reference to a small increase in the shelter allowance 
will in fact have any real benefit for assistance recipients in this 
province. 
 
We often forget, Mr. Speaker, that 40 per cent of the people 
who depend on social assistance payments are children — 40 
per cent. Already, one out of every four children are living 
below the poverty line. And what this freeze in Saskatchewan 
assistance plan rates means is a lot of these children will not 
only be living below the poverty line, but they will be living in 
horrendous poverty — 40 per cent or more below the poverty 
line, Mr. Speaker. This budget fails poor children in a way that 
is incomprehensible, Mr. Speaker. Sheer cruelty is the mildest 
term I can use to describe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could not help but note the bitter irony of the 
comment under the budget heading, “Opportunities for 
Disadvantaged Families,” one of the supplementary statements 
published with this budget. And I want to quote from that 
budget heading entitled, “Opportunities for Disadvantaged 
Families.” It says, and I quote: 
 

Welfare Reform has provided many with the dignity of 
employment and self-sufficiency. 
 
(Over) 10,000 participants have received skills training 
and employment from the Saskatchewan Works Program. 
 
Today (and I’m continuing to quote from the budget, Mr. 
Speaker), because of these efforts, there are over 2,000 
fewer people requiring social assistance than in 1984. 
 

What distortions can be placed on the printed page, Mr. 
Speaker? Here we have the government leaving the impression 
that they have reduced the welfare rolls of Saskatchewan by 
creating jobs for people. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. 
 
I invite all taxpayers to look at what is really happening to 
people under work for welfare. They’re simply being placed in 
dead-end, short-term, low-paying jobs that last 20 weeks at 
maximum, and are paid minimum wage with little to look 
forward to afterwards but being eligible for unemployment 
insurance. In fact, the jobs are intentionally designed to last just 
long enough to get people onto unemployment insurance, where 
Saskatchewan no longer needs to spend support dollars on 
them. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

437 
 

This government should be providing real hope for people, with 
long-term employment at a living wage that would allow those 
who are on welfare to genuinely better their economic 
circumstances. Instead, work for welfare is just another way to 
keep people poor while temporarily getting them off the welfare 
rolls until their UIC runs out, all designed to make the statistics 
that the Minister of Social Services likes to publish look good, 
but to do absolutely nothing for the people involved in the long 
term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — There’s only one reason, Mr. Speaker, why 
there are 2,000 fewer people on the welfare rolls than there 
were in 1984, and it has nothing to do with job creation. It is 
because in the last 12 months this government has cut more 
than 1,500 people arbitrarily off social assistance, and 
regardless of their need has refused to reinstate them, in 
violation of the Canada Assistance Plan Act. I have had dozens 
and dozens of these people into my constituency office in the 
last year, Mr. Speaker. And I know for every one I meet with 
and try to help, there are 20 others who go without advocacy 
assistance. 
 
Thus what this government fails to offer the people who are 
poor is hope — no real jobs and no hope. We will never 
eradicate poverty in Saskatchewan without a strategy for full 
employment, but this government has no employment strategy 
to offer. 
 
Eighty per cent unemployment in many northern communities, 
but no announcement in this budget of jobs for the North. An 
unemployment rate consistently in excess of 10 per cent in 
Saskatoon, but no specific plan for jobs in Saskatoon. A youth 
unemployment rate in this province in excess of 17 per cent, 
and yet this government is cutting back the employment 
summer jobs program for students from $10.5 million — 10 and 
a half million dollars — in 1986, Mr. Speaker, to $4 million last 
year, to only $3.1 million in this budget. 
 
It’s difficult to believe that we can be living in a province where 
unemployment has doubled in the past seven years of this 
government’s administration, and yet we have a budget speech 
which barely makes a passing reference to employment 
creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a concrete suggestion for the government 
with respect to its employment strategy, or rather its lack 
thereof, that I wish they would take seriously. It’s time for the 
government to abandon its ineffective focus on megaprojects 
and instead concentrate on creating long-term, environmentally 
sound jobs on a small and decentralized scale right across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1230) 
 
There are jobs, for example, to be created by expanding our 
vegetable industry in the province of Saskatchewan. At present, 
85 per cent of all the vegetables we purchase in grocery stores 
in this province are imported from outside Saskatchewan. 
Clearly, we could easily grow the large majority of these 
vegetables in our province. The  

key to expanding vegetable production is the construction of 
vegetable storage facilities to permit a year-round supply of 
vegetables to our local market. 
 
Local vegetable producers would also need help from 
government to negotiate with large retail stores in order to 
initially get their produce onto the shelves of these stores. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite, I note, and particularly the 
Minister of Education, are making light of this proposal to 
expand vegetable production in this province. But I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s an opportunity to create healthy, nutritious 
food for our local people, that’s not treated with the pesticides 
used in California, and that will create work for people without 
work in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are jobs to be created in fish processing in 
his province. Rather than sending our fish to be processed in 
Winnipeg, why not provide assistance for the establishment of 
filleting plants in northern Saskatchewan in the processing and 
freezing of fish? Why not build new fish hatcheries in northern 
Saskatchewan and implement a program of fish farming and a 
program for restocking our depleted northern lakes. By 
processing our own fish resources in northern Saskatchewan, 
local jobs can then be created in the delivery of those fish to 
food outlets in the southern part of our province. 
 
There are jobs, Mr. Speaker, to be created by adopting a 
sustainable forestry policy for our province. We need to move 
from the planting of 8 to 12 million seedlings a year to the 
planting of a minimum of 30 million seedlings a year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This would mean the minister — I note, Mr. Speaker, if I could 
move from my prepared remarks for a moment, that the 
Minister of Health is agreeing with my statement. Well I 
wonder if the Minister of Health can explain to members of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, why this government, when it came it 
to office, cut the budget for the replanting of trees in this 
province by more than 50 per cent and has kept that budget well 
below a budget for tree planting, established by the NDP in 
1981, for every year that it has been in office since it’s been 
elected in 1982, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister of Health 
can explain that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was saying . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I know the 
remarks are interesting and other people want to get into the 
debate, and that’s understandable, but perhaps a little later on 
they’ll have their chance. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I was saying, there are jobs to be had in the replanting of 
trees in northern Saskatchewan and reforestation of our forestry 
resource. And this would mean expanded nursery capacity in 
creating new jobs in tree breeding, cone gathering, seed 
extraction, replanting, and silviculture. With a more intensive 
approach to forest management, we could create a healthier 
forest, higher profits and more jobs in the forest sector than ever 
before. That is the only way we can replace our depleted forest 
stock. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

438 
 

A million acres in this province, Mr. Speaker, have been clear 
cut and not replanted, and it’s time to do something about it. 
And in the course of doing something about it, and in the course 
of developing a plan for intensive forest management in this 
province, we can put more than 2,000 people to work in the 
parkland area of this province and in northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are jobs to be had in our recycling industry, Mr. Speaker. 
The taxpayers of this province are tired of seeing bags and bags 
of material that they know could be recycled being piled up 
each week in back lanes destined for land-fill sites in our cities 
and towns. The government knows it doesn’t have to be this 
way, and they know that hundreds of new jobs could be created 
through various recycling initiatives. And yet they sit on their 
hands and do nothing to foster the growth of recycling 
industries in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Government of Saskatchewan wants to 
create long-term, meaningful work for young men and women 
in this province and if it wants to offer hope to families who’ve 
been unemployed for a long period of time, then why not put 
people to work creating an environmentally sustainable 
economy in the province of Saskatchewan? Why leave people 
on welfare, Mr. Speaker, when these kind of meaningful, 
decent-paying, long-term jobs could be created. And yet the 
Government of Saskatchewan fails to offer that option to those 
who are poor in this province. 
 
Alas, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that neither has the 
political will nor the vision nor the desire to change the 
structures of the economy in such a way to ensure that this will 
happen. And so we have a growing crisis in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that this budget will exacerbate. 
 
We are creating a society with three distinct groups of people in 
this province. We have one group of families with good paying 
jobs that, happily, are relatively secure in our society. We have 
a second group of families with low-paying jobs that are often 
seasonal or temporary and that offer no long-term security and 
very few fringe benefits. And now we have emerging a third 
group of families in our province which have been, sadly, 
without work for long periods of time. When they find work it 
is very temporary and low paying, and they have no hope from 
this government for a long-term job strategy, and they have 
little to look forward to but long stretches of time on social 
assistance. 
 
It is the policies of this government that are creating the tragic 
circumstances in which this third group of families find 
themselves. It offers those families no hope and no help, only 
the promise of forced labour in 20-week jobs — 
work-for-welfare jobs — at starvation wages. 
 
It should be no surprise that many of these families face 
enormous stress, are often in crisis, and are in urgent need of 
support services. And you know, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Meadow Lake, the Minister of Health, is laughing as I 
make these comments. He obviously has no empathy with these 
families. And I’m not surprised, because it is the policies that 
his government has implemented — and he sits on the front 
benches of that  

government — that has made life so difficult for those families. 
And yet he laughs about it in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I 
say shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, there are many families in urgent 
need of support services in this province, and yet what do we 
find in this budget? We find a government that is intent on 
cutting back even more on the key support services that all 
families across this province rely on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I saw yesterday’s budget and I looked under 
grants for family services, I could not believe my eyes. Here we 
have a government that claims to embrace them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. We’re having several 
sub-debates taking place. Let us just allow the main speaker to 
continue with his remarks. Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
Let’s just all allow the member for Saskatoon University to 
continue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see, Mr. Speaker, 
that members are clearly sensitive about the point I’m going to 
raise. And now that I have their full attention I want to say how 
very surprised I was in this budget to see that a government that 
claims to embrace family values has actually dramatically cut 
the budget item that is described as grants for family services. 
And I want all members to note this. 
 
Here we have a government that is hosting a symposium on the 
family this summer as a show-case of its commitment to the 
family, while in the same breath it has slashed spending to 
non-government organizations that deliver family services in 
Saskatchewan by over $800,000 in this fiscal year alone. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, groups such as the family service 
bureaus, Big Brothers and Big Sisters, John Howard Society 
youth services, Mobile Crisis (intervention) Services, sexual 
assault centres in the province, those kinds of groups, Mr. 
Speaker, received $7,491,000 last year to provide support 
services to families in need. This year those same groups will 
receive a total of only $6,550,500. 
 
When inflation is taken into account, this is a cut of 16 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker, a 16 per cent cut in grants to family service 
agencies in this province from a government that claims to be a 
supporter of the family. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this cut 
shows this government for what it really is, which is a 
government that is against families, and particularly against 
poor families in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — These family service organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, are already reeling from an earlier round of cuts in the 
1987 post-election budget. Many of their budgets then, Mr. 
Speaker, were cut by up to 20 per cent. 
 
I remember Mobile Crisis (intervention) Services, Mr. Speaker, 
in cities like Regina having 20 per cent slashed  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

439 
 

off their budget without even taking account of inflation, Mr. 
Speaker. And now this government is proposing to cut them 
again. Now they’re being hit with a second major round of cuts. 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, we have only the global figure and 
not the details of these cuts. But the government’s intent is 
clear. 
 
My fear, Mr. Speaker, is that many of these non-government 
organizations who’ve suffered long and difficult years under 
this government just will not be able to hang on much longer. 
Their staffs have not received salary increases for many years. 
They’ve already had to cut back sharply on their services. 
 
Many of these dedicated people, Mr. Speaker, are earning 
wages that are no better than the poverty line themselves. They 
stay in these jobs because of their commitment to the people 
they are trying to help. And what does this government do to 
show its appreciation? It’s cut their budgets by another 16 per 
cent. 
 
And I fear, Mr. Speaker, that many of these organizations 
simply will not be able to continue operating their programs in 
the way they do now and will use many of their more 
experienced staff. 
 
I find it hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Social 
Services can come into this Assembly last week with a new 
family services Act that can only be effective if 
community-based family support services are expanded in our 
cities and towns, and then this week brings in a budget that 
further stifles the work of the very support agencies his 
legislation will depend on in order to be effective. 
 
Members of the Assembly will recall last week during second 
reading on the family services Act, Mr. Speaker, that I said that 
the true test of whether or not the family services Act will 
genuinely help children and families in his province will be if 
on the ground the Minister of Social Services is prepared to put 
the funding resources in place to agencies that are expected to 
deliver those services. 
 
Now that we see this budget, Mr. Speaker, I can clearly predict 
that the new family services Act will do little to improve the 
well-being of the children of this province, because instead of 
being increased, the resources available for families in crisis is 
being cut again by this government. And I say shame; that is 
clearly a record that should be unacceptable, not just to all 
members of this House but I know is unacceptable to everyone 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other comments I’d like to 
make about the Social Services portion of this budget, but I will 
reserve this for the budget estimates debate. I do before closing, 
however, want to make some brief remarks with respect to the 
budget of the Department of the Environment and with respect 
to the Premier’s support for a nuclear reactor in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, some of the announcements in the budget 
speech with respect to the environment, such as the proposed 
soils conservation agreement with Ottawa and legislation to 
protect the ozone layer, are long  

overdue but have genuine potential. We’ll have to wait and see 
the details on those, Mr. Speaker, but I say that those measures 
have some potential and we’ll wait and see the details on the 
announcements. 
 
But my initial air of optimism was sharply tempered, Mr. 
Speaker, when I looked at the actual estimates for the 
environment, the Department of the Environment’s proposed 
spending in the year 1989-90. 
 
(1245) 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, the budget of the Department of the 
Environment will be $11.6 million. In 1988 it was about $10.8 
million, but, Mr. Speaker — and this is the point I want to make 
— in 1981 it was $10.17 million. Bear in mind that in the 
interim period inflation has been in excess of 40 per cent, so 
what we have, Mr. Speaker, what we are witnessing now, is a 
government that for seven years has whittled away at the 
Department of the Environment in this province, has laid off the 
top-notch public servants that we had during the NDP period 
that were truly experts in the area of the environment, has laid a 
lot of those people off. 
 
And I’m thinking of the likes of people like Dr. David Penman, 
who was a respected expert in the whole area of pesticides and 
cancer-causing chemicals. He was one of the first fatalities of 
this government. There have been many others in that 
department since that time. 
 
This is a government that whittled away for seven years at the 
Department of the Environment, in effect cut its budget, Mr. 
Speaker, by some 40 per cent in real dollar terms, and now is 
having a deathbed repentance as the environment becomes a 
more publicly popular issue in this province, and is now 
increasing the budget in the department by a million dollars — 
a deathbed repentance, I say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, even more important is what we 
didn’t hear about the environment in this budget. Did we hear 
anything about energy conservation initiatives that are key if we 
are to avoid the construction of major new coal-fired generating 
plants in this province; that we do not want because of the 
impact that they have on acid rain, because of the impact they 
have on the greenhouse effect, Mr. Speaker? We want to be 
able to avoid those kinds of projects, and the way to do that is 
through an energy conservation initiative. 
 
Did we hear anything about an energy conservation initiative in 
this budget? No, nothing. Did we hear anything about this 
government proposing to actually reduce the use of hazardous 
pesticides in this province, to reduce the use of cancer-causing 
pesticides like 2,4-D in this province? Did we hear a word 
about that? Not a word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did we hear anything about the need to clean up radioactive 
uranium tailings in northern Saskatchewan that have been 
sitting in some of the lakes up there, like Lake Athabasca, now 
for many years and have never been removed from the lake and 
will be a source of permanent contamination to the lake, Mr. 
Speaker, if they are not removed. Did we see anything about 
that in this  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

440 
 

budget? Not a thing. 
 
Did we see anything, Mr. Speaker, about abolishing cancer 
causing pollutants from the environment? Not a word, Mr. 
Speaker. Did we see anything about changes to the 
environmental impact assessment process that would make it 
more independent, that would stop the current provisions under 
which the advocates of a project actually get to write and 
prepare the environmental impact assessment for that project 
rather than having it being done by some more independent 
body. Did we see anything on proposed changes to that process, 
Mr. Speaker? Not a word. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it should be of no surprise that we also 
didn’t see a word on a halt to what will clearly be one of the 
most unnecessary and environmentally damaging projects in 
this province, that will flood hundreds, in fact thousands of 
acres of good agricultural land in Saskatchewan; that will 
destroy thousands of acres of top-notch wildlife habitat land in 
this province; that will flood dozens of oil wells in this province 
and dozens of parks in this province, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
referring, of course, to the Rafferty-Shand project which this 
government insists on going ahead with, despite the fact that 
environmentalists, not just across Canada but around the world, 
have condemned this project. Of course we saw nothing in the 
budget that would lead to the cancellation of Shand-Rafferty, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that this deathbed repentance of a an 
extra million dollars for the Department of the Environment is 
hardly about to turn this PC government into a group of 
environmental advocates. In fact, their record demonstrates that 
in effect there is no hope for them, Mr. Speaker. They are a 
write-off in terms of the environmental community in this 
province, and, Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that in the next 
election environmentalists across Saskatchewan will not 
support the PC government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s get right down to it, Peter. What 
about the uranium mines? Let’s get down to another matter — 
the uranium mines. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now I see that the member for Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Education, wants to get into a 
discussion of the nuclear issue, and I’m going to oblige him, 
Mr. Speaker, and do just that. I’m going to oblige him and do 
just that. 
 
I see there’s about 10 minutes left on the clock. The member 
from Weyburn is anxious to get into the debate and, Mr. 
Speaker, I therefore want to talk about what has become one of 
the government’s favourite subjects in the last couple of 
months, and that is a proposed nuclear reactor for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and their advocate in this area, in addition to the 
Premier, is one Colin Hindle, who was formerly the head of the 
Crown investments corporation in this province, but has now 
taken a sudden desire to temporarily head for the private sector. 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that in the end this is going to be a 
private  

sector project. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Hindle is out 
there pushing the idea right now that in the end, if this reactor is 
built, it’s not going to be built by a tiny company such as the 
one that Mr. Hindle operates; it’s much more likely to be built 
by Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We will wait and see in 
that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The real issue is not the question of whether or not Mr. Hindle 
will operate this plant, because I don’t believe he ever will. The 
issue is whether or not a nuclear reactor is good for this 
province. I say it’s not. I’m proud that the New Democratic 
Party is saying it’s not. And I want to take a few minutes to 
comment on why it’s not, in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that Mr. Hindle has been 
travelling Saskatchewan, proposing on one hand that the reactor 
could be located in Lloydminster, proposing at another moment 
that the reactor might be located near La Ronge, proposing 
another moment that the reactor might be located near Lake 
Diefenbaker. The point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that 
wherever this reactor is located, it will be, if it is allowed to be 
built, it will be a tremendous hazard to agriculture in this 
province. 
 
And I’m amazed that a government that pretends to be the 
supporters of agriculture would ever come forward with an 
energy project that would endanger agriculture in this province 
in the way that the proposed nuclear reactor would, because I 
ask members of the Assembly to consider what the 
consequences of a serious accident at a nuclear reactor would 
have for agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. And all 
one needs to do is look at the consequences of the Chernobyl 
accident in the Soviet Union, Mr. Speaker, where only 3 per 
cent of the uranium in the reactor was actually released into the 
environment as a result of that accident. Only 3 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, of the radioactive materials inside the reactor were 
released into the environment, and yet, what were the 
consequences? 
 
Well the consequences, of course, immediately around the 
reactor in the Ukraine was that 30 kilometres on all sides of the 
reactor has been permanently written off. It’s a dead zone that 
no one is allowed to enter without special permission, in which 
the forests and the land in that zone are being buried, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But more importantly, what is the implications for agriculture 
hundreds of miles away from that accident, Mr. Speaker? What 
happened to farmers in places like Italy and West Germany and 
Austria? Well what happened, Mr. Speaker, was that they had 
to throw away all their crops. Their asparagus crops and the 
lettuce crops and the spinach crop and the bean crop, right 
across Austria and right across West Germany and right across 
countries like Finland, had to be thrown in the garbage as a 
result of the Chernobyl accident. 
 
That’s what that accident meant for farmers, Mr. Speaker. The 
artichokes . . . artichoke farmers had to write off their crop for 
the year in which the Chernobyl accident took place. The hay 
producers all across western Europe, Mr.  
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

441 
 

Speaker, found that their hay had been contaminated with 
radiation and that their silos had been contaminated with 
radiation. That’s what that accident meant to farmers who were 
living more than a thousand miles from the site at which the 
accident took place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members on the opposite, the PC government, can talk 
about locating this reactor in northern Saskatchewan. But they 
can’t pretend for a moment that if an accident occurs at that 
reactor, it will not impact farmers in southern Saskatchewan, 
because it will. And that’s one of the reasons why the New 
Democratic Party says that it’s an unnecessary risk for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — It’s also an unnecessary risk, Mr. Speaker, 
because in the event of a serious accident we don’t need an 
excess of the cancers in this province that we’ve seen at places 
like Three Mile Island and in the Ukraine when a nuclear 
accident occurs. Look at the statistics from Three Mile Island, 
where you get giant dandelions that are growing, not just a foot, 
but several feet long, contaminated by radiation. Look at the 
record in terms of the infant mortality that tripled at Three Mile 
Island after the accident there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Scare tactics. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The member for Weyburn says, scare tactics. I 
say to the member, go to Three Mile Island; go to Pennsylvania; 
visit with the families there; talk to the families who lost their 
children after Three Mile Island; talk to the families whose 
children were born deformed, and then you come back and ask 
me if that’s scare tactics. Because I tell you that it’s real, Mr. 
Minister, I tell you it’s real. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Scientists, Mr. Speaker, are saying that there 
could be in excess of 10,000 cancers as a result of Chernobyl, 
and I say we don’t want a legacy like this in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that the members opposite conveniently 
ignore the fact that one of the serious problems that would be 
associated with a nuclear reactor in the province of 
Saskatchewan is the fact that no one — no one — has been able 
to determine how the high level radioactive nuclear wastes that 
such a nuclear reactor would generate would be disposed of. 
 
And I take it that members opposite want to see such 
radioactive wastes building up in the province of Saskatchewan. 
I take it, Mr. Speaker, that they favour these highly radioactive 
wastes being transported through communities in 
Saskatchewan. I take it, Mr. Speaker, that they believe that the 
risks of nuclear power and the risks of these wastes being 
created are worth the benefits. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that these members have got their 
values badly corrupted because what they are proposing is the 
construction of a reactor and the generation of highly 
radioactive uranium wastes that will be  

radioactive for tens of thousands of years to come. And they 
want this generation of Saskatchewan residents to get the 
benefits of the electricity from that reactor while the next 
generation of Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, the children 
of this province and the children who are yet unborn will be 
asked to deal with the legacy of those nuclear wastes. 
 
One generation is to get the benefits of the power under this 
government, and the next generation, it’s proposed, is to be left 
with the problem of how to dispose of the waste. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is highly irresponsible, highly inappropriate, 
and puts an unfair burden on future generations of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also note that members are now suddenly 
becoming concerned about the greenhouse effect in this 
province as it relates to a nuclear reactor. I, Mr. Speaker, am 
deeply concerned about the greenhouse effect. I think that it is 
just as serious as the problem of long-lived radiation in the 
environment. These are two very serious problems that have to 
be simultaneously addressed by Saskatchewan residents and on 
a global scale, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not interested in pitting 
one against the other. I want to see them both dealt with. 
 
What I find ironic, Mr. Speaker, is that suddenly overnight the 
proponents of the nuclear reactor have become concerned about 
the greenhouse effect. And the Premier says: well, one of the 
reasons we need a nuclear reactor in the province of 
Saskatchewan is so that we don’t have to build another 
coal-fired generating station in this province that would produce 
carbon dioxide and add to the greenhouse effect problem. Well 
I say to the Government of Saskatchewan, if they are so 
concerned about the greenhouse effect and the construction of 
another coal-fired generating station in this province, well then 
why is the Premier building Shand in his own riding, a 
coal-fired generating station that will add to the greenhouse 
effect in this province. Maybe members opposite can explain 
that to me, Mr. Speaker, because I’m at a loss to understand it, 
at a loss to understand it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that my time has almost elapsed. I want to 
say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that a nuclear reactor in this 
province is unnecessary; we don’t need it. The option of energy 
conservation and safe, renewable, alternative sources of energy 
is far more promising in this province. That’s what this 
government should be addressing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in closing that I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is simply no need for a nuclear power station 
in this province. The risks are unnecessary; it’s an unnecessary 
initiative. And for many obvious reasons that I’ve outlined, Mr. 
Speaker, both for the reasons of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Peter, what about the mines? Put my 
mind at ease. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The minister is saying what about the mines, 
and, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that I don’t have time to address 
that today. I see my time has elapsed, and I will at this point 
adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1989 

 

442 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


