


















































March 30, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 30 1989 
 

401 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to 
the members of the Legislative Assembly, 23 grade 12 students 
from Meath Park. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Bernice McNair and Wayne Wolffe; also their bus driver, Lisa 
Davidson. 
 
They drove in this morning to have lunch with me at 11:30 and 
ask me questions, and certainly I hope they enjoy the budget 
speech this afternoon. I wish them a safe journey home. I would 
like all members here to welcome them in the usual manner. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to 
the members and our guests today, a group of 19 high school 
students from the riding of Thunder Creek. They are seated to 
your immediate right. They are from the high schools of 
Eyebrow, Briercrest, Pense, Bethune, and several students from 
the Moose Jaw area which attend high schools in the city of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
It was a pleasure for me to have them in for lunch today and 
talk about the legislature and our work as MLAs. I would like 
all members here to welcome them here to the floor of the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to people 
assembled today, two members seated in the east gallery, a 
Vicki Northcott, who is the president-elect of the University of 
Regina Students’ Union; seated beside Vicky is Lyndon Surjik, 
who is the vice-president-elect of finance, again for the 
University of Regina Students’ Union. I ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these two distinguished guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Deficit Forecast for 1986-87 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Minister of Finance, and it has to do 
with the 1986 budget and the credibility of the government. Mr. 
Speaker, as the Minister of Finance will know, he predicted in 
that budget a deficit of approximately $390 million, which as 
we have subsequently found out, in fact, turned out to be a debt 
not of $390 million but a debt of $1.2 billion. 
 
Now on March 16 of this year, his deputy minister of Finance, 
Mr. Art Wakabayashi, under testimony to the  

Public Accounts Committee stated that you, sir, as Minister of 
Finance, and that the Premier, as the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, received monthly statements as to the deficit 
situation and the expenditure and revenue situation for the 
province of Saskatchewan — before ’86 budget and after the 
’86 budget — indicating that you must have known that the 
debt prediction in that budget was wildly low. My question to 
you, sir, is this: why did you have what is now clearly a false 
and misleading debt position paper in that ’86 budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a little difficulty 
accepting a question on budgets and the difference from the 
Estimates from the hon. member that missed by some $2 billion 
on potash revenues, oil revenues in the 1981-1982 — both 
budget and information — to the credit rating agencies. 
 
Having said that, let me go back through to refresh the hon. 
member’s memory, because he has forgotten as we went 
through the debate. One, certainly this government in 1986 was 
not accurate, and we’ve been through the debate on oil prices. 
We predicted about $22. Mr. Speaker, that was the year that oil 
went down to $10 a barrel. Mr. Speaker, of the three 
governments in that year that are affected by oil prices, that is 
ourselves, Alberta, and the Government of Canada, we were the 
most cautious in our prediction of oil estimates in 1986, and no 
one predicted that they were going to drop from $22 down to 
$10 a barrel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, I made it abundantly clear that we were not taking in 
that year the Liquor Board revenues that we had indicated we 
would take. That was a discretionary decision by myself and the 
government. Mr. Speaker, we made that clear. Secondly, we 
made it clear that we were going to set a bad debt provision in 
1986 for the production loan program. We made that clear. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we made it abundantly clear we were 
going to take some debt write-offs in 1986. Mr. Speaker, the 
only part of the budget 1986 where there was not a relationship 
on the estimates to the actual pricing was on oil, Mr. Speaker. 
And if the hon. member in fairness would go back and take a 
look at that time, this government was more cautious in its 
predictions on oil prices than any other government in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister 
of Finance. The Minister of Finance would have this House 
believe and the people of the province of Saskatchewan believe 
that all of a sudden these are facts and figures which have come 
to his attention, that somehow he didn’t have all of these figures 
and explanations which he has given to us at the time that he 
was the Minister of Finance back in 1986 and after the budget 
of 1986. 
 
Isn’t it true, Mr. Minister of Finance, that you had those, you 
had those explanations, and you knew that the debt was heading 
toward $1.2 billion, and still you misled the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan by predicting it at  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

402 
 

$390 million. Why is that the case? Give us the answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again what the Leader of the 
Opposition of course does not understand, and I find it 
somewhat regrettable that, Mr. Speaker, we received in the 
Department of Finance estimates throughout the course of the 
year. In no case do we begin until about the last quarter of the 
fiscal year to begin to get some firm numbers. We get estimates 
on what equalization . . . they are up and down. Mr. Speaker, 
we get variations on retail. No one credibly, Mr. Speaker, takes 
a look at the estimates in the first quarter of a fiscal year as 
meaning anything throughout the course of the year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So having said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, I can sit and 
tell the hon. member right now — and it’s amazing to me that 
he doesn’t understand — that even today we get adjustments on 
what the equalization payments would be from the federal 
government. Mr. Speaker, we do not even close the books, nor 
does any government in Canada close the books, for another 
month after the fiscal year, because we keep getting adjustments 
on our revenues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Finance. Is the Minister of Finance, by virtue of the 
answer which he has just given us, telling us that these monthly 
reports that Mr. Wakabayashi gives to you, sir, and to the 
Premier, as a result of reports from the departments, that these 
monthly reports are virtually meaningless; that you ignore them 
for the first quarter or second quarter or, for that matter, to 
listen to your answer, ignore them right until the very last 
quarter? What in the world is the purpose of giving these 
monthly reports to you except to keep the government apprised 
of your fiscal situation? 
 
And, sir, your fiscal situation in that year was desperate, as it is 
this year desperate. And you, sir, betrayed the people of 
Saskatchewan by not telling them the truth. I want to know why 
you hid it in your budget of that time and since that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I can explain 
to the hon. member over and over and over again, and I’m 
having some difficulty getting through; what I told the hon. 
member: if, for example, after the first quarter the price of oil 
drops from $22 to $10 in the second half of the fiscal year, it 
has an effect on the budget. If it happens at Christmas time, it 
has an effect on the budget. If we have an equalization 
adjustment because of the economy in Ontario, it has an effect 
on the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hate to have to go through an elementary lesson 
to the Leader of the Opposition who should know better. But 
that is why, Mr. Speaker, we call them estimates, because we do 
take estimates of what our revenues will be. And I have gone 
through, Mr. Speaker, the litany of the decisions that I and the 
government made  

after the 1986 year to begin to take write-downs and have a 
bad-debt provision. We made those decisions after the fact, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The one area that we did not contemplate, which I have freely 
and often acknowledged, that we did not know in 1986 that oil 
would go from $22 a barrel down to $10 a barrel. And I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, no matter how all-wise the Leader of the 
Opposition thinks he is, that no other government in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, predicted oil to go from $22 to 10, nor did any 
other government in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Servicing of Budget Deficits 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
probably unnecessary, Mr. Premier, to remind you that oil 
wasn’t $22 a barrel when you brought in the budget, and it 
didn’t get to $10 a barrel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to deal, Mr. Minister, if I might . . . 
if the minister can control his temper, I want to deal if I might, 
Mr. Minister, with another of your fables. And this fable is that 
you’ve managed the province wisely and you’ve been building. 
All you’ve been building, Mr. Minister, is a $3.8 billion debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s a half a billion a year. My question, 
Mr. Minister, is: will you tell us what the yearly cost of 
servicing this debt will be this year, and will you admit that this 
year it’s going to be the third-largest item of expenditure in this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m sorry that the opposition Finance 
critic has fallen trap to the opposition inconsistent arguments. If 
I give him the information, I’m going to be accused of leaking 
the budget. So I mean, you can’t have it both ways. Your 
inconsistencies have been obvious, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will make it abundantly clear, as we have in the past, when 
there is a drought and when there are difficulties in agriculture, 
we will help, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has a few words he’d 
like to wrap it up with. I’ll allow him to do that. I’m having 
difficulty hearing him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And, Mr. Speaker, when he talks about the 
economy, let me remind the hon. member that you have 
opposed every single job creation effort to date — 2,900 jobs 
from privatization and public participation already. You say no. 
You sit and you complain that you want to shut down the 
uranium mines, but you’re  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

403 
 

interested in creating jobs. Mr. Speaker, the inconsistencies are 
consistent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Promise of Tax Reductions 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, prior to forming government, 
you campaigned, indeed you promised the people of 
Saskatchewan that you were going to reduce the personal 
income tax by 10 per cent. 
 
I regret in having to say that you broke that promise; you broke 
it. Mr. Speaker, instead what you did is you introduced a flat tax 
of 2 per cent, which is costing the average family $600 per year. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: when are you going to keep the 
faith; or if you don’t, how do you expect us to believe anything 
that you might have in this year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I must say, Mr. Speaker, the tenor of 
questions today indicates a fear of this budget from the 
opposition that I haven’t seen before, Mr. Speaker. I suggest to 
the hon. member that certainly we have had tax increases, and 
the tax increases go to help to pay for, for example, education; 
that now there will be twice as much spent on education than 
when you were in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, in some seven years, 
education expenditures have doubled. Health care has nearly 
doubled in seven years over your 11 years, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I can say, without leaking the budget, that after the 
budget, when fair-minded people have had a chance to read it, 
they will find, Mr. Speaker, that in most levels of income 
Saskatchewan people will continue to be the second-lowest 
taxed people in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax on Gasoline 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also directed to 
the Minister of Finance, and it concerns another of his broken 
promises. Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, in 1982 you promised 
the people of Saskatchewan that as long as there was a PC 
government in power in this province there would not be a gas 
tax. Well now we’ve got the worst of both worlds — we’ve got 
the PC government and the gas tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, the tax right now is 7 cents a litre. Who knows 
what it’s going to be tonight! How can you explain this betrayal 
of the promise that you made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m surprised 
at that particular question. The member wasn’t around at the 
time, I don’t think, but let me just refer, if I  

may, and quote the former leader of the opposition and leader 
of the New Democratic Party when he talked about gasoline 
tax. He was complaining about no gasoline tax at the time, and 
in 1984 the then leader of the opposition said: 
 

I don’t believe that Saskatchewan people should be 
supplying road use free to truckers. 
 

He said the NDP takes a different position, that those people, 
those out-of-province truckers should pay the tax but 
Saskatchewan citizens should not pay the tax, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, somehow want a system, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have a separate pump for out-of-province truckers, another 
gas pump for out-of-province tourists, and then we have a third 
one for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have said, and repeated over and over again, 
that in order to tax those people from out of province, Mr. 
Speaker, the only effective way is the rebatable gas tax so 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan individuals still, Mr. 
Speaker, if they keep their receipts, do not have to pay the gas 
tax, Mr. Speaker, the only province in Canada that has that 
benefit for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Promise to Remove Sales Tax 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also to 
the Minister of Finance, and it concerns another one of his 
broken promises. Mr. Minister, in 1982 you promised that you 
would phase out the sales tax, and in seven budgets you have 
failed to keep your promise. Mr. Minister, you have increased 
the sales tax, and that’s been very, very hard on people on low 
income and middle income people. They are waiting today to 
see if you are going to keep your promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan, or are you going to continue to keep the sales 
tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, certainly, and the hon. 
members may even recall that we did increase the sales tax 
from five to seven. But, Mr. Speaker, let me remind the hon. 
member that there are exemptions in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government exempts clothing under $250. Mr. 
Speaker, our province has taken the sales tax off the electrical 
and gas bills, Mr. Speaker. We have a special income tax 
deduction for low income people, Mr. Speaker, to help them for 
the very reasons that the hon. member has said, so I suggest to 
the hon. member — and with no tax on gasoline if people keep 
their receipts. I suggest to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that 
of all the provinces in Canada that have a sales tax, 
Saskatchewan has the greatest number of exemptions, and 
secondly, the lowest tax base or the narrowest tax base. 
 
I may recall the hon. member, I may tell the hon. member that 
under the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

404 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to remind the hon. member that I 
did indicate to him that I sat him down and that he had made his 
point, and I don’t wish that he persist in speaking. 
 

High Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, as 
well, is to the minister of denial, the Minister of Finance. Mr. 
Minister, I want to say that you know that small-business 
operators are under a great deal of stress and threat because of 
Mulroney’s high interest rate policies. In 1982 you promised 
the small-business sector in Saskatchewan prosperity, but all 
they’ve seen is bankruptcy and tough times; you broke your 
promise. 
 
My question is this: why have you sat on your hands regarding 
high interest rates, and will you act today to protect 
Saskatchewan small business from Mulroney and his high 
interest policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t deny for a minute that 
the small-business community has had serious difficulties, and 
you can sit and put the blame on this government for the 
drought — that’s what you do and the hon. member says we do; 
other fair-minded people don’t go to that extreme. 
 
Having said that, let me remind the hon. member that last year 
this government committed to a small-business tax rebate for 
the business taxes, the largest portion of which is imposed by 
your NDP friends and the NDP government in the city of 
Regina — led by your friends, the NDP mayor of Regina — 
which imposes some 40, nearly 50 per cent, of all the business 
tax collected in this province comes from the only NDP 
government in this province in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me also remind the hon. member of the mortgage interest 
protection programs for Saskatchewan people so that 
Saskatchewan people are in fact protected from high interest 
rates on their homes, Mr. Speaker. Other initiatives will be 
announced. I hope the hon. member is supportive as he is 
critical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Unemployment in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister for Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment. Mr. Minister, you will be aware that over the past 
14 months Saskatchewan has had a net loss of 21,000 people — 
in the last 14 months alone — and our unemployment grows — 
9.1 per cent in 43,000 unemployed in February. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: will this budget today recognize 
that your government’s privatization plans are not working? 
And will it provide concrete action — concrete action — to 
bring back our young people and to  

provide jobs for the people of Saskatchewan again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 
opposition has given me an opportunity to point out that 
diversification is working in Saskatchewan, and that if it were 
not for the sad state of agriculture and world market conditions, 
that we would have a net increase in jobs; there is a net increase 
in jobs outside of agriculture, and that there is a massive 
decrease in jobs related to agriculture. 
 
That problem of crisis in agriculture has spread to the cities. 
Certainly the Government of Saskatchewan, who has done more 
for farmers than any government in history, cannot be blamed 
for the agricultural situation. We have done much to alleviate it. 
But it is clear that if it were not for diversification, this province 
would be in deep trouble. 
 
This government has, through diversification, brought in new 
corporations through public participation. You see now a 
successful pulp mill and paper mill in Prince Albert. Those are 
all good jobs. Those are non-agricultural jobs. Those are 
examples of what diversification does for this province. And 
when we get rain, and when the prices go up as they are now, 
things will be a lot better in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants to Universities 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minster of 
Education. I’ve had enough of deny, deny, deny from the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, this deals again with another 
broken promise. You promised to the university students of the 
U of R that they would have their student union centre during 
the 1986 election. The students are still waiting for that promise 
to be carried out. And my question to you will be whether or 
not that promise will be carried out in the budget. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, 1,100 students, qualified students, 
last year were unable to attend post-secondary institutes and 
universities, qualified students, because of lack of funding by 
your government. 
 
Would you mind telling us today also whether the budget will 
make sufficient moneys available so that our students don’t 
have to leave this province, and that they will have access to 
post-secondary institutes and our universities so that they can be 
prepared for the 21st century. Will there be sufficient money 
available? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, relative to what will be 
in today’s budget, I’ll leave that for later this day when the 
Minister of Finance will announce those budget initiatives. And 
that’s as the House would dictate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Relative to what’s been going on at our universities, Mr. 
Speaker, the track record there, albeit that there are  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

405 
 

pressures, but if I look back at over the last five or 10 years, 
what we have seen there is more and more of our young people 
having the opportunity to get a post-secondary education in this 
province, whether it be at our newly formed regional colleges 
— that rural network we have established across this province, 
Mr. Speaker — or at the newly formed technical institute, 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), or at our two universities. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this very day well over 50 per cent of the 
grade 12 children, some of these grade 12 children that we have 
in this House today, Mr. Speaker — this very day, over 50 per 
cent of those young people go on to a post-secondary education 
training. Now that’s . . . maybe we’d like it to be 60 or 70 per 
cent, but, Mr. Speaker, that speaks well to the priorities of the 
people of this province to see that many young people go on to 
post-secondary education. 
 
I think our commitment to education is outlined by that single 
phrase that the Minister of Finance said earlier today, since this 
government, since this Premier took over administration of this 
province in 1982, education spending in this province has 
doubled, Mr. Speaker. That’s our commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants to School Divisions 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, last night in Saskatoon you told the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation that the government portion of school 
board expenditures has not decreased under your government. 
The teachers and trustees at that meeting, Mr. Minister, did not 
believe you. They know that the government grants to school 
divisions as a percentage of school board expenditure has 
dropped from 55 per cent in 1981 under a New Democratic 
government to 49 per cent in 1988 under a Conservative 
government. 
 
Will today’s budget, Mr. Minister, put an end to school boards 
having to increase local taxes, dip into reserves, cut programs, 
raise student-teacher ratios, and close schools as we just saw in 
Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I don’t accept 
the hon. member’s arithmetic. Historically and traditionally, 
and as it has been in the past and as it will be in the future, the 
amount of dollars that come from the provincial government as 
opposed to the local property tax base has always been around 
50-50. It’s a partnership where we equally share, and there may 
be a plus or minus 2 per cent one way or the other in any given 
year, but certainly it has not eroded. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, if you compare the mill rate 
increases and the off-loading under the NDP in the ’70s, in the 
heady days of the ’70s, mill rate increases at local levels were 
far outstripping anything we’ve seen in the  

last years, even during these tough times, Mr. Speaker. So I 
don’t accept those numbers. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is Education spending has 
doubled, and in a per pupil basis over the last seven years, there 
has been a 60 per cent increase in per student funding while 
inflation was only 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And our student 
population base has basically stayed about the same at 200,000 
people, Mr. Speaker. That’s our commitment to education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — I have the following message from the 
Lieutenant Governor which I now wish to convey to the House: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1990, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1989, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed) Sylvia Fedoruk, Lieutenant Governor, province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Premier, the member from Estevan: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
the third budget of this Progressive Conservative 
administration. 
 
In 1986 and 1987 an increasingly volatile world economy 
threatened Saskatchewan’s economic and financial well-being. 
International prices for the province’s major commodities fell 
sharply, resulting in a serious revenue shortfall along with an 
increased demand for government services. The change in 
economic conditions was both sudden and profound. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government responded quickly and 
decisively. The four-year economic and financial plan we 
implemented in 1987 has strengthened our fiscal  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

406 
 

position. More importantly, it has given us the flexibility to 
fulfil our commitments to protect and enhance essential 
programs for health, education, the family and the family farm, 
and to develop and diversify our economy. 
 
This budget builds on the plan and positions Saskatchewan for 
the future. Today I will announce innovative measures to 
advance and strengthen essential services. Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to ensure that Saskatchewan’s health, education, and 
family programs remain Canada’s finest through the 1990s and 
beyond. 
 
I will also announce new initiatives to help our rural and urban 
communities and businesses to take advantage of expanded 
opportunities at home and abroad, generating jobs and 
prosperity. The world economic outlook for the 1990s is not 
without risk. Large international debt loads and persistently 
high national deficits are among the factors that could slow or 
even halt the economic expansion the world enjoys today. 
 
The recent rise of interest rates is particularly worrisome for 
economies such as Saskatchewan. The Premier has brought this 
issue to national attention, and we will work with other 
governments to attempt to resolve it. 
 
This government will continue to offer protection from high 
interest rates through initiatives such as the mortgage protection 
plan which holds mortgage rates to nine and three-quarter per 
cent, assistance programs for students, interest-free livestock 
cash advances, and low interest loans provided by the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite specific concerns, total output and business investment 
are expanding steadily in many countries, including Canada. 
World trade is growing rapidly and this brings opportunity and 
prosperity, and Saskatchewan has benefitted from this 
expansion. Today one in four jobs in this province depends on 
trade. 
 
The Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement increases 
Saskatchewan’s prospects for economic growth over the 
coming decades. It will strengthen our economy by increasing 
investment, by encouraging our industries to become even more 
competitive, and by creating jobs. And this government fully 
supports the free trade agreement. The free trade agreement also 
strengthens our bargaining position as we pursue the removal of 
trade barriers world-wide. 
 
The recent General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade discussions 
on agriculture demonstrate that international trade liberalization 
is a slow process. However, we believe these discussions will 
pay economic returns over the years. Accordingly, this 
government will continue to participate actively in the 
multilateral trade negotiation process. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agricultural economy 
experienced the worst drought in nearly 30 years. The volume 
of crops harvested fell by 50 per cent and farm employment 
declined. Nevertheless, this government’s economic 
diversification initiatives lessened the drought’s impact. 

In 1988 Saskatchewan had Canada’s second lowest 
unemployment rate. Non-agricultural employment rose 3 per 
cent. The value of retail sales rose nearly 5 per cent to $5.5 
billion. Oil and gas well drilling increased by 30 per cent. And 
Saskatchewan for the first time became a net exporter of natural 
gas. 
 
Our economic growth will accelerate in 1989, and we have 
every reason to be optimistic about the years ahead. Major 
Canadian forecasters agree. The Conference Board of Canada 
expects that with a recovery in crop yields, Saskatchewan’s 
economy will grow by 8.8 per cent in 1989. This will be the 
fastest growth among the provinces of Canada, and the board 
predicts that 11,000 jobs will be created in Saskatchewan. Data 
Resources of Canada also foresees 1989 Saskatchewan 
economic growth as the strongest in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has protected Saskatchewan 
people from adverse events beyond their control. When 
mortgage interest rates were in excess of 19 per cent, this 
government introduced mortgage interest protection to ensure 
that Saskatchewan families did not lose their homes. When 
escalating living costs eroded seniors’ incomes, this 
government increased the monthly seniors’ income supplement 
for singles by 220 per cent, from $25 in 1981 to $80 today; and 
for couples, by 200 per cent, from $45 in 1981 to $135 today. 
And we also introduced the $40 million senior citizens’ heritage 
program. 
 
When the stock market crash in 1987 reduced the return on 
investments for teachers’ pensions, this government provided 
an additional $19 million to the teachers’ superannuation fund. 
 
When the farm debt crisis threatened farmers, we introduced 
The Farm Land Security Act to provide for a fair resolution of 
debt problems. But last year’s drought caused many 
Saskatchewan farmers and communities severe distress. For 
example, the Maple Creek and Weyburn areas received under 
60 per cent of normal rainfall and crop production fell 
accordingly. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this government responded quickly and 
decisively. We made it a priority to ensure that the $450 million 
in Canada-Saskatchewan crop insurance claims were processed 
promptly. We initiated the $25 million green feed program and 
the $39 million livestock drought assistance program to ease 
farmers’ financial burdens and to try and protect rural 
communities. As well, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
provided almost $9 million last year to increase water supplies. 
 
The extremely dry conditions also threatened Saskatchewan’s 
northern forests. We protected northern communities and 
forests from a record number of forest fires at a cost of over $32 
million. Despite these adversities we will meet our 1988-89 
deficit target of $328 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this represents a 39 per cent 
reduction in the deficit from the previous year, and a  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

407 
 

decrease of over 70 per cent since we implemented our plan. 
 
Our strategy, Mr. Speaker, is a sensible one. By working with 
Saskatchewan people and managing wisely, we have protected 
and improved our social programs, and at the same time 
pursued economic diversification throughout our province. We 
will continue this course. 
 
And in 1989-90 we will reduce the deficit significantly for the 
third year in a row, and this gives us the flexibility to build for 
the future. 
 
The 1990s hold great promise for our province. Mr. Speaker, 
we can expect more change in the next 10 years than in the last 
100. And change means challenges and opportunities. Sound 
management gives us the flexibility to meet these challenges 
and to build on those opportunities. Sound management also 
means working with Saskatchewan people to build our province 
and to diversify our economy. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased the accessibility of government 
to the people it serves, enhanced community services, and 
encouraged, Mr. Speaker, public and employee participation in 
Saskatchewan’s economic development and diversification. 
Accessibility brings convenience, more opportunities for 
consultation, and a stronger rural economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have brought the government closer to 
Saskatchewan people by relocating government offices to 
Moose Jaw, Melville, Swift Current, and Saskatoon; by placing 
business resource centres around the province to provide small 
business information and assistance; by opening rural service 
centres to make agricultural and other government services 
more accessible to rural residents. 
 
The enhancement of community services is succeeding through 
continued co-operation with educators, health care providers, 
municipalities, and other groups and institutions. 
 
Our partners provide first-rate services. Their experience and 
expertise have enabled them to take on new responsibilities. For 
example, the Saskatchewan Abilities Council now manages the 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living program. The 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres has 
provided over 100 jobs for disabled people in its container 
recycling depots. The Indian bands of the Meadow Lake tribal 
council have agreed to deliver child and family services on the 
reserve. 
 
Saskatchewan people have a tradition of working together 
toward common goals. Public and employee participation 
builds on this tradition by giving individuals a direct stake in 
the economic future of our province. 
 
And this is demonstrated by: over 42,000 Saskatchewan people 
investing $295 million in the last Saskatchewan Power savings 
bond issue; over 33,000 Saskatchewan people investing more 
than $100 million in the recent  

SaskTel TeleBond issue; employees taking ownership in former 
government enterprises such as the Meadow Lake Sawmill, the 
Saskatchewan Government Printing Company, now known as 
Printco Graphics, and the SaskTel directory operations, to be 
known as DirectWEST Publishers; and over 90 per cent of 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation employees purchasing 
shares in last year’s equity offering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To further encourage employees to invest 
in Saskatchewan business, we initiated the labour-sponsored 
venture capital program. DirectWEST employees will be the 
first to participate in this program. In addition, applications 
have been received from Printco Graphics and the Canadian 
Federation of Labour’s Working Ventures. 
 
We will encourage further participation in Crown corporations 
through public share offerings in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, SaskEnergy, and the general insurance business 
of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this government believes that 
accessibility, co-operation, and public and employee 
participation are the best ways to build and diversify our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn now to our number one priority — health 
care. The people of Saskatchewan enjoy Canada’s finest health 
care system and we will ensure that this continues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By working closely with the public and 
with health care providers, we have improved services through 
measures such as the recent introduction of the plastic health 
card. We have built an impressive record of upgrading, 
replacing, constructing, and staffing health care facilities 
throughout the province, and this budget reaffirms our 
commitment. 
 
We will increase health care funding by over $130 million in 
1989, up 11 per cent from last year. We will dedicate nearly 
$1.4 billion to health care, or almost $1,400 for every man, 
woman, and child in Saskatchewan. 
 
The need to replace and upgrade health care facilities had been 
sadly neglected before we took office, and we have reversed 
that trend. This year, we are providing over $64 million for the 
construction and renovation of hospitals and special-care 
facilities across Saskatchewan. 
 
In many provinces, waiting times for surgery are lengthy, but in 
Saskatchewan we are making substantial progress in increasing 
the accessibility of elective surgery, especially in Saskatoon 
where the demand is high. The number of surgeries performed 
annually in Saskatoon has risen 64 per cent since 1982, from 
27,400 to 45,000 surgeries, Mr. Speaker. This includes 
operations  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

408 
 

performed in the new day surgery facilities that this government 
built and funded. 
 
Capacity for surgeries will be further increased in Saskatoon 
this year, and this budget allocates an additional $1.5 million to 
purchase high cost supplies, and increase surgical staffing. 
Together with the health care providers, we are also exploring 
the development of a province-wide information and referral 
system to reduce waiting times even further. 
 
Our health care system relies upon the excellence of its 
professional and support staff. We will continue to ensure 
Saskatchewan attracts and retains the highest quality health care 
providers in Canada. This budget includes $646 million for 
nursing and health care support staff salaries, including the 
funding for an additional 370 nursing positions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — All individuals have a vested interest in 
maintaining a healthy life-style. The government introduced the 
Everyone Wins program to raise awareness of how to maintain 
good health, and we will expand our efforts in this area. And we 
want to help Saskatchewan people to detect health problems 
early. This year this government will initiate a breast cancer 
screening pilot project to help women in the high risk age 
groups in the fight against the leading cause of death from 
cancer among Canadian women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, substance abuse poses a threat to health and to 
family relationships. Last year your government increased the 
support for Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission, the Whitespruce Centre for youth and the Calder 
Centre for adult treatment. And this year, Mr. Speaker, we are 
providing $1 million for a major new education outreach and 
enforcement initiative to prevent alcohol and drug abuse by 
young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the details of our health care 
initiatives, along with those for education and families and 
other important areas, are presented in a budget document 
entitled Challenges and Opportunities, which I am pleased to 
table with this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people recognize the need to pay 
for health care innovations we are introducing, and effective 
midnight tonight the tobacco tax will rise by 1 cent per 
cigarette, with similar increases for tobacco products. The hon. 
member across says he quits. The program is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Prices of alcoholic beverages will increase 
to generate an additional $5 million annually, and effective 
midnight tonight the rebatable fuel tax will increase by 3 cents 
per litre on gasoline and diesel fuel. The fuel tax rebate 
program, which provide benefits to over 280,000 Saskatchewan 
families, will be maintained and will apply to this increase. 
 

Effective July 1, a new hospitals tax will apply to gaming 
activities including lotteries, casinos, and bingos, and the 
moneys raised from this tax will be dedicated to hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, these four measures do not 
cover this year’s increase in health care funding. They will raise 
79 per cent of the over $130 million in new expenditures on 
health care. 
 
To address the future of health care, this government 
established the Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in 
Health Care. The commission’s final report, expected later this 
year, will help this government set priorities to meet the 
challenges of the future. 
 
Quality education, Mr. Speaker, is an investment in our future. 
The dollars spent today on basic and advanced education will 
pay generous returns in economic progress and improvements 
to our quality of life. 
 
We will spend over $841 million this year, an increase of $52 
million from 1988-89, to see that Saskatchewan people have 
access to quality opportunities to learn. This funding level is 
nearly $370 million, or almost 80 per cent higher than that 
provided at the beginning of this decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government is committed to ensuring 
that all students acquire a solid foundation to prepare them for a 
lifetime of learning. We are demonstrating our commitment by: 
increasing school division operating grants by $13 million to 
almost $350 million, or $1,700 for every student; by providing 
$31 million for the construction and renovation of schools; and 
by allocating $14.5 million from the education development 
fund for special program improvements such as computer 
technology and resource materials; and by contributing $4 
million in new initiatives to implement education reform, 
including the expansion of programs to teach students the basic 
skills of reading, writing and mathematics. 
 
Saskatchewan can be proud of its system of higher education. 
Our two universities, nine regional colleges and the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology do 
an excellent job of fulfilling the diverse needs of our student 
population. In this budget, the universities, SIAST and the 
regional college system will receive $225 million in operational 
funding. In addition, up to $10 million will be allocated from a 
new university and institute enhancement fund for the 
universities and the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The University of Saskatchewan’s Issues 
and Options Accessibility Task Force has expressed the view, 
and I quote: 
 

Increased accessibility to a university education need not 
necessarily be provided on the campus  

  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

409 
 

of the University of Saskatchewan itself. It might come 
through extension teaching and distance education 
technology, regional colleges and technical institutes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government agrees. A regional college system 
ensures access to quality educational opportunities in rural and 
northern communities. To build on these opportunities, the 
colleges and university will be asked to develop a co-ordinated 
first- and second-year arts and science program. Through this 
program, more students will be able to study in their home 
communities for the first two years of their post-secondary 
education. 
 
But an extra effort must be made to accommodate individuals 
such as single parents who have had difficulty in obtaining 
access to educational opportunities in the past. Our student 
assistance program gives special recognition to the needs of 
these students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s welfare reform initiative 
provides social assistance recipients with skills training to 
acquire meaningful work, making it easier for them to regain 
independence. Since we began welfare reform in 1984, over 
17,000 people have received class-room and on-the-job 
training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In addition, the innovative work project 
initiated by PAR Industries of Prince Albert has trained 
hundreds of individuals in forestry jobs. And this year, the New 
Careers Corporation will invest $5.6 million, an increase of 
more than 50 per cent, in training projects across Saskatchewan, 
including the construction and improvement of provincial park 
facilities. These projects will provide valuable job experience 
for a further 280 welfare recipients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But new technology also plays an important role in achieving 
access to quality education. The innovative Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network, or SCAN, will bring 
electronic class-rooms to students throughout Saskatchewan, as 
well as provide information to farmers, consumers, businesses, 
and home-makers. Broadcasting is scheduled to commence in 
1990. 
 
To further our efforts to increase literacy in Saskatchewan, we 
will be opening computer-assisted literacy centres in a joint 
venture with IBM Canada Ltd. The centre is using computers to 
teach teenagers and adults basic reading and writing skills. 
These initiatives reflect our determination to ensure access to 
quality education for the benefit of all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, families do matter in our 
Saskatchewan. This government has consistently supported 
families through measures such as: education and health tax 
exemptions for clothing, some utilities, and other essentials; 
mortgage interest rate protection for more than 44,000 home 
owners; the home improvement  

program, assisting over 150,000 Saskatchewan families with 
home improvements and renovations; and the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan, contributing to retirement security for 47,000 
members, of whom 80 per cent are women and 40 per cent are 
home-makers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To further protect Saskatchewan workers, 
we will implement pension reform legislation to increase 
eligibility and to improve survivor benefits and portability. In 
addition, most public service superannuates will receive a 
pension cost-of-living adjustment effective April 1989. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our children require quality care. I’m pleased 
to announce that we are allocating $16 million for the first year 
of our comprehensive child care development plan, including 
$3 million in new funding for child care, Mr. Speaker. The plan 
will double the number of day-care spaces in the province to 
almost 12,000 by 1995. And in recognition of the requirements 
of rural parents, 2,000 of these spaces will be allocated to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Foster-parents play a special role in 
Saskatchewan. Last year we introduced Canada’s first 
foster-parent training program. This program provides and 
improves the skills of foster-parents to meet the needs of 
children, particularly those children who have been difficult to 
place. For the second year in a row we will increase payments 
to foster-parents. 
 
In the past, many people who were legally obliged to make 
maintenance and child support payments failed to live up to this 
responsibility. In 1986 this government introduced the 
automatic enforcement of maintenance orders program to 
address this problem. The program has helped more than 5,500 
people, mainly single parents, to receive regular maintenance 
and child support payments. This budget strengthens the 
capacity to pursue these payments and to assist single parents to 
gain financial independence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government recognizes the potential 
of many disabled people to participate actively in their 
community. Community living has allowed the mentally 
disabled to become more independent. Over 180 residents of 
provincial institutions have moved into community settings, and 
this opportunity will be extended to 80 additional institutional 
residents this year. 
 
Our welfare reform initiatives have helped members of many 
disadvantaged families to find long-term employment. Welfare 
reform, Mr. Speaker, is a prudent and proven program and is 
good value to the taxpayer. While maintaining and enhancing 
support for those in need, welfare costs have been nearly $90 
million lower than they would have been under the system in 
place when we came to office in 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

410 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Clearly, welfare reform is working. 
 
The farm family is integral to the social fabric of Saskatchewan 
and is the economic base for most of Saskatchewan’s 
communities, but farm families face unique pressures and 
problems. This government’s support for agriculture has tried to 
ease the financial difficulties. And this year additional funding 
will be available to the centre for agricultural medicine in 
Saskatoon for the study of farm-related illnesses, including 
those brought on by farm chemicals, grain dust, and stress. 
These efforts will try to improve the health of farm families. 
Mr. Speaker, families do matter in our Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government has worked with local 
people to develop economic opportunities while enhancing the 
quality of community life. Cultural and recreational facilities 
are an important part of community life, and since 1983 we 
have funded the construction and renovation of almost 2,000 
such facilities across the province. This year we will introduce a 
$33 million, six-year cultural and recreational facilities grant 
program for Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In addition I am pleased to announce the 
introduction of a $100 million, six-year municipal capital 
program, and this budget provides nearly $17 million for the 
first year. This is Saskatchewan’s first capital grant program to 
address the needs of rural municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It will assist all urban and rural 
communities, regardless of size, to build the facilities required 
to provide a high quality of life, and the program will give high 
priority to water and sewer projects. Together, these initiatives 
will provide over $130 million to our communities over the 
next six years, and they demonstrate this government’s 
continued support for local communities. 
 
The Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan plays 
an important role in financing of school, hospital, and other 
municipal construction and local improvement projects. The 
corporation purchases up to 50 per cent of municipal debentures 
for sale by the Saskatchewan municipal board. During 1988, 56 
projects were assisted by the purchase of nearly $27 million of 
municipal debentures. I’m pleased to announce that urban and 
rural municipalities will now be able to obtain up to 100 per 
cent of their capital financing requirements for water and sewer 
projects from the municipal financing corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And to further assist municipalities we will 
encourage the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to approve the 
financing of water and sewer projects over longer terms. Rural 
and small urban municipalities are  

now involved in this government’s rural development 
corporation and community economic development program. 
I’m pleased to announce that changes will be made to the 
venture capital program to allow rural development 
corporations to qualify. Our new rural service centres will also 
help foster community economic development by providing 
convenient access to timely business and economic information. 
And this year the rural service network will expand to 52 
communities across the province. 
 
Some of our northern communities have required special 
assistance to diversify and enhance their quality of life. In 
addition to including northern municipalities in the new cultural 
and recreational facilities grant program, this budget continues 
to support northern economic development programs. This year 
the first $1.2 million of a $13 million 10-year commitment will 
be provided for the development projects at Cumberland House. 
At the request of that community, the New Careers Corporation 
will assist with locally identified construction projects. 
 
This government has helped urban, rural, and northern people to 
implement innovative measures to enhance their economic 
opportunities, to create jobs and to ensure that our communities 
are vibrant and attractive places to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, environmental protection is a prerequisite for a 
high quality of community life, and this budget allocates over 
$22 million to preserve and enhance Saskatchewan’s 
environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This includes funding to implement a 
program to collect and dispose of hazardous agricultural 
chemicals, to safely centralize PCBs in the Boundary Dam 
storage facility, develop a comprehensive hazardous waste 
handling and disposal system for the province in consultation 
with industry, other interested groups, and Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
To ensure safe drinking water we will introduce a water quality 
management system, and we will improve monitoring and 
control of industrial waste water and establish standards for 
water basin quality. 
 
Soil conservation is a serious concern to the people of this 
province. The soil conservation initiatives we have 
implemented have helped to protect the viability of 
Saskatchewan agriculture. Many groups have also recognized 
the importance of soil conservation and requested this 
government’s assistance in preserving our soil. For example, 
the United Church of Canada suggested that the Saskatchewan 
government should develop long-term soil conservation 
policies. Mr. Speaker, this budget provides funds for a 
three-year, $54 million soil conservation agreement with the 
federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The field shelter-belt planting program, a 
permanent cover program, and a marginal land use adjustment 
program will be initiated under this  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

411 
 

new agreement. 
 
And this budget furthers our commitment to renew 
Saskatchewan’s forests. We are providing more than $5 million 
to continue the five-year, 50 million seedling reforestation 
program begun in 1988. 
 
And people in industry must help in our effort to preserve the 
natural environment for our future generations. Accordingly, 
this government will increase the fines levied under existing 
provincial environmental statutes, introduce legislation to 
protect the ozone layer, and introduce legislation to allow for an 
environment tax on environmentally harmful products. 
 
And as the first initiative under the environment protection tax, 
effective midnight tonight, purchases of leaded fuel in the 
province will be subject to a 2 cents per litre non-rebatable 
environmental surcharge. This measure recognizes the 
contribution of users of unleaded fuel to environmental 
protection and will reduce the use of leaded fuel before its sale 
terminates in December of 1990. Mr. Speaker, these 
environmental measures will enhance our quality of life as they 
support sustainable economic growth. 
 
The future of our social programs depends, however, on 
continued economic growth and diversification. We must work 
together to diversify our economy and to create jobs, and we 
must look to the future and build on our strengths. 
 
And agriculture remains, of course, Saskatchewan’s most 
important industry. It is the foundation of our economy and we 
have tried to protect that foundation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The production loan program has provided over $1 billion in 
low-interest loans and offered extended repayments where 
needed. The Farm Land Security Board has established a 
process of fair and equitable mediation for farmers experiencing 
financial difficulty. The counselling and assistance for farmers 
program has guaranteed over $166 million in farm loan. 
 
Canada-Saskatchewan crop insurance payments and other 
special drought assistance payments amounted to over $500 
million in 1988. The federal Canadian crop drought assistance 
program will complement our provincial drought initiatives by 
providing over $400 million to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to pursue long-term solutions to 
the problem of farm debt. We will provide financing initiatives 
to assist farmers and to encourage young men and women to 
choose farming as a career. The mandate of the agricultural 
credit corporation, I’m pleased to announce, will be extended to 
include debt refinancing for viable farm operations; financing of 
the home quarter and necessary farm related facilities; 
long-term financing to cover the first year start-up cost; and the 
restrictions on off-farm income will be removed to eliminate 
any disadvantage to farmers with off-farm employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Through the agricultural credit corporation 
this government will also initiate a new vendor mortgage 
guarantee program to provide financial security for retiring 
farmers and to encourage them to help young farmers acquire 
farm land. By guaranteeing mortgages to beginning farmers, the 
program will try to remove the risks associated with the sale of 
land. 
 
And we will establish a voluntary farm equity financing pilot 
project. Through a new agricultural company, Saskatchewan 
investors will be offered the opportunity to participate in the 
farm sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these five new initiatives will help position 
farmers for the challenges and opportunities of the future. 
 
Agricultural diversification will place Saskatchewan farmers on 
the forefront of industry advances and this budget will provide 
over $29 million from the agricultural development fund, 
including $21.7 million for agricultural research and 
development, and $7.6 million for irrigation grants to farmers, 
agricultural biotechnology and food processing and 
commercialization. 
 
Saskatchewan’s manufacturing and processing industries have 
made major gains in recent years and generate significant 
economic activity in all regions of the province. In 1988, new 
capital investment in this sector totalled over $550 million. 
Manufacturing and employment in 1988 rose 17 per cent or by 
4,000 jobs, and the value of factory shipments for most product 
categories reached a record level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Through our support to trade and 
diversification, we have stimulated the growth of many 
manufacturing and processing firms throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Intercontinental Packers of Saskatoon has created over 200 jobs 
since it modernized its hog processing facility, and this year the 
company will double its beef processing capacity, creating 140 
new jobs. The company is taking advantage of opportunities in 
the United States market and is pursuing additional business in 
the Asia-Pacific area. 
 
Canada Packers has announced its intention to double the 
slaughtering capacity at its Moose Jaw plant, providing 36 new 
jobs. The $745 million NewGrade Co-op heavy oil upgrader is 
now in production and has created 125 new jobs. 
 
When completed in 1992, the $1.2 billion Husky upgrader at 
Lloydminster will produce 46,000 barrels of light oil per day 
and employ an additional 165 Saskatchewan workers. 
 
The $250 million Weyerhaeuser fine paper mill at Prince Albert 
began production last year, creating new jobs for 170 people. 
This year that company will undertake a $21 million expansion 
to produce finished, cut paper. 
 
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

412 
 

Millar Western Industries announced that it will construct a 
$235 million pulp mill at Meadow Lake, and new jobs will be 
created for another 110 people. 
 
Last year’s merger of federal and provincial Crown 
corporations to form Cameco, the Canadian Mining and Energy 
Corporation, created the world’s largest uranium mining and 
processing company, and it’s headquartered in Saskatoon. 
 
These and other major projects across Saskatchewan have 
provided thousands of new construction jobs and millions of 
dollars of business to Saskatchewan suppliers. For example, 
Saskatoon Chemicals is undertaking a $25 million expansion to 
increase the supply of a key ingredient for pulp and paper 
production. 
 
To assist in the development of local business, this government 
established the Buy Saskatchewan agency in 1987. The agency 
has encouraged hospitals, school boards, local governments, 
and Saskatchewan businesses to seek Saskatchewan suppliers. 
It has also encouraged local people to supply the needs of these 
groups. The Buy Saskatchewan agency has helped 
Saskatchewan firms to secure more than $140 million in 
contracts and has played an important role in the development 
of over 50 new product lines in the province. 
 
The Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement will accelerate 
business activity in the 1990s as Saskatchewan gains increased 
access to the world’s largest market. We will implement 
programs to assist Saskatchewan firms to take advantage of new 
trade opportunities, including the export marketing assistance 
program to share the cost of new marketing activities, and the 
export project development program to assist industry to 
develop long-term strategies for market identification and 
penetration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to raise new capital for Saskatchewan’s 
manufacturing and processing industries, including exporters, 
we have established the Saskatchewan government growth 
fund. It is expected that that fund will make available up to 
$100 million in investment funds with $36 million available in 
the first year, and the fund will help finance economic 
opportunities throughout all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, service industries have been at the forefront of 
business growth in the 1980s, and the 1990s hold even more 
promise. This government’s initiatives have enhanced 
significantly the profile of Saskatchewan’s service sector. 
 
The new Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan is one of 
Canada’s 10 largest institutional investment counselling firms, 
managing client assets of over $3.3 billion. The corporation is 
helping develop the financial services industry in this province. 
 
And the WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation is western 
Canada’s largest fully integrated computer company. The 
corporation has over $6 million in new out-of-province 
contracts, and has already created 50 new jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 

Our assistance to the tourism industry has helped Saskatchewan 
to begin to provide world-class tourist destinations for local 
residents and out-of-province visitors alike. Three private sector 
resorts opened in provincial parks in 1988 with facilities such as 
the Manitou Springs Mineral Spa in Manitou Beach, the 
Saskatchewan Trade and Convention Centre in Regina, and 
Saskatoon’s Saskatchewan Place are drawing visitors to all 
parts of our province. And our continued co-operation with the 
private sector and with other governments will ensure a further 
development of Saskatchewan tourism. 
 
And this government continues to recognize the importance of 
Indian and native communities, of economic development 
opportunities. Accordingly, we will in this budget be increasing 
support for the Indian economic development and native 
business development programs. 
 
Small business, Mr. Speaker, is the major source of 
Saskatchewan’s economic activity and job creation. And strong, 
small businesses support healthy local economy. This budget 
will enable our small business community to take advantage of 
emerging economic opportunities at home and abroad. 
Saskatchewan’s small businesses will benefit from $1.1 billion 
in provincial hospital, school, highway and road construction, 
and other capital projects that will support over 9,500 jobs. 
 
And funding to improve our transportation network alone will 
total 121 million, 9 per cent above last year’s level. 
 
We will restructure, for the small business community, we will 
restructure and expand SEDCO’s (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) programs to provide new, more 
flexible financing options to help small businesses cope with 
the difficulties posed by high interest rates and volatile cash 
flow. Lending services will include loans to small businesses 
and loan guarantees to business associations and rural 
development corporations. We will improve our economic tax 
credits to ensure that they are flexible enough to meet the 
business development requirements of the 1990s. 
 
And we will continue to support the economic contribution of 
Saskatchewan co-operatives. The NewGrade Co-op upgrader 
project and the success of Co-operators Data Services Limited 
which performs the claims processing function for the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan illustrate the potential of 
co-operatives to support Saskatchewan’s economic 
diversification objectives. 
 
But we recognize that local business taxes have been a burden 
for many small businesses, especially given the unsettling effect 
of the drought on business conditions. The $10 million business 
tax assistance program will provide needed business tax relief, 
and business taxes in Saskatchewan will drop by an average of 
25 per cent as a result, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — These four new programs will be of  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

413 
 

assistance to small business, Mr. Speaker, because 
Saskatchewan small businesses face many challenges. 
However, challenges bring opportunities, and we will continue 
to work with small business to realize those many opportunities. 
 
As I indicated earlier, our economic financial plan is working. 
We responded rapidly to the drought and to northern forest 
fires, and we still achieved our deficit target of 328 million for 
the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989. 
 
Our 1989-90 expenditure plan is focused on the priorities of 
health, education, support of the family and the family farm, 
and economic diversification. Through the careful balance of 
priority spending, including $314 million in capital spending, 
and sensible revenue measures, we will reduce the deficit for 
the third consecutive year to $226 million. This represents a 
drop of 102 million or 31 per cent from our 1988-89 deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, since coming to office in 
1982, our government has worked with the people of this 
province to protect and improve the social programs 
Saskatchewan people cherish, and to diversify and develop the 
provincial economy, and to manage responsibly. The record 
speaks to our success. 
 
The 1990s and the years beyond promise new challenges and 
new opportunities for all Saskatchewan people. But together we 
must act boldly to meet these challenges and to seize those 
opportunities. Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s only fair to begin 
by commensurating with the Minister of Finance in his ongoing 
problems with elementary arithmetic. It began, Mr. Minister, in 
the first line. You said, I rise to present the third budget of this 
Progressive Conservative administration. Mr. Minister, it’s your 
eighth. Now it’s not as big a mistake as you’ve made in the 
past, but in percentage terms it’s still fairly serious. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I can well understand, Mr. Minister, why 
you’d prefer to forget at least five of those budgets. I can well 
understand that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You’d prefer to forget them because 
there’ve been eight straight deficit budgets. This is the eighth in 
a row. 
 
Three words I think, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, sum up 
this budget. It is cruel, it is incompetent, and it’s cooked. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I should have begun by 
welcoming to the Assembly the many guests who aren’t 
ordinarily here. I am not sure what their invitation said. It 
should have invited them to the minister’s annual spring 
cook-out, because that’s what the budget has become. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The Minister of Finance turns this charade 
into a cook-out when you claim that you’ve reduced the budget 
deficit for this year. It’s cooked, Mr. Minister, because you’ve 
claimed to be wisely managing tax dollars. 
 
I heard you, Mr. Minister, use phrases such as “managing 
wisely,” and “sound management.” Well, Mr. Minister, if eight 
straight budget deficits are managing wisely, someone ought to 
send a note of clarification to Webster’s Dictionary, because 
they’ve got it wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you claim to be able to 
manage change, and you want taxpayers to believe that a deficit 
which now tops $3.9 billion is managing change. And you want 
them to believe it’s due to bad luck. That, Mr. Minister, is a 
bald falsehood, equalled only, I might add, by your attempt in 
1986 — in 1986, Mr. Minister — to tell us that the deficit was 
380 million. Taxpayers still recall that; many call it “the $800 
million whoops.” 
 
Before the provincial election, you told the people of 
Saskatchewan that the budget deficit for 1986 would be $380 
million. As a result, Mr. Minister, of what has come out in 
Public Accounts, we now know that you knew the revenue 
estimates were inflated — what your deputy has called 
ministerial discretion. We know that you knew throughout the 
year that that deficit was not accurate. And, Mr. Minister, when 
asked why you had overestimated it and why you deceived the 
public of Saskatchewan, you said in the only moment of 
candour that I can recall from this minister, “What do you 
expect from a politician?” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is, here we 
go again! Today this minister says he has the budget deficit 
under control. That statement is every bit as phoney and 
contrived as your 1986 budget, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if we were making a movie 
of this, an apt title would be “Cooking the books; the sequel.” I 
say that, Mr. Minister, because you claim the deficit is going to 
be $226 million. He forgets to tell the taxpayers that that 
Alice-in-Wonderland figure is achieved by robbing the Crown 
corporations of $200 million, money which you yourself admit, 
Mr. Minister, the Crown corporations are going to have to 
re-borrow. 
 
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

414 
 

Mr. Minister, you claim that you’re going to get another $65 
million in revenue from the Liquor Board at a time when the 
liquor consumption in the province is going down. Mr. 
Minister, you claim to be getting another $8 million from the 
federal government when your own officials admit that they 
have to expect less money from the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In total, Mr. Minister, those three items 
alone — the 200 million from the Crown corporations, the 
transfer of money from the liquor corporation, and the claim of 
money from the federal government — amounts to $273 
million. In fact, Mr. Minister, your deficit’s going to increase 
by 50 per cent this year if you count it accurately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So much, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think we should be a little understanding 
of members opposite when they’re so sensitive about the 
Minister of Finance’s integrity. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is 
not turning the deficit around. And I ask the public of 
Saskatchewan whether you think this Minister of Finance has 
managed the tax dollars wisely, and whether you think with a 
budget like this you’ve eliminated waste and mismanagement. 
 
But the most important question of all, Mr. Speaker, is whether 
or not the public of Saskatchewan think they can trust this 
government and think they can believe anything this 
government says about its own budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I said, Mr. Speaker, it was a cruel budget. I 
say that because it represents a tax grab from ordinary 
Saskatchewan citizens without laying a finger on big business. 
Under this PC government, the tax system has become more 
and more unfair, and this budget makes that situation much 
worse. 
 
Ordinary families are hit with two tax increases. The PC gas tax 
for unleaded fuel and diesel fuel has jumped to 10 cents a litre 
— that’s 45 cents a gallon. Every time the average motorist fills 
up his tank, it’s an extra $4. Saskatchewan now has the 
second-highest gas tax in Canada, second only to Quebec. 
 
You say, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to rebate the gas tax. 
The fact is that the public of Saskatchewan have to shell out 
that extra money starting tonight, and sometime next year when 
your incompetent administration gets around to it, sometime 
next year they may get some money back. You say the fuel tax 
is going to be rebated. Not so, Mr. Minister, for the one-third of 
the consumers who, for whatever reason, do not apply for it. 
And not so for small businesses, municipalities, school boards 
who have to pay it, and for whom it’s going to cost tens of 
millions of dollars. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I recognize, Mr. Premier, that the gas tax 
doesn’t mean much to you and your ministers when you fill up 
your cars with government credit cards and the taxpayer pays 
for your fuel. But I’ll tell you, when you have the courage to 
call an election, or are forced to do so, you’re going to find out 
it means a lot to the Saskatchewan public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And, Mr. Minister, while you’re socking it 
to Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan businesses, what do 
you do, Mr. Minister, for big business, you give them a tax cut. 
Oh, that’s another thing you forgot to mention, Mr. Minister. 
You forgot to mention that as of January 1 this year big 
business enjoys a 2 per cent cut in the corporate tax rate. You 
forgot to mention that, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Globe and Mail recently reported that Canada’s largest 
corporations enjoyed a 59 per cent increase in profits. Did you 
touch that? No, no, you left that alone. Instead, you sock it to 
small businesses and the Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I said, Mr. Minister, that your budget is 
crooked, cruel, and incompetent. It’s incompetent, Mr. Minister, 
because it fails to deal with the economic needs of 
Saskatchewan families. Although we have 43,000 people 
unemployed in the province today, the budget doesn’t contain a 
single new job creation program. Indeed, I don’t believe I heard 
the word mentioned. 
 
Although Saskatchewan had a net population loss of more than 
6,000 people last month alone, most of them young people 
leaving the province in search of jobs, this budget cuts summer 
employment programs for young people by 23 per cent. Or to 
put it another way, that’s a thousand jobs gone. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, if that’s your plan to give young people a sense of 
hope and security. 
 
Incompetence in the area of jobs and incompetence in the area 
of agriculture. We’re losing a thousand farm families this year. 
Rural communities are in dire straits, yet you have chosen to cut 
spending in the Departments of Agriculture and Rural 
Development by a total of $50 million — that’s your cut in 
Agriculture and Rural Development. 
 
Despite the crisis in agriculture, you cut spending. But 
somehow or other, you still managed to find $9 million for a 
birthday party that everybody in rural Saskatchewan tells you 
they don’t want. To some people watching, perhaps, and to 
some of the guests here, incompetence may sound like too 
strong a word. I ask the public, and I ask the guests here, to ask 
themselves: how else would you describe a government whose 
third largest expenditure item is interest, and whose third largest 
revenue item is equalization payments? 
 
That’s right. This budget shows that in the coming year the 
provincial government will spend $380 million, more  
  



 
March 30, 1989 

 

415 
 

than $1 million a day, just to make the interest payments on its 
deficit. At the same time, Saskatchewan will receive, so you 
claim, $440 million. And if it’s accurate, that’s the largest 
figure in the province’s history. 
 
Equalization payments should be viewed for what they are. 
They are hand-outs from the federal government. 
 
A few years ago, I say to you, Mr. Premier, a few years ago the 
people of this province were proud that we stood on our own 
feet financially. Unlike the Newfoundlands, the New 
Brunswicks, we didn’t have to depend on hand-outs from 
Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thanks to your government’s waste and 
mismanagement, we’re now in that economic boat. It shames 
one to have to say it, Mr. Minister, but Saskatchewan is on 
welfare. This proud province now on welfare. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this budget is cooked to hide the 
real deficit from the public of Saskatchewan. It’s cruel in that it 
imposes taxes on the public of Saskatchewan and small 
businesses while exempting big business. And it’s incompetent 
because it fails to meet Saskatchewan’s needs. 
 
These are a few of the preliminary remarks which I want to 
make. I’ll have more to say, Mr. Speaker, when this budget 
resumes. I therefore agree to beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed 
on Friday, March 31, 1989. 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members are aware that when the 
Speaker is on his feet there should be no chattering. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:41 p.m. 
 
 


