





























































Hansard: July 18, 1989


July 18, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 39 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my immediate right is Doug 
Cressman, the deputy minister of the department; behind Doug Cressman is Keith Rodgers, 
assistant deputy minister of Culture and sport; and immediately behind me is Alan Appleby, 
assistant deputy minister of resources. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when we finished the last 
time we were in here we were on . . . I just pretty well got through Parks. I want to make a few 
comments on Parks, and then I'll start off where I left off, asking you the question about the 
vessel from Uranium City,. I had asked for some information. 
 
Since the last time we were in here, we have passed a Bill yesterday, Bill No. 35 respecting the 
implementation of the grasslands National Park, and I had had a few questions that I wanted to 
put forward today on a motion that didn't get to the floor. 
 
When we were discussing the Grasslands National Park the other day, I had asked you a question 
of how they were going to determine the perimeters of the Grasslands National Park. We had the 
Prince Albert National Park up in northern Saskatchewan, which is a forest within a forest -- it's 
all forest -- and there are some roads and some boundaries and lines drawn around there. But 
when you get into the Grasslands National Park, Mr. Minister, you're dealing with prairie and a 
completely different environment. 
 
And I was asking the question as to how they were going to determine the boundaries and were 
they going to put fences around the grasslands park. And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that when 
you're dealing in the grasslands that, you know, you're out in the prairie. And I don't know how 
you are going to implement and how they are going to look after the grasslands National Park 
when you have cattle grazing all around in that area. It would just seem to me that somehow 
they're going to have to come up with a way of marking that Grasslands National Park out. And I 
sort of had visions of putting fence around the Grasslands National Park so that you could keep 
out the grazing livestock from the park and the wild animals that are within there. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: has there been any discussions with your department and the 
federal department regarding the jurisdiction of the Grasslands National Park, and just how you 
are going to determine the boundaries? 



 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, as I advised the hon. member yesterday, the final 
determination of boundaries will depend upon the amount of land that is acquired by Parks 
Canada, a branch of the federal department of Environment. They will be purchasing land from 
local ranchers and they will decide the extent of the boundaries. 
 
As regards the fencing, there's a couple of factors there. One, we talked about bison and if they 
do introduce bison I do believe some fencing would be required. However, nothing is gong to 
happen without consultation between the federal officials and the local advisory committee 
which is composed of people from the area, some of my folks obviously, and ranchers from that 
particular part of the country. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, has there been any concerns forwarded to you regarding how 
they are going to determine the boundaries of that provincial park, especially when we talk about 
preserving it as a national park and we're dealing in the grazing land where there is many 
ranchers down in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, there haven't been any concerns that I'm aware of. I just 
asked my officials if there's anything that we've received in writing or phone calls. There's 
nothing that we can recall. To the best of our knowledge, all of the difficulties we had 
encountered previously -- and as the hon. member is aware, this goes back quite a number of 
years -- we've painstakingly resolved all of the outstanding issues whether it be minerals. water, 
or anything else, grazing rights. That is a subject between the federal department officials and the 
local ranchers, and that all seems to have been satisfactorily resolved. Any ongoing dispute or 
arising . . . I shouldn't say ongoing, any new arising dispute will be solved at the local level. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. It would just seem to me that somehow they're going 
to have to find a way of setting the boundaries up for the park. It's so much different than the 
Prince Albert National Park where you're dealing with a forest within a forest. Here you're 
dealing with range land and you're competing with the ranchers in the area, and it just seems to 
me that somehow they're going to have to determine a way. I don't know if there is such a thing 
as a prairie grasslands park in Canada. I think this is probably the first one. And there's probably 
going to be some of these areas that will have to be worked out, and I just see that as a problem 
on the horizon -- not a great problem but I think you'll probably have to look at that. 
 
Unless you have any other comments on that, Mr. Minister, I will now turn to other items of the 
department. When I closed I had asked about a boat, and you were going to get me the 
information, I believe on a boat, a jet boat, that was the property of your department up in 
uranium City. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you have that information or do I have to go to 
another department to get that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we did find the information the hon. member requested, 
and I have a copy. I'd be pleased to send it over to him this evening. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I may come back to that after I read this material. I want to now 



go into reforestation, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, is you could indicate how many tress . . . I 
believes that's under department. How many tress were planted in Saskatchewan in the year that 
we are reviewing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, for the hon. member, the year we're reviewing, that's this 
current fiscal year, and there would be more planting to be done during the course of the fiscal 
year, as you're aware, later this fall. You mean, as of April onwards from this year? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I believe that will be the figures that we want, because we'd 
be taking them from the nursery in the spring. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I can advise the hon. member that site preparation is under 
way to plant 10.3 million seedlings. That has been taken care of, so we anticipate 10.3 will be 
planted in the year under review. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- How many were planted in 1988, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we're having a little difficulty locating all of our forestry 
material. Perhaps we could give that information a little later. 
 
I can tell the hon. member that we did commit to 50 million seedlings over five years and we're 
certainly on target. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister. It looks like you're planting at the rate of 10 million trees 
a year. Is that the total amount of reforestation that we have in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, that is. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That cover all the forest management lease agreements that we have with the 
Meadow Lake saw mill, Weyerhaeuser and the works, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I believe that we were planting at one time in this province 
around 11 million trees per year. It would seem to me that we are going down. 
 
As you know, Mr. Minister, reforestation is very important in this province. We take a look at 
what is now catching up to us, and that is a lack of forest; we just take a look at Simpson Timber 
over in Hudson Bay that are now going to leave there because of lack of forest or lack of time, 
and they indicate that the program to reforest just wasn't enough in the earlier years, and we take 
responsibility for that if that's the case. One has to take a look at how long it takes a tree to grow 
in Saskatchewan, and the amount of trees that we are transplanting seems very small. I wonder if 
there's anybody in your department that could indicate how many tress are harvested in this 
province in a year. 
 



Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, I'd like to clarify something that one or two 
members from their seats who are commenting, which is fair enough, but the fact is that in the 
last five years of the previous administration, they planted 39 million trees. In the first five years 
of our administration we planted 46 million trees. So we certainly planted no less than the 
previous administration. There was a peak year of something in excess of 11 million trees under 
the previous administration. We also had a peak year where we planted that many, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I would like to point out to the hon. member, too, and I'm sure he's aware of this because he does 
come from the North . . . He lives there and he know what's going on with various forest 
operations. But what has happened over the last number of years is there's been a change in the 
type of tree that is being utilized. With the switch from softwood to hardwood in the pulp 
industry, as an example, there's been a greater demand for aspen, and indeed, we're looking at 
reforestation programs, many of it natural, in previously aspen covered areas because that has 
become a very valuable commodity to the forest industry. 
 
In addition to that, we're not including in this other areas that we're preparing, site preparation, 
scarification, and the other things that go in prior to actually planting seedlings. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Just a short comment there, Mr. Minister. You talk about site preparation. You 
didn't get to the question that I asked you as to how many trees are harvested in the province in a 
year. 
 
You talk about site preparation and preparing the forest for 10.3 million trees, seedlings. Last 
year, did you reach that figure that you had planned on? When you prepared the soil for these 
seedlings, did you get the 10.3 million seedlings in last year, or the number that you had planned 
on in the spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can advise the hon. member that we're right on target 
with our numbers. Occasionally we have a problem with a particular contract whereby, for 
reasons of weather or other problems, perhaps a contract doesn't get fulfilled properly or we have 
to do it over again. We're not counting that number in. If we target 10, we accomplish 10. We 
have met targets, however. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I guess that's the easier question to answer. I will repeat the question, Mr. 
Minister. How many trees do we harvest in Saskatchewan in a year? How many trees do we take 
out of the forest? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, that information is generated in the form of cubic metres, 
not in the number of tress. I don't have that right at my fingertips, but we'll have officials do some 
checking and find that out. The harvest volume schedule in Saskatchewan, as in other provinces 
now, is measured in cubic metres, as the hon. member, I'm sure, is aware. So we'll get that 
information for you and send it over to you. 



 
Mr. Thompson: -- And when we deal in cubic metres, we deal with a mature tree, so we can't go 
back to cubic metres with seedling. Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, that's quite correct, Mr. Chairman, and we can get that kind of 
number for you. You're talking about area that has been harvested of mature timber and then vis-
a-vis the area that would be scarified and ready for site preparation, if that's what you're looking 
for, to see if they match up. I'm sorry, go ahead. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- The question that I asked you was: how many trees do we extract out of the 
forest in a year? You tell me that the only way that we can get that, or you have those figures, is 
in cubic meters or square feet of timber, or whatever figure you want to use. If I had the cubic 
feet of seedling then I could figure that out, but we're dealing in square feet, in square feet of 
timer that is taken out of the forest. Some trees may have 700 feet to 1,000 feet, and some of 
them may have 200 feet of timber in a tree. What I was looking for was the number of trees; you 
plant 10.3 million seedlings. What I would like to know is: are we extracting out of the forest 
10.3 million mature trees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, it's quite difficult to actually count the number of trees that 
are being harvested because of the harvest methods and the volume schedules. I was saying 
earlier that the mix is changing in the forest industry in Saskatchewan and the demands are 
changing. Indeed, with the advent of Meadow Lake saw mill and the enterprise that's taking place 
in the north-west part of the province, they're looking for a different type of mix. So in fact quite 
often what is happening is there's natural regeneration of aspen in areas that may well have had 
some softwood in them previously. So we have a little difficulty just giving you those kinds of 
numbers. 
 
The assurance I can give the hon. member, because I think this is what he's looking for, is that 
when we harvest trees and we make up our harvest schedule in conjunction with the various 
companies and with the small outfitters who also have a timer allocation, what we try to do is 
match what will be regenerated in the following year so that we are replacing what we've taken 
out. 
 
And the hon. member alluded to earlier, and he is correct, there was a period of time where we 
were taking far more out of the forest than we were putting back in, for various reasons. And I'm 
not point a finger and saying we're doing better than you were, or you did better than a Liberal 
government, or anything else. That serves no good purpose here. The point is, we have to justify 
that as a department and as a forestry branch, that we are giving responsible care, silviculture, 
and management to our forests. And I believe we're doing that, and I'd like to assure the hon. 
member that what we are doing when we're harvesting now is we're looking at the overall system 
and looking at what is going to be required in future years for the industry with the kind of 
modern mix that we have now between Weyerhaeuser and the other companies who are planting. 
 
I can tell the hon. member that on a tree-for-tree basis, because we did some numbers with 
Simpson Timber -- it would be about four years ago -- they were planting at the rate of 110 per 



cent of what they harvested. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. When we talk about reforestation, we're 
dealing strictly with industry who goes in there and extracts a tree, or individuals for their own 
use; we're not talking about fires. Are you planting any burnt-out areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I'm advised that with burn-over areas, Mr. Chairman, we give them a 
couple of years to see if they will regenerate naturally because biologically that's generally what 
happens. If there are a combination of factors to exclude that from happening, then we do in fact 
go in and do a scarification program and we reseed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, I assumed that, Mr. Minster, because I know at one time the department 
were carrying out controlled burns where they would set the fire and then they would reforest 
themselves. I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, are there any contracts that have been put out for 
reforestation in the last number of years that have had to . . . you had to go in and redo the job 
again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do check the plantation after a one-year growth 
and again at periodic intervals thereafter. And if there's significant failure within that particular 
plantation, we go back and redo what has to be done within that area. I've asked the officials if 
they can find a specific example. You may have one in mind, if you want to share it with us; if 
not, I've asked officials if they could track down in the past two or three years something -- well 
it would be the past five years, because we check every year for a five-year period -- if we could 
go back and take a look and see if there has been an example of a big failure for whatever reason, 
the primary reason being in the last few years, Mr. Chairman, drought. I know when we think of 
drought we tend to think of the southern part of the prairie grain belt of the province -- the south-
west probably springs to mind most readily -- but we have had drought in the provincial forest as 
well, large pieces of it in the last three or four years. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- The one area that I'm aware of, Mr. Minister, is in the Green Lake area, and 
that was a major burn; that was a number of years ago. And I see some of those trees are coming 
up quite well, but I have seen some work in there this summer. It looked like they were 
replanting that area again, and I though maybe that there had been some sort of a failure there. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you give me the percentage of success rate that you ask for with your 
contractors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the success rate we ask for is 90 per cent. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And who does the inspections on the planting of those trees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Department foresters carry out those inspections, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, when the contracts are let out for tree planting, and 
Weyerhaeuser in their lease agreement and Meadow Lake in their forest management lease 



agreements, who lets the contract out, and who determines how many trees are going to be 
replanted in those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- If it's something that we're generating ourselves, we would make that 
determination. If it is under the purview of a particular company, whether it be Simpson or 
Weyerhaeuser or one of the other companies, they would make the determination. But in any 
event, their planting program is subject to our scrutiny and our ratification. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So you're indicating to me that if Weyerhaeuser is going to plant a couple of 
million trees in their forest lease agreement area, they get the trees from Saskatchewan's 
nurseries, and they let the contract out to the contractors to do the planting. Is that the way it 
operates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Essentially, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Do you do the same with all small forest operations around the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- In the case of the smaller operators, Mr. Chairman, they do pay a 
reforestation fee to the company and then that same process I described earlier would come into 
place. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay. I just want to close off on the tree planting, Mr. Minister, and indicate to 
you that I think that the forest is an important part of Saskatchewan. It's becoming an important 
part of our planet that we live in, and we have to plant more trees than we've been talking out. In 
other places, other provinces, other parts of the world, in some cases they take 40 trees out and 
put one back and as a result we end up with more desert and less greenery on our planet. And we 
now are running into a situation where environmentalists all over the world are indicating that we 
have to take a new approach. If we're going to take a tree out, we should be putting two or three 
back because there's a success rate; it takes a long time for a tree to mature. And especially in 
northern Saskatchewan or any place in Saskatchewan, it takes a long time for a tree to mature. 
Climatic conditions are against us with the long, cold winters. 
 
So I just want to indicate that I think forestry is an important part of our economy in 
Saskatchewan. We have to protect it, and I would just urge you to continue with reforestation. 
And as far as I'm concerned, I think we should step up the process and start planting a lot more 
trees than we are taking out because of the slowness of growth in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I concur most heartily with what the hon. member has just 
said. In fact, trees have been described as being the lungs of the earth and this is absolutely 
accurate. And there are portions of this world where unfortunately -- Brazilian rain forests, a case 
in point -- where they're just being totally denuded. Fortunately in Canada we haven't made that 
mistake. But we have made the mistake, Mr. Chairman, over a very long period of time, of 
extracting more out of the forests than we've been putting back in, and I think it is important that 
we do accelerate our tree planting programs. 
 



We have in the last number of years made a commitment over the long term. We're not going 
from year to year any more. We're setting five-year plans and five-year targets and we're adhering 
strictly to them, and I may say at the behest of the Premier. We want to make sure that we 
continue this type of program. The hon. member would be aware that there are programs right 
now in place by the World Wildlife Fund. I know my family have all been subscribing where you 
buy an acre of rain forest in other parts of the world and they're preserved, and I would urge all 
members to do the same thing and of course we want to do that right here at home in 
Saskatchewan. The hon. member's correct. The trees are the lungs of the earth. We have to 
preserve it. We recognize now, more so than any other time in previous history, just how vital 
they are to us, and we must protect it and we're trying to do our best as a government to ensure 
that will happen. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I fully agree with your assessment of 
planting more trees. I don't know . . . I think maybe that we have to start planting more trees in 
the southern part of our province. And we have the Grassland National Park. I think that forest 
belts put through that Grasslands National Park would be a real asset to that park and to the rest 
of the province. And I think the Department of Parks has a role to play here, an important role, 
and I would suggest that reforestation and the nurseries that we have should be expanded, and we 
should provide more trees. And I know that other countries in the world are most certainly 
looking at planting more trees and bringing the forest back into the planet. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Minister, to some other items. If I get some co-operation from the minister 
and he will give me some answers and make some decisions, we should be able to work fairly 
quickly through these items. I want to now start with a contentious item in northern 
Saskatchewan that has been for the trappers for the last number of years, a decision by your 
department, Mr. Minister, to not allow trappers to harvest lynx. 
 
We now have seen the effect of the moratorium on the lynx population, and I might add that lynx 
are trapped in northern Saskatchewan and they are not trapped in the South. You don't find lynx 
down in the Meadow Lake areas or in Carrot River or Big River areas. But lynx in northern 
Saskatchewan is a vital part of the economy of many of the fishermen and the trappers who live 
up in northern Saskatchewan. That decision to go away from the traditional styles where lynx 
were trapped as the rabbit cycles moved in and the rabbit cycles moved out, was always the way 
it operated up in northern Saskatchewan. It's still going the same way, only what we have now is 
that the cycles have come and cycles have gone and trappers have got themselves into a lot of 
problems. 
 
One of the highest priced items in the fur industry is the lynx. You chose the lynx over the 
marten or the otter or the beaver or anything else, and you put a moratorium on there. Rabbit 
cycles work from east to west. The rabbit cycle will come into the province from the east and it 
will work itself through to the Alberta border. Followed by the rabbit cycles, you have the lynx 
cycles that follow along. We now have seen the rabbit cycle come through the province with the 
lynx population going with them and in certain areas, where we had a lot of lynx, we now see 



that they are gone and trappers have missed that income. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would make a decision here. I've written you letters and asked you 
to go back to the way it was before. The trappers, they look after their own areas. They know 
when the cycles are coming and when the cycles are going. They know how to harvest those furs. 
They've been doing it ever since trapping started in this province. I think that to make those 
decisions for those trappers and to take the income away from then because of someone -- 
trappers' association in southern Saskatchewan or yourself or myself, being a member of the 
legislature -- passing the type of laws that we pass in this province and on consulting with those 
local trappers, has been a hardship. 
 
and I would ask you, Mr. Minister --I've asked you in letters -- to reconsider that and to let the 
trappers know ahead of time. Don't wait until the trapping season is upon them. Many trappers, 
they leave in September or October. They go out to the trap lines. They stay there over the freeze-
up and they still don't know whether they can take a lynx or not. And you indicated that you were 
going to make that decision. I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to once again open that lynx season 
so that the trappers in northern Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to once again go back and 
harvest the fur the way they have always harvested and managed their trapping lines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member's a native Northerner himself and he has 
an advantage over me in that regard, in that he's also operated a trap line, which is something I've 
never done; he's been a commercial fisherman; and he knows whereof he speaks when he speak 
about northern Saskatchewan. So I never question what he tells me that is relevant in the North. 
 
What has happened . . . The member is correct that it is cyclical and it does change and they do 
follow the snowshoe hare, and when the hare population is down, the lynx population is down 
because it's their natural food. And when it was down and the lynx were very scarce, we had to 
take the zero quota option. Nobody likes doing this because certainly it reflects in the pocket-
book of the trappers, but at the same time we want to make sure that there is sufficient lynx 
population for the future, that indeed there will be an ongoing trapping industry. 
 
The hon. member has asked for a decision. I'm pleased to give him one. The December season 
this year, we will have a lynx quota. There'll be one lynx per trapper. The indications are they 
will peak . . . They are close to peaking at that time. It won't be a high peak, unfortunately. It's not 
going to be as good as in previous years, but we will open a season in December when the pelts 
are at their best, when they're at their healthiest, and it will be a one-lynx quota per trapper. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well thank you very much for those compliments, but then you turn right 
around and do the opposite to what I was asking you, Mr. Minister. 
 
If you're going to put a one-lynx quota, you put the one-lynx quota, once again you're tying the 
hands of the trappers. That's what you did at the start, and anybody that know anything about the 
industry, that lynx, if they are in a pocket of rabbits, you don't just find one lynx. And a trapper 
doesn't go out and set one trap to catch one lynx. If he sets 10 traps and he goes out and he has 
two lynx, then you've got a problem. And you're creating that problem. Your department is 



creating that problem by putting this quota on the lynx. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, and you indicate that you want to take advice from me, then I say that 
forget about the one-lynx quota. I don't know where you're getting this one-lynx quota advice 
from, because if you're getting that from trappers in northern Saskatchewan, I would like to know 
what trapper you got that from. Because I've talked to many trappers who go out. Trappers will 
go out and they'll stay on their trap line from October and come in at Christmas and they'll have 
seven to 10 lynx, and they'll catch those lynx, and that's the difference between profit and loss for 
a year. 
 
But you're saying that if one trapper catches 10 lynx, or if he catches two lynx, what's he going to 
do with the other one? And that is a prime pelt. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that is 
wrong-headed and it's a decision that you have made by consulting with . . . I really don't know 
where you're getting this advice from, but you indicate that you don't know the trapping industry 
and you don't know the fishing industry, but yet you're making a decision to put a one-lynx quota 
on, which you did at the start and that caused a lot of trappers a lot of problems. And I would ask 
you to reconsider this and open that lynx season and let the trappers look after those trap lines the 
way they always have and the way they're capable of doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we do in fact speak with the trappers' association, both the 
northern as well as the southern trappers' association. And we've asked them the question about 
the seasons and about the quotas and they don't have an easy solution for this either. They are 
telling us that it is cyclical, and the biologists believe this from not only the empirical evidence 
picked up by the trappers themselves, but by the biological studies that have been done across the 
North. And we think this is a viable . . . a viable option is the one-lynx quota for trappers this 
season. 
 
In the case of the trapper who does in fact come back with more than one lynx and wondering 
what to do because he's worried that he may be charged with overtrapping, if they do turn it in, 
the proceeds go to the fur trapping block for humane traps and further education in humane 
trapping, as it was in the previous year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I just don't accept that. You're going to tell a trapper that, 
you go on out to your trap line and trap all the species of fur that are out there and you come in at 
Christmas and you bring your fur in. And if you catch two lynx, you can sell one -- you make the 
decision what lynx you're going to take -- you sell one and you give one to your department, to 
the Government of Saskatchewan. They will go out and sell it where they see fit to sell it. Where 
are you going to sell the fur? That poses a big problem because we have fur outlets all over 
Canada. you're going to go and take it to the Hudson's Bay store or the department; they're going 
to sell that lynx. Where are they going to sell it? You're causing more problems than you're 
solving. 
 
And for you to say that a trapper who's coming back out of the bush with two lynx . . . And I'm 
just using that as an example. Many of them could go up there and could come out with 6, 7, or 
10 lynx because the lynx are starting to come back in pockets and those trappers know where 



they are. But for you to say that if a trapper comes back, that he has two lynx, that's just like 
telling a farmer he's got two prime bulls but you can only have one and you give the other one to 
the government and the government will sell it. You've raised it. You've raised it to maturity -- 
because those trappers they look after those trap lines -- but you say to that farmer, well you've 
raised two bulls. We're going to take one; you sell one. That's just not fair; that's just not the way 
governments should operate. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that if a trapper comes out of the 
bush in the fall and he has three or four lynx, that means profit or loss for that trapper in many, 
many cases, and they should be allowed to sell those furs. 
 
There's no lynx in North Battleford, and there's no lynx down in the Redberry country, but up in 
that country that's where you have it. You have lynx up there and that's what the trappers go after, 
because it's the prime fur right now. And for you to make that decision that you're going to take 
three or four lynx, or anything that's over one, I think is wrong-headed and the wrong way for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to be operating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- One hon. member says, come to my senses over here. Well I'm advised by 
people who are experts in the field, and I will be guided by them as well as by many of the 
northern trappers, that indeed, if we do permit an open season on lynx trapping, we're going to 
have them extinct. It's going to be the end of it. 
 
And I'd appreciate if southern members wouldn't inject themselves into the debate when they 
don't understand the situation. But if we take the situation with lynx, and this is for the benefit of 
the other members -- I know the member from Athabasca would be aware of this, but other 
members would not -- the lynx is the only large cat, in fact, that is not on any protected species 
and can in fact go right out to Europe. And because there's a fairly high price on them how do we 
keep control and make sure that these things are not trapped out? What we have to do is make 
sure we're going to have a viable trapping industry with lynx and with other species of fur bearers 
for ever more. 
 
And I'd like to point out to the hon. member, as I have in times past, I've been the only wildlife 
minister in Canada who's stood on a national stage and said, as long as I am the wildlife minister 
in the province of Saskatchewan, we will have fur trapping. We will have traditional trapping, 
and it will go on in Saskatchewan, and we will not interfere with the trapping that goes on in the 
North. We will try to control it to the extent that we'll make sure we have an ongoing, viable, 
feasible industry, but under no circumstances will we yield to foreign European pressures and 
outlaw trapping in this province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I respect your decision there and the 
battle that you've put up on behalf of trappers. 
 
On the one hand you're trying to protect the trappers; you stand up and you fight for their rights. 
And on the other hand you take away their rights to make a living when you talk about the lynx 
running in cycles, then you turn around and say if you allow them to trap two lynx, then they're 



going to be extinct. So you can't have it both ways. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that's a 
wrong decision. What's happening is when the rabbits move through the province from the east 
to the west and the rabbit cycle is at its peak, the lynx, they're at their peak and they reproduce at 
their peak. As the rabbits die out, so does the lynx. They also become infected and the number of 
kits that they have in a year -- I use the word kit because that is what they're called -- but the 
number of young lynx that are born to a mother is less when the rabbit cycle is gone. So really, 
they come and they go with the cycle, and whether you want to put a limit on them or not is not 
going to determine which way the lynx are going to be as far as being extinct. That's just not 
going to take place -- never has since time began and it never will. 
 
The same thing happens with your foxes and your coyotes in the South. They get diseases. You 
can look at your coyotes around here now; the prices are down to nothing. The farmers are not 
trapping coyotes the way they used to. And you can take a look at some of these mangy-looking 
coyotes that are running around on the prairies, and they eventually starve to death or they freeze 
to death, and that's exactly what happens on all animals if they are not controlled. 
 
And what I am saying to you, Mr. Minister, is that the trappers up there know how to control the 
fur on their trapping blocks. They know how to control the beaver. They'll go in, they'll take so 
many otter, they'll take so many martens -- they take what they feel can be taken. But you're all of 
a sudden saying that you and your department know better than the trappers who trap those trap 
lines, or the farmers that farm their farms. That's exactly what you're saying. We got to compare 
them; there's got to be a comparison there. 
 
And from what I can see, you're going back to your same old pattern. You're starting off; you're 
hitting these trappers, and you're hitting them hard again. And if you're not going to change you 
mind, we'll just leave it at that. But I say to you, that's the wrong decision. That lynx season 
should be opened up and let the trappers look after their own area. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- A couple of points just from what came out from the hon. member's 
remarks. He did touch on beaver. I'd just like to point out there's more beaver now than there was 
at the height of the fur trade 100 years ago. A lot of people have trouble understanding that, and 
it's as a result of sensible trapping and good procedures. 
 
As a matter of fact, the trappers' association and northern trappers themselves will tell you, wear 
a fur coat for conservation. A lot of people question that an say there's something wrong with it. 
But if we don't have a sensible trapping and culling, what happens eventually is they disease out 
with over-population of numbers and then nobody is served, least of all the animals themselves. 
 
Further to the discussion on the lynx, I should point out that the CITIES, with which the hon. 
member would be familiar, which is a Convention on International Trade and Endangered 
Species, does not protect lynx. And if we are not careful with our own lynx quotas here, we're 
going to have the international ire that was directed against pup seals off the coast of 
Newfoundland and Labrador also directed at us by the same, in my view, misguided Europeans 



who put and end to the sealing industry. 
 
And what did they accomplish when they did this? All they accomplished was an over-
population of seals, a diseased population; and they died out and they served no good purpose for 
anybody. And they destroyed an industry, and they destroyed an economy, a much-needed 
economy for people in that part of the world. And Chief Erasmus, a much-respected native 
leader, certainly someone for whom I have the utmost respect, has said that to allow that to 
happen would be nothing short of cultural genocide, and I agree. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Just a few comments, Mr. Minister. It looks like you're set in your ways. 
You're going to put this penalty on the trappers. But you make the comment that there are more 
beavers up in Saskatchewan now than there ever has been. And I can tell you that it's not by 
sensible harvesting -- has nothing to do with it. It's the world demand; it's the prices for the fur. If 
the beaver prices come up, then the trappers will go out, the farmers will go out, and they'll take 
those beaver. 
 
I just go through telling you about the coyotes and the foxes. The priced are down, and you've got 
coyotes and that there starving to death in their province because they're not taken and they have 
nothing to eat. 
 
So far as the beaver, it's nothing to do with it. It fluctuates the same as the domesticated minks 
did; the different colours were in demand, and that mink was a good price. And the same thing 
goes with all fur-bearing animals. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just urge you to leave the lynx system the way it was before and allow the 
trappers to look after their own trap lines and let them make the decisions. 
 
I want to turn now, Mr. Minister, to the corridors. Do you have a corridor between Glaslyn and 
Meadow Lake right now -- hunting corridor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, we currently don't have one, based on moose populations within the 
area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, three years ago in this House you stood up and said that you 
were going to put a corridor between . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you indicated that you 
would put the corridors. Once again, it's no different than the quotas that you're putting on the 
trappers for your lynx. 
 
You have two laws: one for southern Saskatchewan and on for northern Saskatchewan. Those 
corridors -- you go north of Meadow Lake and the first thing you do, you have a corridor. The 
trappers and the hunters and the citizens who live up in northern Saskatchewan cannot even carry 
a firearm in their truck unless they have it in a regulation case. You come down to Meadow Lake, 
there's no problem. They can carry their rifles in the windows, on the gun rack in the back of their 
truck. You can drive down the corridors. 
 



And I give you a good example: between Meadow Lake and Glaslyn, which is in the member 
from Meadow Lake's constituency and in your constituency, there's no corridors there. you can go 
and hunt all you want along those corridors. But as soon as you get past Meadow Lake, you come 
into a different world. We come in to a world that is ruled by a Conservative government, right 
now, that uses no compassion and who are penalizing citizens who live up in those northern 
areas. It's just like night and day. As soon as you go past Meadow Lake, you have no regulations. 
But when you get down to you constituency, and the member from Meadow Lake, it's totally 
different. 
 
And I say once again, Mr. Minister, that if you're going to keep those corridors on in northern 
Saskatchewan, then you better put them on in the rest of the forested area in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- The road corridors are based entirely on moose populations, nothing else. 
And a corridor means there's a no-shooting zone 400 metres either side of a road. Primarily these 
are forest roads. There's something like 27,000 kilometres of forest roads that have been driven 
into commercial forests over the last number of years, decades of years in Saskatchewan. It's very 
easy for hunters to drive down those roads and shoot from the side of the road, especially, 
especially at night, which is a despicable type of hunting, but it has happened in certain areas 
across the commercial forests, which are not primarily in the North but in the central belt. 
 
And there are road corridors that run right across that area, that run right through several 
constituencies -- I know they run through the member from Shellbrook-Torch River's 
constituency, and a piece of min, and other, and it's based strictly on moose populations. What 
we're trying to do is preserve the moose and allow them to recover in certain areas of the 
province. And there's certainly no intent to discriminate against any part of Saskatchewan, 
whether it be in the Cypress Hills or whether it be in Meadow Lake or Bronson Forest or any 
other part of the province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's in the same forested area -- Meadow Lake, you draw 
the line -- same forested areas as you have from Meadow Lake north. No different, exactly the 
same, the same type of forest. The only thing is it's in different constituencies. And I say that 
once again you're using a law for the North and a law for the South. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many big game surveys were carried out in the province last 
year. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sorry? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Big game surveys . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You could give me the 
moose first, if you want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- That would take a bit of work to start defining right now, but if it's okay 
with the hon. member what we'd like to do is furnish him with the complete report for the entire 
province, and that would be with all species. That would give him all the ungualates. I believe we 
could do the bear population as well on surveys . . . whatever we have on that, too. We'll give 



you all the big game, if that's okay with you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can't really go through the department and ask the 
questions that I should as if I don't have the information on the surveys. Could you just give me 
the number of aerial surveys that were carried on in the moose area last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- We did a quick count through the hunting guide and it looks like 10 moose 
aerial surveys. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you give me the results of the aerial survey in the Meadow Lake area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have those numbers with us this evening, but I've 
asked one of my officials to make sure that he digs out definitive numbers that we can send to the 
hon. member. What I can tell him is that the moose population, overall in the province, is 
approximately 25,000. South of the Meadow Lake area, the moose count comes to one per square 
mile. North of the Meadow Lake area -- it may sound a little foolish talking about proportions of 
a moose -- but in terms of the proportion, it works out to two-thirds to three-quarters moose per 
square mile south of that area. But we will give you definitive numbers on what our biologists 
have come up with in the past aerial surveys. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You indicate that per square mile there's one moose in the southern forest belt, 
and in the northern forest belt there's three-quarters of a moose per square mile. And you indicate 
that there's more moose in the southern belt than there is in the northern belt. Is that your 
indication? And that was the reason for the corridors not being put between Glaslyn and Meadow 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Quite often where the road corridors exist, the populations are indeed 
significantly lower. And that can happen in some southern belts in specific regions. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I just want to indicated to you, Mr. Minister, that if you have one moose 
per square mile in the southern belt and three-quarters per square mile in the northern forest belt, 
then the moose population would be far greater in the North than it would be in the South, 
because the southern area is just a small portion of the forested area, and really not a great moose 
area. 
 
I don't know how many moose you would find between Glaslyn and Meadow Lake, but I suspect 
very, very few. You have to go farther north into the muskegs and the lake to find the moose. 
There's a lot of deer, I'll grant you that. There's a lot of deer between Glaslyn and Meadow Lake, 
but it would seem that the deer population -- and probably your surveys will show this -- are 
fairly heavy all over the province, especially between Green Lake and Buffalo Narrows you see a 
lot of deer now, and Big River and Green Lake. 
 
But without the proper information on these surveys, just taking it as a whole, I would say that 
the corridors that you have implemented either should be lifted or they should be uniform 
throughout the province. If you're not going to put a corridor between Glaslyn and Meadow Lake, 



then I say you should lift it up in the northern areas, because the arguments that you're using on 
the moose per square mile is just not a good argument. You have to take a look at the geography 
of northern Saskatchewan and the southern area that you're talking about, and I suspect there's a 
lot more moose up in that area than there is in the southern area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- We did have a recent consultation process, Mr. Chairman, involving 
natives, trappers, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, and the wildlife advisory committee. 
The overwhelming consensus was that we should continue with the road closure program, and it 
is based on need; it is based on population. And where population is depleted and we want to 
recover, we implement the road closure program. Where, down the road, the populations do 
recover, then we're pleased to take it off. 
 
What I had indicated to the hon. member approximately three years ago was, I would ask the 
biologists to check and if there was any need to do a road corridor program in that particular 
stretch of road. I certainly would be pleased to do it, and I certainly wouldn't be afraid to do it any 
place that it has to be done. 
 
It's not always popular with local folks who has traditionally hunted on these roads unimpeded 
and been able to have gone in with four-wheel drives. But overall it does have the support of 
native groups, the wildlife federation, trappers' associations, and individuals such as the natural 
history society and the Sierra Club. So we think we have some support for this. 
 
I appreciate what the hon. member is saying, that we should look at it with a common sense 
approach, and that's precisely what we're trying to do. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I agree with you that it's probably an unpopular move, and that's why you 
have not put the corridor in your own riding. Because I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the 
same individuals that drive between Green Lake and Meadow Lake are driving between Glaslyn 
and Meadow Lake. And you have the corridors up North but you don't have it there. 
 
(2000) 
 
So an individual that is travelling from Canoe Narrows, wants to go through to North Battleford, 
they can't even carry a gun legally unless it's in a special case. But once they get to Meadow 
Lake, then between there and Glaslyn then they could start hunting again. And I just think it's 
high unfair, and your figures show that. 
 
I want to now turn to . . . Have you done any bear surveys in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- It's recognized by biologists across the North American continent that it's 
rather difficult to be definitive in taking surveys of bear because of the movement. They cover 
vast territories in a very short period of time. What we do is take biological indicators such as the 
age of population and we combine that with the reports we receive from trappers and hunters and 
others. We try to compile records and as near as possible try and keep a tab on the population. 
 



Mr. Thompson: -- You haven't carried out any more young calf moose projects, in tagging young 
moose, have you, in the last number of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I won't add to that, but that most certainly was something that should never 
have been done. And I suspect it's never been done again since the one time you done it. 
 
So you're going to provide me, Mr. Minister, with the big game surveys in the province, and that 
will cover the deer, the antelope, caribou. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I'll give you the list. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay. And could you add . . . You don't have any bear surveys per se, just 
coming in from the outfitters and the trappers and the hunters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- We'll give you any numbers we have on them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, I want to ask a few questions about fishing, but I'm going 
to turn it over to my colleague from Elphinstone who has a number of questions. I'm going to 
turn it over to him and then I will go on to the fishing portion of your estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, what I wanted to ask, Mr. Minister, is on the Cypress Hills, 
the provincial park. As you'll know, the infrastructure of the park there is privatized to some 
extent, but that's not the main gist of my questions. 
 
I want to ask a specific question, and I hope you have officials here who can answer questions 
about the park because there's a couple of them I wan to ask that are specific to that park. But in 
the park there was a cafeteria that was built back in 1979 or '80, I forget the exact year. But 
there's a great deal of concern up there, and it may only be rumour, but I want you to either 
confirm or deny that that cafeteria is being planned to be close in the near future. In fact the 
rumour is that next year it will not open as a cafeteria. Can you indicate to me whether that is, 
and I hope, only a rumour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, no decision has been made as to what will be done or what 
will happen to the cafeteria. There have been a number of suggestions made, including making it 
into a visitors' centre. But no decision has been taken. There's been a study done to say what is 
the best use. One suggestion has been making it into a visitors' centre, but no decision has been 
taken. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I would have leave to introduce a couple of guests 
in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, and members of the Assembly, I want to introduce a couple 
of special guests who are here tonight, Art Kluzak and his wife Betty, who are with us tonight. 
 
Art was the member in Shaunavon from 1960 to '64 with the Tommy Douglas government and 
will well remember the medicare debate at that time, which is still well remembered in this 
province. Art was a key player during that debate. With him is his family, and I want all members 
to join with me in welcoming him here tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 39 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, on the issue of the cafeteria at Cypress Hills, I just want to tell 
you that on behalf of a number of people in the park who are concerned abut that building, the 
word is that it will be closed next year and turned into a museum. 
 
I want to know whether you've done any study or analysis on that, and if so, why you would be 
doing that. Now I notice members of your staff are shaking their head. I want you to be clear on 
this, because this will be an issue that will, I'm sure, hit you broadside if you continue on down 
the path of making changes there. Because the cabin owners' association, others who come to the 
park, are quite concerned that what will happen there is the cafeteria, which is relatively 
inexpensive food, will be close down to be replaced by a regular restaurant or cafe. 
 
And most people who come to the park are people of modest means who don't want to be 
spending 15 or $20 for their evening supper, but rather they have families with them and merely 
want a hamburger or something to tide them over. And I want you to be quite clear in making a 
commitment tonight that that isn't what you're up to in the Cypress Hills park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I join with the hon. member in welcoming the former 
member, Art Kluzak, his wife Betty, and family to the Assembly this evening. Nice to see you, 
hope you have a pleasant evening. 
 
Mr. Chairman, back to the question that was just asked. As I've said earlier, we've made no 
determination as to the final outcome of what will happen with this particular building. I would 
point out that the cafeteria is under lease to the same operator whose company operates the lodge 
and provides food service through that. As far as we're concerned, no decision has been taken. As 
I've said, a museum wasn't in the works, but certainly there was some discussion about a visitors' 



centre, but certainly no decision has been taken in that regard. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- You're being less than forthcoming by saying that no decision has been 
made. What I want to know: is there active consideration of that being a possibility? Have you 
discussed it, for example, in the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- All I can reiterate, Mr. Chairman, is that within the department there have 
been a variety of options outlined, and we're looking into all of them. Again no decision has been 
taken. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Is one of the considerations, or one of the changes that you're considering, is 
one of the options turning the cafeteria into a museum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, that hasn't been considered. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The other issue that I want to ask about, there's been active consideration in 
terms of building a road that would connect the Cypress Hills in Saskatchewan with the Cypress 
Hills in Alberta. And here I don't think anyone's talking about building a new road as such, but 
merely laying down a mat of pavement that would sit in fact on the existing trail that is presently 
there and I think have very little environmental impact. 
 
Can you tell me where the plans are to do that, or if there's active work being done and 
negotiations taking place between the Alberta government and the Saskatchewan government at 
this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, there's kind of an exciting development down there that we 
hope later this year, probably the end of summer, we'll see our ways clear -- certainly we've done 
our homework and we hope the Alberta government gets theirs done very quickly -- to form the 
first interprovincial park in Canada. It hasn't been done anywhere in the country and we think this 
particular park, the Alberta side, the Saskatchewan side, would make an ideal first interprovincial 
park anywhere in the country. 
 
The connecting trail, it's kind of rough. I went over it last summer myself. It's not in the best of 
shape. There's also a reason for that. It does limit the heavy vehicles going over. But if the 
interprovincial park this summer does come into being, the road is under consideration for some 
upgrading and work. 
 
Only yesterday I spoke with my Alberta counterpart about that, and they're looking at the kind of 
dollars they might have to put into if, if indeed they want to put the money into it. 
 
But it's such an exciting project and such a good project that I'd hate to see this one not come to 
fruition. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me what kind of money you're talking about to 
amalgamate or make a joint park in that area? What kind of money are you looking at? I know 



the infrastructure in Alberta. Much more money has been spent there in the last six or eight years. 
I wouldn't care to guess how many millions of dollars the Alberta government has spent on their 
side in the park, but it would be 8 or $10 million, I would imagine. There's been a great deal of 
work done on the Alberta side, and it seems to me that we are really playing second fiddle in the 
area in that south-west corner of the Cypress Hills. 
 
I wanted to know what your plans are at the present time. What kind of money are you looking at 
injecting into that park in the next year or two years? What are your projections for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I can tell the hon. member that capital isn't a major concern 
for us in that area. We could . . . As the hon. member would be aware, we've put significant sums 
of money into the swimming pool, the leisure pool, the parking area, and the road within the 
park, just within the last two or three years. So we have put a lot of capital in. There's been 
private sector money invested, I believe 2 to $3 million, with expansion on the lodge and what 
has happened in there. 
 
So in terms of playing second fiddle, we're not as large as some of the things they did on the 
Alberta side. Certainly they have a very sophisticated marina and boat system and lake on their 
side, and they have the ski hill on their side. But on the other hand, we don't have to duplicate 
things that have already been done, and that was part of the discussions that took place between 
our officials -- not duplicating what already exists on either side, but rather complementing each 
other in as far as possible. 
 
What we're look at over the next two to three years down there is a marketing strategy to try and 
get that tourist traffic off No. 1 Highway and let them know that there is an alternate route across 
the south that would take them through some of the prettiest country anywhere in this province or 
indeed anywhere in this country. We have the highest land mass from the foothills of the Rockies 
in the West to the lakehead in the East. It's simply spectacular; it's breath-taking; and it just 
amazes me that so many people don't know about it. 
 
So what we're going to be concentrating our efforts on doing within the next three years is 
marketing what we already have there and trying to bring the tourist traffic into that are and 
showing them a unique piece of Saskatchewan flora and fauna. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, tell me again where the negotiations are at for the combining 
of the two parks or the joining or linking of the two parks. Is it close at hand? Is there an 
agreement that has been initialled -- not signed but initialled? Where is the agreement and 
negotiations at, at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I should point out that we wouldn't join the parks and have one 
administration. We'd each be responsible for administering our own parks, our own boundaries. 
Our conservation officers, as in the past, would provide the various services they currently 
provide in our park and vice versa on the Alberta side. What we would have is an agreement for 
interprovincial travel and one park permit would be valid for both parks. 
 



The stage we're at right now -- as far as we're concerned, the officials have finished the 
negotiations to put the deal into place. We're only waiting ratification from the Government of 
Alberta, and if we get that within the next month, then there would be a signing to declare an 
interprovincial park. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I don't know whether you're aware of the way the road 
structure in the south-west part of the province would work, but the highway linking the west 
park or the Alberta park with the Saskatchewan side, that road would then either have to go north 
or south to continue their route east. 
 
However if Highway 13, where it joins on to 37, were extended across, you would have a direct 
link, for example, with Assiniboia, Lafleche, and those towns along 13, with the Cypress Hills. 
My understanding is that it would only take several, oh maybe 10 miles of road that would have 
to be rebuilt that then would link the Cypress Hills with the eastern stretch of 13 Highway. Is 
there any consideration of doing that at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, we haven't really made a decision on roads in the south-west. And as I 
indicated to the hon. member in discussion on the Grasslands National Park yesterday, when we 
were looking in Committee of the Whole on that particular item, that we're going to have to get 
together with the Department of Tourism and come up with a marketing strategy that would 
reflect the existing highway system and what potentially would have to be done in order to 
ameliorate the situation to bring more people into the area. And it's going to be part of a larger 
strategy. As I committed yesterday, I would be writing the letters you asked me to write and I will 
be copying you with them. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, earlier you talked about not wanting to duplicate between 
Alberta and Saskatchewan and I understand your concern. And you referred to the Alberta side 
having a ski hill. I want to remind you that we have a ski hill in Saskatchewan as well, although 
some winters you'd never know it simply because the snow doesn't stay very long. Years ago, 
when we were in government, we had considered bringing in snow-making equipment even to 
the extent of possibly looking at putting in a chair-lift. I wonder whether or not, at this time, you 
can confirm whether or not you're considering this winter putting in snow-making equipment in 
the Cypress Hills for the ski slope that exists. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we're not considering it for this winter and probably 
not the following winter either, for some of the reasons the hon. member outlined -- the chinooks 
and the type of warm weather. We have got a problem with water supply. And we did look into 
this at some length, and it would appear to be not only costly but tremendously difficult to secure 
a water supply such as would be adequate to have snow-making facilities in our side of the park. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, just a final question or a comment. I want to let you know that 
I'm please that you gave a commitment tonight that the cafeteria is going to remain open and that 
it's not going to be turned into a museum. I believe there is a cabin owners' association meeting 



this Sunday in the park, if I'm not mistaken, and I'll be taking Hansard to that meeting so that 
they will be aware of the commitment that you made here tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate what the hon. member just says, and I certainly 
stand by what I said in Hansard. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask a few questions of the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, there has been a recent controversy over the sand dunes area, great sand dunes area 
because of the apparent decision by your government to allow drilling by Lone Pine Resources 
for oil and gas in a fairly extensive way. The number of wells to be drilled apparently range 
anywhere from 100 to 1,500 which is a very, very massive kind of proposition. 
 
Now in the face of that, apparently, Mr. Minister, you and your department have been seriously 
considering establishing a certain area of the Great Sand Hills as a park. One of your officials 
was quoted in the newspaper as saying that you were to announce that in July, I believe. We're 
now in July. Mr. Minister, can you report to the House on the status of this park that you are 
proposing to announce in the great sand dunes area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, could we just clarify something. I was in the House 
the day the hon. member was speaking to my colleague, the Minister of the Environment, on this 
subject, and he was talking about great sand dunes. And I believe they were being confused with 
the Great Sand Hills in the south . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Great Sand Hills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Well there's a significant difference in this . . . And believe me, I'm not 
being pejorative about this at all, but he quoted from something that was said by my officials in 
the June 2 edition of the Leader-Post. In the June 3 edition of the Leader-Post there was a 
correction printed, and I'd like to quote, with your indulgence, Mr. Chairman. It says: 
 

A story about a protected designation for the Great Sand Hills that appeared in Friday's 
issue of the Leader-Post was incorrect. 

 
The story, in which Parks Department officials said they would be announcing a 
designation for the sand hills, should have referred to the Athabasca Sand Dunes in north-
western Saskatchewan. 

 
And I know that's not your fault if you took the verbatim from the Leader-Post, and you probably 
didn't see the correction because it's a very small piece. you can have this copy if you want to 
look at it. And it did appear in a subsequent edition. But it was in error. I'm not blaming you. 
That's not your fault; it was printed in the Leader-Post and they made a mistake. They misquoted 
officials. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you for that clarification. Let's get it clear then. Is there then no plan, 



Mr. Minister, on designating any part of the Great Sand Hills as a protected area or as a park or 
any other kind of designation? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can confirm for the hon. member the Great Sand 
Hills in south-western Saskatchewan has been examined by officials from my department. We 
are very interested in protecting some areas of it. It's not the whole area that is at risk or is 
particularly fragile; it is particular sections of it that's at risk and is fragile. And we are interested 
in protecting those areas and we are looking at the potential and possibility of a future 
designation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, there is now in process an environmental impact assessment 
study that is being put together by the proponent in the area in the anticipation of drilling in a 
very extensive way. I would assume therefore that you and your department would be very 
interested in this proposition. I have no doubt that you are, because of the ecological impact this 
kind of activity might have, in fact will have there. 
 
Have you, Mr. Minister, through yourself or through your departmental officials, made some 
input into this proposal, either through the environmental impact study, which may not be the 
right way to go, or to the Department of the Environment, so that it is clearly understood what the 
position of your department, whose role it is to look after this kind of an area. Have you made 
some input into this, and if so, in what form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we will be invited after the EIA, the environmental impact 
assessment, is complete -- I'm not sure that it's complete yet -- we will be invited to make input. 
It will be given to us for review. We certainly will review it very carefully and we will make 
comments. And the hon. member's perfectly correct; we do have a deep and abiding interest in 
this area. As he may be aware, and I know some members over there would be aware, there are 
some portions of that that have been designated critical wildlife habitat protection land. So 
naturally we would have some vested interest in making sure that the interests of this department, 
or more precisely, the interests we represent, whether it be wildlife or parks or protected areas, 
would in fact be looked after. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I invite you to look at the 1978 study, which is 
a very extensive one, and I'm sure that you have and I know that your officials are aware of it. 
Because I think that having looked at that, the position of the department ought to be a very 
strong one in opposition to what is being proposed to take place here because of the kind of 
impact that it could have. 
 
I want to leave this subject, and I want to ask you another question dealing in another part of the 
province. On Saturday I had the good fortune of spending a brief period of time at Madge Lake. 
Unfortunately I wasn't able to find the time to do a round of golf, but I was there and speaking to 
some of the people there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I won't say what they said about the 
MLA. It could be unparliamentary. 
 
But as I was speaking to the people there, Mr. Minister, I was informed that for some strange 



reason your department had taken a very unusual action. There had been a certain business 
operation that was selling ice-cream -- I think it was at a filling station. And they received a letter 
from the department informing this business place that they not longer would be able to sell the 
ice-cream because they were going to provide it to someone else. Now can you provide, Mr. 
Minister, the explanation of this. I don't know what it's all about, but I thought it was a little 
unusual. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we're just going to go back and dig out the specific terms of 
that particular lease. I'm advised that the agent who was providing ice-cream actually didn't have 
provision within the lease to do that. I believe it was a garage and a few other things, but ice-
cream was not one of the commodities he was supposed to be selling. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Was an opportunity provided to make appropriate renovations or whatever 
might have been necessary in order to make this possible, Mr. Minister, rather than simply a 
cancellation so that . . . I don't know what the whole thing is all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we just dug up the terms of the lease, commercial lease 
approval, and as a service station, electronic games over a number of seasons, there was no 
provision for selling ice-cream within that lease. I'm further advised that the proponent did not 
request to add on to his business in any form to make provision for the sale of ice-cream. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I see. Just so I can get it clear, are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the operator 
did not in any way request whether he could do anything at all to meet the requirements? I don't 
know if he did because I don't know the operator, quite frankly. But I think your officials will 
know because I am told that there was some communication with him, and I am wondering 
whether he had requested whether he could continue, if he met the requirements, Mr. Minister -- 
just for the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, if there was any communication at all it would have to have 
been at the local level because the officials here are unaware of it. We don't have anything on 
record that there was a request to go ahead and do this. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me who the new operator is then. Apparently 
there is an ice-cream stand. I was tempted to go, but as I said to the member from Pelly, I decided 
not to for certain reasons well know to him. But can you tell me who the operator is of the new 
ice-cream issuing facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I did receive an unsolicited proposal to do an ice-cream parlour. It was 
called 45 Flavours, I believe, and was subsequently given approval. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Can you tell me if the owner of this business is a Mr. Boyd? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that this Mr. Boyd is a former PC candidate in 



the area? And I'm wondering if maybe there was some connection with this whole story state of 
events that took place here. Are you aware of that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Some people behind me indicated yes, he was in fact a former PC 
candidate. I don't see any sorry mess. We had one individual who was selling ice-cream contrary 
to terms of his lease, and he was told he was not supposed to be doing that. 
 
Subsequent to that, someone else comes along who in my view should not be excluded from 
submitting an unsolicited proposal merely because he's been a former PC candidate, as indeed 
nor should a former NDP candidate, former NDP minister or MLA be excluded from making an 
unsolicited proposal to conduct business in one of the provincial parks, and should be given 
every due consideration. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I think I'm quite prepared to rest my case; the story speaks for 
itself. 
 
The facts are . . . Mr. Minister, I'll make my comment and I'll leave it at that. The facts are that 
notice was given to this operator; the operator offered to meet any kind of requirements that were 
necessary in order to met the standard. he was told that that was not possible, and soon after that . 
. . Maybe you're not familiar with this because it might have been done at the local level, but if 
you're not I suggest you should take a close look at it very quickly, because these are the facts. 
And then very soon after that, this other gentleman, who probably is perfectly qualified but so 
happens that was a Conservative candidate, was given the permission to operate. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now I wouldn't probably raise this if this government's record in the last little while wasn't so 
dismal about the kind of way it operates, but I won't pursue it any further. I think the local people 
are the ones who should judge here; I'm not going to do the judging. I just wanted to make sure 
that this was on the record of Hansard. It's there and I shall therefore rest my case. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I've had an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to 
go over the bids and the tenders that you received for the boat, or the yacht, or the vessel -- I 
shouldn't use the word boat. Mr. Minister, I just want to make a few comments on this. 
 
What the department had was a 32-foot, aluminum cabin boat, twin port engines, supercharged 
engines, fridge, stove, furnace, partial furnishing, triple-axle trailer, which is a heavy-duty trailer. 
Mr. Minister, I say to you, that is a pretty expensive yacht. The department in 1976 paid $35,000 
for it and I see that one Don Lay of Meadow Lake purchased the boat from the department for 
$13, 752. Mr. Minister, considering the fact that that boat today would be worth in the 
neighbourhood of $50,000, do you not think at that time that you should not have accepted this 
bid of $13,000 and retendered it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, the bidding was handled in the normal fashion through the 
property management corporation. This was the third bid that was received. I believe if we look 



through it, earlier bids were not accepted. And we found this information because the hon. 
member requested it from me to get it from property management. I undertook to do that and I 
did, but it's really between yourself and the property management corporation to pursue the whys 
and the wherefores. I undertook to find the information from them and that's what I've attempted 
to provide for you, in just as forthright a manner as I could. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I shall pursue that with the property 
management corporation. 
 
I now want to turn to an item up in Jan Lake, Mr. minister, where some individuals are claiming 
that the taxes on their property have increased . . . well some of them have . . .They indicate that 
they have increased their taxes by 120 per cent. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could confirm if 
that is the percentage of increase in the taxes on . . . That is in a recreational subdivision, I 
believe, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, but we don't levy taxes in any of those areas. 
That's under the purview of the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I'm having a tough time here tonight to get answers. This is a recreational 
subdivision, Mr. Minister. Does your department not have authority over the recreational 
subdivisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- If there is no municipality, Mr. Chairman, taxes accrue to the Department 
of Urban Affairs. We have a lease fee if it's land that is owned by us, just a lease fee. That's rather 
like the situation in a park, where we'd lease land within a park to cottage owners. We would 
charge a lease fee and get money from them in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay. Mr. Minister, could you indicate what the lease fees are on that 
subdivision at Jan Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- On that kind of property, lake shore lots, $200; back shore lots, 140. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And they're all uniform throughout the subdivisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, basically according to the size, the length of the frontage, but that's a 
standard frontage lot and a standard back shore lot, as well, that I quoted to you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So one would assume that the taxes on those that Urban Affairs put on would 
be identical, the same as the lease is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I guess that would depend, hon. member, on the assessment on the 
buildings and the type of property they have. Again, taxation just doesn't fall under by bailiwick; 
it's under Urban Affairs. So I'm sorry I couldn't give you a definitive answer on how the taxation 
amount was arrived at. 
 



Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I will follow that up with Urban Affairs 
then. 
 
I want to now turn to fisheries, Mr. Minister. Have you opened up or have you planned any new 
fish hatcheries in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we haven't opened up any new ones and at this precise 
moment there are no new plans in the works. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- What would be the newest hatchery that we have in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- That would be the revamped, reworked, remodernized Fort Qu'Appelle 
hatchery, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And the Fort Qu'Appelle hatchery, do they produce all species of fish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I'm advised, Mr. Chairman, we have between eight and 11 species each 
year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate how the lakeside hatcheries are working, or are they still in 
operation? I'll be more specific, and I'll give you the one on Stony Lake or Delaronde Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I'm advised that we did have problems at Delaronde, Mr. Chairman, due to 
drought in this last year, and we were very unsuccessful with the fishery in there. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Have you ceased operations of that lakeside hatchery, or are you still going to 
continue with the operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- We do have an enhancement proposal ready to go there next year, Mr. 
Chairman, but it is contingent on getting water, making sure we have more than we had this last 
year. I think the early indications, because it's near a part of the world where I live, they have had 
quite a bit of rain this year, so hopefully that one's going to be a success. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That lakeside hatchery, was it not successful up until, as you indicate, last year 
it did not produce fish? Was that not a successful lakeside fish hatchery, and the first one in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- That's correct, Mr. Chairman. It was the first one and it has been successful 
in previous years. It's produced up to 41,000 fish in some years before drought took its toll. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You're talking about 41,000 fingerlings. Is this right? And one species only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- That's wall-eye, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I refer to them as pickerel. Mr. Minister, some people call them dories. 



Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many fish are being produced in the hatchery at Meadow 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- With your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, we're finding those numbers right 
now. I have an official going through the book, and we're trying to find all our fish numbers. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, when you get that information you can pass it on to me and the 
species that you are producing in the Meadow Lake hatchery. 
 
My next question would be, Mr. Minister: are you looking at any other lakeside hatcheries in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- There are two on the go right now, Mr. Chairman, Lake Lenore and 
Kenosee, and a new one planned for this year, Nichol reservoir. And I did find in the fish and 
wildlife development fund report for this year, Meadow Lake, A and B ponds at Meadow Lake, 
operated by our fisheries branch, was 97,000 fingerlings, the majority of which were released 
into Greig Lake. And if the hon. member would like a copy, I'd be pleased to send this one over. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Which species are you raising in the Meadow Lake hatchery, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Sorry. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- What species are you producing out of the hatchery in Meadow Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Wall-eye. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay. I now want to turn to fish kill that w had in northern Saskatchewan this 
spring. and it was under investigation by your department where there was over 1,000 mullets or 
suckers that were found floating in the river, and this was just after break-up in the river. 
 
And I wonder if you could indicate if the department . . . I know the department had sent out 
water specimens, fish specimens, and I also know that there are individuals up in Canoe Lake 
area, in the Broad Creek is what I am talking about, who also took specimens out of there and 
had them sent out to get them tested. I wonder, could you indicate what your department found 
out as to what happened to that kill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, yes indeed there were investigations done, and we found 
there was not contamination in the water and no contamination in the fish; however, we did find 
lack of oxygen, which contributed to the fish kill and stress in trying to get up through a blocked 
culvert. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So you indicate, Mr. Minister, that your departmental officials indicate that 
there was no problem there, that as the mayor of Cole Bay, Daniel Desjarlais, indicated that there 
was either some sort of a chemical that killed the fish or possibly dynamite was used. You 
indicate that it was just a normal kill normally associated with a creek of that size in the 



springtime. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we found no evidence of dynamite, and it appears just to be 
a normal occurrence with a lack of oxygen. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that that is not the case. Most certainly if . 
. . when you know northern Saskatchewan, and I'm sure that you have biologists who are aware 
of this, we have thousands and thousands of rivers and creeks that are running in the spring. The 
mullets go in there to spawn. There most certainly is a lot of fresh water. 
 
The mayor of Cole Bay indicated tome quite clearly that there was no blockage of the creek that 
you're talking about with a culvert, and most certainly lack of oxygen just doesn't take place at 
that time of the year with all that fresh water and it's running freely. You don't have a lack of 
oxygen; if you did, we would have million and millions of suckers or mullets dead in all our 
creeks in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I've lived in that country, and every spring I see mullets that are so thick in the creeks that you 
could walk across them, and I'm not exaggerating, they are that thick. And you never, ever see 
kills for lack of oxygen. Most certainly I think that the citizens of Cold Bay and Canoe Narrows 
and in that area have some concerns. I know that they have taken specimens out of there to get 
them tested. And I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that that just does not take place at that time of 
the year in that fresh water moving the way it is with lack of oxygen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- If I can further perhaps expand on my previous answer, Mr. Chairman, for 
the hon. member. There was a temporarily blocked culvert as a result of beaver activity. So what 
happened was . . . And there was a low amount of water . . . The fish, and as the hon. member 
indicates, do come in there en masse, and they're solid such as one could walk across them, help 
to block it because they get stuck in there, hence the low water, the high number of fish caused 
the lack of oxygen problem, which was a result of the fish kill. I am advised that we found no 
evidence of dynamite at all within the area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate where the fish were found; were they up the creek from the 
lake or on the lake side of the culvert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- They were found mainly, Mr. Chairman, in the downstream pool and some 
in the culvert. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I would like you to check into that further, because I know that I've bee 
up in that country for many years and I have never ever seen a mullet kill of that magnitude -- 
never, ever. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, just closing that off, could you indicate how many mullet kills that your 
department officials have seen, and how many have been reported up in that northern area? 



 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, this is the only one that we're aware of, I'm advised, that 
has happened in that part of the country. Apparently we do have an updated report on this 
particular incident to which the hon. member is referring, so I've asked my officials . . . It's not 
something that they've got with them tonight; it's a report that's been filed. If they'll bring that 
report out and I'd like to send a covering letter with it to the hon. member so he can look at it, and 
if he's not happy with what's contained in the report, naturally I'd be pleased to discuss it with 
you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And when I get that information, then I 
will pass it on to the Canoe Lake council and Cole Bay and Jans Bay. 
 
I now want to turn to the lake limits for the commercial fisheries, Mr. Minister. And as you 
know, in the last number of years you keep adding more and more tolerances to the commercial 
fishing industry, and now you have reverted to the species limit. And as you go through the 
Gazette, you will now find lake after lake in northern Saskatchewan who now have species 
limits. 
 
I wonder if you could indicate to me why you would put species limits on the commercial fishing 
industry in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, as an outcome of the 1985 commercial fishery options 
paper, it was determined that some species were being overharvested. I don't think that's any 
secret to anybody -- primarily wall-eye, pike, and lake trout. And of course that depends on 
market, as with so many other things, and the market was high, the demand was goo, and the 
price was good on those, so there was some overharvesting. 
 
Most jurisdiction do have a species limit by lake. We were one of the last to impose this 
particular measure. We also have one, of course, for anglers, and it's just, in our view, a matter of 
good conservation. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So, Mr. Minister, you are going to continue with the species limits and you're 
going to put these quotas on other lakes, are you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- This would be on an as required basis, Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, once again the species limit is no different than the lynx 
that you've put on, it's no different than the corridors. It's another example of a department 
making decisions in northern Saskatchewan that they are making it very hard for traditional users 
to make a living. 
 
You talk about these species limits. Well let me tell you, when you go out there to fish a lake and 
there's always been a 40, 50,000 pound limit on that lake, and the fishermen go in there . . . The 
biologists are the ones who set those limits. They gazette them every year. They check the limits, 
and if the commercial fishermen are taking a little bit too much fish out, then they just lower the 



limit -- 50,000 pound lake may go down to a 40,000. Or it can be gazetted at 60,000 if the fish 
hatch has been a good hatch. 
 
But what you've done with the species limit, you've put a species on each fish. And if you've got 
a 50,000 pound limit on some of those lakes and you've got a species limit on northern pike or 
jack fish, and wall-eye and white fish and trout, then if you have a 50,000 pound lake and a 
fisherman goes in and he catches 10,000 pounds of trout first, or 10,000 pounds of any species, 
you shut the lake down. And the other 40,000 pounds of that limit stays there and the fishermen 
also loses that income. 
 
And I say that this is a policy that is set by yourself in a department in southern Saskatchewan 
who is not looking at the needs of northern Saskatchewan. Once again you're making those 
decisions. This species limit is one of the most backwards way of operating a fishery in this 
province. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, and I ask you: will you consider changing that species 
limit and going back to the system where biologists go in, they check out the fish and see what 
the catch is that year, and then they gazette it for the next year? Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it is in fact the biologists who do recommend those 
limits, those species limits, and we're taking their advice. Prior to the imposition of a species 
limit it was 1.8 million kilograms taken out. That was the normal take. The year immediately 
prior to the imposition it went to two million; with the imposition it went back to 1.8, so there 
was no net impact on what had happened prior to species limit being introduced. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, are you indicating that there was only 1.8 kilograms of 
fish taken by the commercial fishery in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Of the species, Mr. Chairman, of wall-eye, pike and trout. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I just want to say this, and I want to make it very clear, that the advice 
that you're getting on these species limits is a bad one. I've go fisherman, and the Patuanak 
fisherman right now have been waiting for the estimates to come up because they wanted me to 
bring this up. 
 
In that Patuanak area those fisherman have limits of 40 and 50,000 pounds in some lakes that are 
sitting there that they can't touch because of your philosophy and ideology that you are going to 
make things tough for Northerners. And that's what this species limit has done. 
 
There is no lakes up in that area that the limits have been taken off. You have biologists who are 
going out there. They check the amount of fish that should be taken and that should be put on the 
limits, and you turn around and make a policy that totally contradicts that. There are fisherman 
who have 10,000 pounds on small lakes, that every year they go in and they take 10,000 pounds 
of fish. you come along with your species limit. Some of those lakes they take 2,000 pounds and 
they have to leave the other 8,000. And I say that that's not fair. 
 
You say that you have limits on the sports fishermen, and that is right. But sports fishermen can 



go out there and they can catch their limit, they can go to shore, and they can fillet those fish and 
eat them and go back out and catch a limit again. And they can do this on a year-round basis. 
Where a commercial fishery, they have those lakes, they fish them once a year, they have a limit 
gazetted by your biologists that indicates how many pounds that lake can handle. 
 
But now when you started putting on the species limit, it's just like putting on the lynx, the 
species on lynx or the corridors that you have up there that takes away the rights of northern 
fisherman, northern trappers and hunters to make a living. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that 
that is a wrong decision. If you just take a look at some of those lakes up in northern 
Saskatchewan where commercial fishermen have always got their licence in the spring -- the 
Gazette indicates whether it's 20,000 pounds or 30,000 pounds for that lake -- they go in and they 
take the limit and they come out, they know that that's theirs. Now you've went and you've put 
the species limits on all those lakes, more and more of those lakes for species. And I just think 
that it's a bad move. 
 
And I wonder if you could tell me, Mr. Minister, what percentage of the lakes that are 
commercially fished and gazetted do you have species limits on now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- It works out in round numbers, Mr. Chairman, to be about 150 out of 400 
lakes. I hadn't bothered converting that to a percentage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, sorry. 
Out of 850 lakes. There's 150 out of 850. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, are there 850 lakes in northern Saskatchewan that are 
commercially fished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- There are 850 lakes upon which there are commercial quotas, not all of 
which, however, are fished every year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate how many limits have been taken out in the last year? I 
speak of the lakes that are gazetted and are fished. Could you tell me the percentage of those 
lakes that the complete gazetted limit was taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- That's not a statistic we normally carry around, Mr. Chairman, but it is a 
number that we could generate within the department, if that's okay with the hon. member. I 
think he knows from years past, when I commit to find numbers and get them to him, I get them 
to him within a reasonable length of time. This is one we can generate and find. I don't was to 
guess at it -- we were guessing on percentages -- but would rather be accurate and send it to you 
in due course if that's acceptable. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could break that down further and give me the 
number of limits that have been taken completely out of lakes that you have applied the species 
limit to also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, we can undertake to do that for you, hon. member. 
 



Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder, do you realize that impact that the species limit has on 
the commercial fishing industry in northern Saskatchewan to the individual fisherman who every 
year has gone out there? Do you really understand the impact that it has on the fishermen, and 
have you met with any of those commercial fishermen to discuss this yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I have met with groups of commercial fishermen, Mr. Chairman, 
specifically on this issue I don't recall. I did have a meeting in La Ronge, it would be a year past 
this winter. I don't recall if that was one of the specific items; there was a wide-ranging 
discussion for about a two-hour period. 
 
(2100) 
 
Yes, I have some idea, because there's a sensitivity within the department and among the officials 
as to imposing a species limit, again, may I say and reiterate, in keeping with other jurisdictions 
across the country. And it's not something we undertake lightly; we are interested in the 
conservation in the long term. 
 
We're very worried that many of these fishermen who are fishing today may not be fishing in the 
years ahead unless we take some measures in the interests of conservation. We think this is a 
good measure to take. The hon. member is raising some concerns. We'll go back, visit the data, 
provide you with the information, and I'm sure I'll be hearing from you in due course. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would agree to go into Patuanak. you could fly 
up there; there's an airport. And the commercial fishermen up there either want to come to 
Regina and meet with yourself and your officials, or they would like you to go into Patuanak and 
meet with them. I have held off arranging a meeting with those fishermen with yourself until we 
brought the estimates up, thinking that maybe this situation could be resolved. Would you agree 
to meet with the fishermen in Patuanak? It would take you only an hour to fly up there, an hour 
and a half, and meet with those fishermen to discuss the issues pertaining to the species limits 
where that has especially hit those fishermen in the Patuanak area very hard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, we have had a regional biologist in the area meet 
frequently with the individuals concerned -- Robert Wallace. However, to answer the hon. 
member specifically, it's probably easier for me to go there than to have a group of people trying 
to arrange logistically to get down here. So at some stage in the future -- it certainly won't be 
during the session; you know we're tied here to Regina a considerable amount of our time, so it 
would be rather difficult to arrange a trip up there during session -- but some time subsequent to 
the close of the session perhaps in the fall, I would have no problem going up there. If for some 
reason I can't make it, I'd certainly arrange to have a senior official there. I'd prefer to go, too. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Minister. The fishermen up there have wanted to 
either come down to Regina, or you go up there. And it doesn't take a long time to fly up into 
Patuanak. There's lights on the airport. We have daylight up north till 10 o'clock yet, so I would 
ask that you consider this request and let the fishermen know up there, or through myself. And if 
you would just go up there and talk to those fishermen, talk to the families, and just see what the 



impact is of the species limit that have been imposed by your department -- they are a 
tremendous handicap, more and more species limits are coming on every year. 
 
I wonder if you could indicate, Mr. Minister, how many more new lakes are you putting under 
the system this year of species limits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- The number is under 15. We were not sure if it is 12 or 13, but it is under 
15. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That's not a large number of lakes. I wonder, could you indicate tome what 
those lakes are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll undertake to find out for the hon. member. We don't 
have them listed with us, but we'll include it in as part of the package of information I've 
previously committed to find for him. We should put a time limit on this. I don't like these things 
dragging on for ever. I'm quite sure we could probably get this put together within a two-week 
period? How long? I'm advised it's probably going to take a month because we don't have the 
statistics from the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation back yet, but just as quickly as we can, 
and certainly we'll aim for a one-month period and give you the whole package. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- No, I guess you misunderstood the question, Mr. Minister. All I asked -- it's 
got nothing to do with the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation -- all I asked you, Mr. 
Minister, was for the names of the 15 new lakes that you have applied the species limit on to this 
year. And surely it's not going to take a month, and you don't have to go to Winnipeg to get that 
information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I was referring to the package of information, which I 
had committed earlier, which included numbers and species and so on. 
 
In terms of just that number of lakes, I can have that for the hon. member within seven days. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I wonder . . . I've had another request for 
an extension for the commercial limit on the Beaver River. There's a 10,000 pound limit, I 
believe, on the Beaver River. Once again, there's a species limit on that river, and they have taken 
out the limit, the species, and there's still a number of pounds, I believe, approximately 3,000 
pounds left to be taken out. We now have a situation up there where Waite Fisheries, the agent in 
Buffalo Narrows, is taking mullets, and in order to fish for the mullets that limit would have to 
be extended. I wonder if you would consider an extension on the Beaver River and let me know 
if it's possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the commercial fishermen's association has 
in fact recommended against that particular extension. 
 
Mr. .Thompson: -- What organization, Mr. Minister? 
 



Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- The Saskatchewan confederation . . . I'll have to get this. Saskatchewan 
commercial Fishermen Federation of Co-operatives is the official title. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, there's only two fishermen that fish that lake. There' only two 
fishermen that hold a licence on the lake, and only one fisherman has fished it. And are you 
telling me that some organization is making the decision as to how that Beaver River is going to 
be fished. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we've already had some representation from the 
organization, and I believe it's to do with some downstream work at Ile-a-la-Crosse -- fishermen 
from downstream who've made some complaints about problems that they've experienced. But 
I've just asked officials if we can take another look at that and revisit that particular situation, and 
we can. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- If you could give me an answer whether there could be an extension or if you 
would just lift the species limit so that they could just take in the 2 or 3,000 pounds that are left 
on the Beaver River. 
 
I realize that the Beaver River feeds into the Lake Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Ile-a-la-Crosse, as you are 
aware, now has only a winter fishery. There is no summer fishery on Ile-a-la-Crosse and that 
seems to be working out quite well. But we're only dealing with a small limit -- I believe 10,000 
pounds -- and I'm not too sure when talking to the fishermen that fish that lake whether they have 
made that representation to your biologist that they not take that limit or not. But I will pass that 
on to them and let them know that that's how the decision was arrived at. And you'll provide me 
with that information? 
 
Once again, Mr. Minister, in closing off on the species limits, I want to indicate to you that I 
think this is a bad deal. It's not the way that you operate a fishery. We've had fisheries operations 
in this province for many, many years, and it's always been done through the system of a 
biologist determining how much fish had come off of those lakes. It was taken off, and if it was 
ever over-fished or anything, then the limits were just dropped accordingly. 
 
Some of those lakes there's absolutely not tourists on them, it's just the commercial fishermen, 
and the decision to go with these species limits, I think, is just another decision that's making it 
very, very hard on the commercial fishermen in this province. In some places it might work, but I 
say to you that it's something that you should, as a minister, look at very seriously. And when you 
meet with the fishermen in Patuanak, I would sincerely hope that you have an open mind as to 
their concerns, because I know that they're going to express that to you as they've expressed it to 
me many times, and so has fishermen in northern Saskatchewan. It's something that you do when 
you gazette, and these fishermen go to get their licence in the spring, not even aware that all of a 
sudden there's a species limit on that lake. 
 
It's just not the way that the fisheries should be operated in this province. It's not the way that we 
done it before when it was successful, and I think that what we should do is go back to the way 
we used to do it. And the species limit is just not the way to go, and I would ask you to 



reconsider those species limits. And when you meet with the fishermen at Patuanak, I would ask 
you to go in there with an open mind and really take a serious look at their concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I appreciate the comments of the hon. member. And as I said before, and I 
mean it quite sincerely -- he know that; he's been my critic for a number of years -- when he 
speaks, I listen. If we wants me to visit and meet with these fishermen, then I'd be pleased to do 
so. I can't guarantee there would be any change of policy as an outcome of the meeting. I can 
guarantee an open mind, and I will listen. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. You indicated that you would make 
arrangements to meet with the fishermen in Patuanak. Thank you very much. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Down the road. After session's over. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Oh, I think we should not wait until after the session because after the session 
we may be into a provincial election and then everything is gone. So I suggest that you don't . . . 
It only takes you a few hours to go to Patuanak, and I suggest that you do that fairly quickly. 
 
I now want to turn to, Mr. Minister, to the game farming the province. How many commercial 
game farms do we have in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Once again, Mr. Chairman, this is an area that doesn't really fall under my 
bailiwick. We don't license the game farms, the Department of Agriculture does, so I imagine 
when the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, is up for estimates, you would probably want to 
get into that with him. I'm advised, however, it's under 50. But again, we don't have a definitive 
number because we don't do the licensing. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well once again I'll take that up with the Department of Agriculture. But I 
want to indicate I'm sure that the regulations that game farming in this province operate under are 
regulations that come from your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you indicate if there have been any new regulations re game farming in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, the regulations are under the purview of the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I'm probably going to end up with a dry hole here too. Are you in charge 
of Ducks Unlimited, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, ducks Unlimited, which just celebrated its 50th anniversary 
in the past year, is a non-profit operation. It is completely separate from government; it's 
supported by private donations. They do work in conjunction with governments; we join-venture 
various projects: wetlands, marshlands, and things like that. The aim, of course, being to increase 
the number of ducks by increasing the amount of wetland and habitat available for the breeding 



of ducks. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, could you indicate what success you've had in the Ross Lake 
project up in Green Lake . . . the Ross Lake project which is up in the Green Lake area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, it doesn't ring a bell with any of my wildlife or 
operations officials. It must be strictly a Ducks Unlimited project and not one we're involved 
with. But I can certainly undertake to find information for you from Ducks Unlimited. If you 
want me to do it or you want to do it direct, it doesn't matter; I'd be pleased to do it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- No, that's fine. I just assumed that your department was involved in the Ducks 
Unlimited projects. Well are you involved in any Ducks Unlimited projects and marsh extensions 
in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, and I've alluded once before in the House to the 
heritage marsh program. And this is one that is joint-ventured; and our other partners are the 
natural history society, Ducks Unlimited, and the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I now want to turn -- and I'll be 
closing off the estimates for the Parks with the fire suppression. Could you indicate how much 
money was spent in fire suppression last year, in fire control, and the fighting of . . . of fire-
fighting, the prevention and control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- It was just about $32 million, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thirty-two million dollars that was spent on fighting fires in the province last 
year. I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you indicate how much of that money was spent on aircrafts, 
both the fixed wing aircraft and the choppers, the helicopters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I just did some quick addition, Mr. Chairman, on the contracts we had out 
for helicopters, and it comes to approximately $1.4 million. We don't have the fixed wing 
because, in part, it's contracted through the property management corporation, so it's not all our 
responsibility. There's some tie-up with the property management corporation on those fixed 
wings which we have, some of which we own. But I'm advised it would be about $3 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate how much money was spent on helicopters that were here 
on speculation then? Not the contract; you gave me the contract helicopters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, rental of helicopters with those that were contracted, 
the ones the were brought in, given the horrendous situation we faced last year, record forest 
fires, the second consecutive record in a row -- came to $3.4 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Am I right in saying that you spent 3 million on the water bombers from the 



fixed-wing aircraft, 3.4 on helicopters that were in here on speculation, and 1.4 million on 
helicopters that were on permanent contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, that's approximately correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- How many helicopters do you have on contract this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we have two light helicopters and five medium, for a total 
of seven. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And could you give me the cost per hour of those helicopters? You only have 
two sized helicopters on contract, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- That's correct, Mr. Chairman. The cost per hour, a Bell 206B is $379 an 
hour; the medium lift helicopter Sikorsky range from $705 an hour to $900 an hour. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- On the Sikorsky, could you give me the difference between . . . you say 
between $700 an hour for a helicopter and $900 an hour on the Sikorsky. Could you give me why 
the difference of the $200 and hour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- It goes by, Mr. Chairman, it goes by model of helicopter. We've got a 
Sikorsky S55T, as opposed to a Sikorsky S58P which is a larger machine. The larger machines 
consume more gas and cost more money. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Who pays for the gas for those helicopters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we have some confusions differentiating on numbers. Just 
the way they're listed here, it just shows a blanket total. I'll have to break that down and get back 
to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- The only question that I asked, Mr. Minister, was who pays for the gas. I don't 
need any breakdown, and I don't need any figures there. I just want to know who pays for the gas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Inclusive in the figure I gave, I believe we are paying for the gas, but I'll 
have to confirm that. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So what the department is paying, they're paying up to $900 an hour for a 
Sikorsky helicopter and they are providing the gasoline and oil for that machine. Are they also 
providing food and lodging for the pilots? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we do not provide the food and lodging for the copper 
operators. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So the pilots do not eat in the cafeterias that Parks and Resources have at their 
headquarters? 



 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- At any time, Mr. Chairman, whereby the operators of those particular 
machines would eat or, in fact, sleep over in anything sponsored by our department, anything that 
we would normally provide for our own crews is billed back to them, so they pay it themselves. 
And a case in point happened at Meadow Lake recently. I had an inquiry on that and I tracked it 
down, and it turned out that they were billed for any fuel they filled up, and they were billed for 
staying overnight out at the base. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I just want to close off by . . . You had an announcement; you 
colleague, the Minister of Social Services, and yourself made an announcement on the hiring of a 
forest fire strike team. You indicated that you hired 68 individuals in northern Saskatchewan as a 
forest fire strike team. Could you indicate if all 68 of those jobs that you announced are in place 
right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to say they are. They were involved very early on 
in the course after having been brought into the program and did just an admirable job in the first 
fire with which they were involved. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicated how much an hour they're being paid, Mr. Minister? And 
is there a two-tier system? I would like to know if they are getting the same wages that they 
started with or right through the duration of that job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, when they are involved actually on the fire line, 
involved with forest fire fighting, they are paid $6.45 an hour. When they re not involved on the 
fire line, they do other things such as work in forests, stand tending, that type of thing, and they're 
paid $4.50 an hour for those activities. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I would just want to say in closing on this, Mr. Minister, that when you 
had all the hype . . . I believe that you were up in La Loche and made that announcement and the 
Minister of Social Services made the announcement in the legislature, and . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well okay, you made the announcement in Prince Albert and Regina, and you 
talk about hiring 68 Northerners and you pay them $6.45 an hour when they're fighting fire, and 
if there's no fire, doing other jobs, and I'm assuming other jobs . . . I don't know really what the 
other jobs would be unless they are looking after the campsites and getting wood and things like 
that, but you lower their wage to 4.50 an hour. 
 
So really what you're doing, you're hiring 68 people, and it's a social welfare job that you're 
using. And I think, Mr. Minister, when you take those individuals -- you made the big 
announcement here in the legislature that you were creating 68 jobs, paying them $6.45 an hour, 
but you only pay them that when there's a fire. So if there's no fire they go back to 4.50 an hour. 
 
And I don't know how you can jump up and pay an individual $6.45 an hour one day and then the 



next day pay him $4.50 an hour. Can you just imagine how degrading that must be to the 
individuals that you have created these jobs for? All of a sudden for one week they're out there 
working getting 6.45 an hour, and I would assume that when they're out on the fire line that 
they're getting their board and room also, the same as the pilots, and then as soon as there's no 
fire the next week, they're back at $4.50 an hour working who knows where, doing what? 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that when you announce a job like this or a program such as this one, 
why not pay them the same wage from the start to the finish, and if anything, increase their wages 
like normal working people would get -- not go backwards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You have 68 northern people up there who need the jobs bad, and to pay them 
6.45 an hour and then reduce it when there's not fires . . . and I say to you, Mr. Minister, we had a 
lot of fires at the start, and then we had a period up until now where there was about a month 
there that there was a lot of rain and there was very little forest fires, so I can only assume that 
those individuals were back down to 4.50 an hour. I think that's a bad decision on your part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we should bear in mind that these are 68 positions 
that didn't exist before, and they're 68 people who had been receiving social assistance. And as 
afar as we hear, they're quite happy to have this opportunity to work because they are, in fact, 
receiving some on-the-job training. We are helping them with silviculture. They're doing some 
fire-guard clearing. Mainly, I would emphasize, it's in the area of silviculture, and they are 
learning a skill that will be of use to them later on. 
 
In terms of the number of strikes -- and yes, we had a horrendous start and it did die down, but I 
would like to point out yesterday we had 32 new fires; today we have 20 new fires burning in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I still maintain -- regardless whether those individuals are 
fighting fire or they're out making the forest look better, using silviculture, planting trees, 
thinning out the forest, whatever it may be -- that they most certainly shouldn't have a reduction 
in wages. They should be paid the same wage that they started with. Why would you want to 
reduce their wages from 6.45 an hour to 4.50? I think that that's the wrong move. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to close off now by indicating that I think that it's important that you create 
jobs like this, but I think it's important that you do not reduce their wages. You can imagine if 
you were getting a reduction of wages in here rather than an increase as we went on. And that's 
the same way those people are up there, only you're putting them at the bottom of the scale; you 
take them from 6.45 down to 4.50. And let me tell you, that is degrading, Mr. Minister. 
 
You have helicopters that you have on spec last year, that you paid almost three and a half 
million dollars to those helicopters, just on spec. The department even paid their gasoline. You're 



paying $900 an hour for some of those helicopters plus gasoline. You don't do that to anybody 
else -- the truckers in this province, the farmers, they don't get free gasoline -- but you're doing 
that to those individuals who own these helicopters. And I say that that program where you 
cutting the wages on those 68 jobs, that you should go back and retroactively pay them 6.45 for 
every hour that they have worked this summer. 
 
I want to indicate in closing that I think that we have to work forward and plant more trees. I 
think that reforestation is important, and we're going to have to improve on our nurseries and get 
more trees. I ask you to take surveys of the big game and the animals that we have in this 
province so we know what we're dealing with. 
 
I had a call today from northern Saskatchewan, from an individual who found a cow moose and 
her calf, who was all chewed up, on a little island. And the flies and everything had got to them, 
but the timber wolves had literally eaten the small moose alive, and the mother moose, she had 
her ears chewed off, and everything. And I would ask you to take a survey, and you have to do 
this through the trappers and the fishermen, and see what the wolf population also is up in 
northern Saskatchewan. These are sad situations when this happens. The one that was phoned in 
today was a serious one, and I would ask you as a minister to look into that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- . . . (inaudible) . . . is brought to my attention, Mr. Chairman. We'll 
certainly look into it; be pleased to do so. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to ask you some questions 
pertaining to the topic which we'd started back on June 23, and that was questions with respect to 
the tax on lotteries. And it's affecting us now, and it's been implemented in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Could you confirm, Mr. Minister, that there are approximately 700 vendors in the 
province that actually vend on behalf of Sask Sport or are licensed through Sask Sport and 
yourself for your department, and there are about 35 of these kiosks that are actually in malls. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, the licence is given. It is now a five-year licence that has 
been given to Sask Sport Incorporated to operate the lottery. Their arm who operate this 
particular aspect is called Sask Sport Distributors Incorporated. They, in turn, license, and I 
would believe that it is 781 retail outlets, of whom 40 are kiosk operators. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Would it be possible, Mr. Minister, to obtain the addresses of the mall 
operators, the kiosk operators, from you? Would it be something that you would be able to give 
me over a course of a day or two or three? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have that kind of information. Sask Sport operates 
entirely independently of the government, and contract that they sign -- and one was alluded to 
already in the House a week or so ago -- those contracts exist between . . . that particular contract 
exists between the 40 kiosk operators and Sask Sport Distributors Incorporated and has nothing 
whatsoever to do with me. So I don't know who they are. I don't have the lists and I don't even 
have access to the information. It's not anything I've ever requested. 
 



Mr. Kowalsky: -- Would you consider it appropriate, Mr. Minister, for a member of the 
legislature to go to Sask Sport and ask them for such a list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, Sask Sport is an independent operation of government. 
Anybody can approach them for any information that they want to divulge. It's up to them what 
they want to give out. They're an organization. They're a business. They have contracts with other 
business people, and it's up to them to decide what information they want to give out. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- So I take it from that, Mr. Minister, that you would have no objection if such a 
list was distributed to a member of the legislature. 
 
Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, whether you have the names and address, and whether I've be 
able to get the names and addresses of the 781 vendors who are licensed to sell lottery tickets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have those names and addresses at all. I don't have 
access to them. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Would they also be . . . Would you confirm then that they are also licensed 
through Sask Sport and that the same conditions would apply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is correct, and that's SSDI (Sask 
Sport Distributors Incorporated), that's a division of Sask Sport Incorporated. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now with respect to the number of lottery machines 
in Saskatchewan, you indicated that there are 781 vendors now, and 40 of these . . . I should just 
get that confirmed. Is it 40 additional or 40 of the 781? I guess it's 40 additional that are in kiosks 
in malls. And would you indicate to me how many were cancelled over the last . . . since January 
of this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I have no knowledge of that, Mr. Chairman. The contract exists between 
the independent operators and Sask Sport Incorporated, through SSDI. I have nothing whatsoever 
to do with the day-to-day operations. My involvement is simply, look after the licence, negotiate 
the licence and give it to Sask Sport Incorporated. It used to be a one-year licence; it's now a five-
year licence. And they operate the lottery, and we have nothing to do with it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Forty additional? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I said 781, of whom 40 would be kiosk operators. So that 
would give 741 retail operators. Now that's the last number I have when I asked how many there 
were. That may have changed but I believe it to be accurate. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Do you have the number of the vendors from the year previous? You were 
giving me the existing number 781; do you have the previous years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- No, Mr. Chairman, I don't have any numbers, I only have those numbers. I 



asked how many there were in the province as a matter of interest, and that was the information 
given to me. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that the money generated from the lotteries 
through Sask Sport Incorporated goes to 1,185 groups in the province or thereabouts, and that 
these represent approximately 600,000 people in various sports, cultural, charitable, or charitable 
volunteer organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- The number I am familiar with is 1,185. The total number of people 
effected -- I would be guessing, but I'd say, yes, I think it's in the ballpark of 600,000 people. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that the gross sales last year for this was 
approximately $108 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that it was $110 million. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- And would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that since the tax on lotteries was 
announced, since March 1 of this year when it was announced, till about the time it was 
implemented, that the revenues generated through the lottery system is down slightly over 10 per 
cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: --I don't have that number, Mr. Chairman. We only have the empirical 
evidence that's been gathered from kiosk operators and retail outlets who've been saying they 
have seen a decline in the amount of sales. In that first month, I think, you're fairly accurate. Put 
it this way: I'd hate to be misquoted two or three months from now and say the member from 
Turtleford said definitively it was 10 per cent. We're not certain, but that sounds like it could be 
about right. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- The indication that I have would be that it's around slightly over 10 per cent as 
well, so I'll use that as an estimate rather than as a definitive figure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the additional figure that I would ask you to confirm, in terms of an estimate, is that since 
this tax has been implemented that there has been a further decrease so that we're now looking at 
a decrease of sales between 20 and 30 per cent through most of the vendors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, I don't have any definitive numbers. We do know, 
again empirical evidence, that the numbers have declined in total sales. We're not sure how 
much. What I have asked lottery officials to do is when they get the numbers, the on stream 
numbers, the computerized figures and so on. We'd like to take a look at them and see how far 
down they are, it indeed they are down. Early indications have been that there was some pick-up 
in sales last week. Again that's only verbal; we have nothing on paper to substantiate that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- The sales being down 10 per cent when the tax was announced and increasing 
close to the 30 per cent level and hovering around there, even at a time when the lottery prices . . 
. 6/49 right now is in the 7 million or close to $7 million range. I would think that we would 



expect, and the operators tell me that they expect, when you get prize money like 5 and $6 
million, that that's when the people of Saskatchewan traditionally flock to the kiosk operators and 
the vendors and put some of their discretionary money into it simply for the excitement of it. But 
in the is particular . . . some members included, I see, but particularly this year, for some reason, 
that's not happened. 
 
Now has it occurred to you, Mr. Minister, that the imposition of this tax is 90 to 95 per cent or 
largely the reason that this is happening? And in view of that, are you putting any argument, or 
what type of argument are you putting to your colleague, the minister in charge of consumer and 
corporate affairs, who is also faced with the same problem in the bingo parlours, and together 
talking to the Minister of Finance about this ridiculous tax and about what it's already done to the 
revenues generated to Sask Sport, and what the possibilities . . . what rather terrible consequences 
it could have if this tax is allowed to extend for a longer period of time, if it's let to go for another 
month or two or three. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, I haven't discussed it with the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs, the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission. In the broader context of a gaming 
tax or a gambling tax, I have had some informal discussions with the Minister of Finance. And 
I'm sure that when the Minister of Finance estimates come up for consideration in the House, that 
will be a topic that will be directed to him because revenue and taxation does fall under his 
purview. That's, I think, answering the first part of your question, hon. member. 
 
The second part of your question: yes, of course I've given some consideration to the 
ramifications of a potential downturn in sales and the concomitant downturn in the amount of 
money, the reduced revenue that would be available to the three umbrella groups and to 
government as a result of the lottery tax. I'm not convinced yet -- and I'm not saying I never will 
be convinced -- but I'm not convinced yet the lottery tax is the only reason. There's no question 
that with the initial imposition of the tax there was an immediate downturn in the sales. I'd be 
very remiss if I said that I didn't believe it was connected to the lottery tax. I think there's an 
obvious connection there. 
 
I think, however, people will become accustomed to the tax. We've seen some recovery, 
according to the empirical evidence within the last five days, certainly. I think it is a worthy 
cause -- a dollar for a ticket and a dime towards hospitals. I really don't believe it's a ridiculous 
tax. 
 
Obviously, you know, we're going to disagree on this, Mr. Chairman, as to the benefits of the tax 
and the potential downsides to having placed this tax. I think it's the kind of tax that you have to 
allow to run for a two-to-three-month period to get the full impact of what really is happening 
with the tax. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I'm afraid of what the full impact could possibly do in this case, Mr. Minister, 
and I'm wondering about the advisability of running it that far, because this tax will not just 



affect the operations of the government, it will affect the operations, as you mentioned of . . . as 
we established earlier, of 1,185 different organizations in the province. And I'm wondering 
what's going to happen, Mr. Minister, when they look at . . . when you get the groups together 
sometime this fall, or they start looking a their projections and they find that they're down 20 per 
cent. What are you going to tell them at that stage, Mr. Minister? Are you going to tell them that 
you're going to . . . are you going to take it out of some place else and fund them at that stage? 
What are you going to tell these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Chairman, we're really dealing with a hypothetical situation here, so 
it's difficult to address a hypothetical situation which may or may not occur. Certainly there will 
be discussions later this fall; the hon. member is correct. Certainly I'm sure groups will raise the 
potential of a downturn in sales, and consequently diminished revenue for their coffers for their 
ongoing programs. They have had, within the last three, four years, significant increases in the 
amount of money that has been available to them. That's a discussion that will take place later 
this year. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Well I think the minister has been quite forthright so far about his approach to 
this. He's been honest in saying that there is a . . . admitting that there is a problem here. I think 
it's incumbent, Mr. Minister, that we do spend a bit of time projecting about what the 
possibilities are because I rather . . . I fear what my happen if the same thing happens over the 
next two months as happened prior, where the Minister of Finance imposed this thing without 
really thinking it through and all of the implications that it has. 
 
From that figure that we had, Mr. Minister, of a gross sales of 110 million, my understanding is 
that about an annual profit of approximately 20 million goes to the Sask Sport, and 40 per cent of 
that is profit, which is approximately . . . pardon me. Let me say this again . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I'm sorry? Let me state this again, because I want to come up with a different 
concept here. 
 
There was $110 million in revenue there, and if we're looking at a 20 per cent decrease, we're 
looking at a $20 million loss in revenue over an entire year approximately, if we estimate that. 
Now my understanding is that there's about a 40 per cent profit on that that is distributed, which 
would mean that these people would be in the vicinity of $8 million short. Would you confirm 
those figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I'm sorry if I missed the precise nature of the question, but the amount that 
would be available, the profit on the sales, I believe is about one-third -- it's 33 or 35 per cent. 
Also depends what figure you were including: it's the 20 million to the trust plus some other 
obligations and payment to non-profit participating community groups who used to be 
responsible for selling tickets, and when they were no longer involved and the system changed 
they still received an annual allowance. So when we put that all together I think it comes to about 
$36 million. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- The amount that goes to the trust to use for charities -- around 35 or $36 
million. 



 
An. Hon. Member: -- Twenty million dollars. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Twenty million dollars. Twenty million dollars. So the figure I'm trying to 
establish here, if we had a 20 per cent loss, a permanent 20 per cent loss of sales over the 
following year, then what would you predict would be the shortfall to the charities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- He's doing some rapid calculations, Mr. Chairman, and I stand to be 
corrected with my arithmetic. Given the scenario, again it's hypothetical, that the hon. member 
has outline, but given the scenario, the drop when you take the percentage of profit from the 20 
million decrease which be outlined would be the difference between 36 and 29 million, should be 
a 7 million drop, given that scenario, and you know we still don't know that that is going to 
happen, and we hope that it doesn't, frankly. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, we're looking at a possibility -- and of course and I think 
it's important in your department to be projecting which way this is going -- a possibility of a $7 
million drop. 
 
One of the things that I notice that your government has been trying to do is rationalize this 
whole thing by calling it a hospitals' tax. And at best you're looking at 108 million or $110 
million gross from your end of it. That means at best that the hospitals could get from that 10 per 
cent would be about $10 million. 
 
So what we're finding is the hospitals' gain is very close to a projected possible loss in this 
particular department. It points to a direction where a program which has taken years to build and 
is a model program across the country, which is sort of the epitome of promoting health styles 
and life-styles that we in government and people in your department have been trying, and people 
in Sask Sport have certainly been promoting, we see that it's tending to undercut this. This whole 
tax structure is tending to under cut it because it's undercutting the funding. And it took years to 
develop it, and here in a matter of a couple of months it's slowly eroding this. 
 
And I think we're into a situation of very close to what I would call a law of diminishing returns 
on it. We try to extract a little more tax money from here, and while we're doing it we're taking a 
little bit off where we can see and grasp it in our hands, and the Minister of Finance can probably 
walk over to the Department of Health and say, here's another $10 million I got, but look where I 
got it from. I got it from a program that was used to prevent the very thing that he's using the 
money to cure. 
 
I want to make the point, Mr. Minister, and ask you whether you and your department, and with 
the mandate of your department, wouldn't be able to use that kind of an argument when you go to 
the Department of Finance on this and get him to cut this ridiculous tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Well of course, Mr. Chairman, before the tax was announced we did a lot 
of thinking and we had looked at potential ramifications. We're still very hopeful that the initial 
downturn is precisely that, merely an initial downturn. We expected probably there would be a 



downturn in the first week, 10 days. We hope it recovers, and early indications are there has been 
some recovery. So the worst case scenario, that we're discussing round now, we hope does not 
come to pass. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I tell you, Mr. Minister, why I believe that there is not going to be a very fast 
recovery of this, if there is at all. And when I stand beside the kiosk or a vendor and you hear 
what some of the people are saying as they come up to buy these tickets, or why they're not 
buying them, and why they're only buying nine tickets where they used to buy 10, you'll hear 
remarks repeated over and over again, that they're sick of being taxed to death. And they're using 
this discretionary money as a way of giving your government a message -- giving your 
government a message that they just don't want to be taxed any more. 
 
And this is a very, sort of a personal way of people doing it. They're able to say, well that's the 
money that I'm not going to . . . They are using this as a way, Mr. Minister, of telling your 
government that they just don't want any more taxes because they've seen tax increase after tax 
increase. At home they see their property taxes increasing because of the different way that the 
government is now cost-sharing the property tax for municipal purposes and for school board 
purposes; they've seen increases in their licences, and all government fees. They certainly haven't 
seen a downturn in their income taxes. 
 
And this is one place where they can sit down, where an individual can sit down' they're not 
addicted to gambling; this is a fun thing for them to do; many of them even go to buy the tickets 
an go to bingos because they want to support the organizations, through your department and 
through Sask Sport, and they're saying, I've had enough; I've got to show that government that 
they can't tax us any more. I think that the scenario of thinking that this is going to be something 
that's going to pass is just not going to happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have, I think, time for another question with respect to this same topic, and that is 
with respect to the reserve fund that Sask Sport used to have. It's my understanding, Mr. 
Minister, that there used to be a reserve fund which was attempting to get one-year equivalent 
worth of funding for purposes perhaps like this, except maybe one that was more of a natural 
downturn rate than a government-inflicted downturn, but that you took this money and it was 
directed at leas tin some way to pay for Canada Games. And now that we're without that money, 
would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that there is no longer a reserve fund from which Sask Sport 
can draw to make up the shortfall for the cultural, sport, and charitable organizations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, there's some fairly wide-ranging comments took 
place in the last couple of minutes. It's difficult to respond to them all in minute detail, but I 
would like to run through some of the program that has been established in the last number of 
years. 
 
As the hon. member would know, Sask Trust exists as a parent body to three major groups, Sask 
Sport, Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations, and Saskatchewan Parks and 
Recreations Association. The money within that trust is divided respectively 50 per cent, 40 per 
cent, 10 per cent, respectively; that is, to each of those governing bodies. 



 
For example, Sask Sport would fund some 75 to 78 sport governing bodies, Saskatchewan 
Council of Cultural Organizations would fund some 27 bodies, and Sask Parks and Recreation 
Association have over 100 groups. In addition to those, there are a number of other groups who 
receive allowances for various things around the province. So in that regard, yes, this is a great 
avenue and a great mechanism for paying money out to those kinds of activities. 
 
I would point out, however, the lottery is owned by the Government of Saskatchewan. The 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation, of which we are a one-third member, comprises Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, and Alberta, so the three of us have the ownership of the lottery corporation. We 
choose in Saskatchewan to give the licence to Sask Sport Incorporated and allow them to operate 
the lottery on our behalf. In that regard, Mr. Chairman, what they are doing is spending money 
that actually could accrue to the government if we decided to run that lottery in any other fashion. 
We've chosen not to run the lottery ourselves. We think it's a much more efficient method to give 
the licence to Sask Sport Incorporated and let them run it on our behalf. 
 
And yes, there are some things that do accrue to us, such as money from which we paid our share 
for the Jeux Canada Games this summer, and a number of other activities that took place. Those 
are activities that either we would not ordinarily be doing or we would have to fund in some 
other manner, whether it be through the Consolidated Fund making an appropriation to my 
department, or whether we raise taxes in some other way to do it. But yes, it serves a great 
purpose. It's well administered, it's well run, and we hope it continues to run that way for a 
number of years to come. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 


