


















































April 14, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 14, 1989 
 

825 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Population Loss in March 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is directed to the senior minister on the front 
bench, who’s with us this Friday morning, and it has to do with 
his own department’s statistics from the Bureau of 
(Saskatchewan) Statistics, which have the latest figures out for 
the population loss in Saskatchewan for the period in March. 
And according to your figures, in March Saskatchewan suffered 
a net loss of 1,400 people — that’s 1,400 in March, 1,600 in 
January, 6,000 in February — for a grand total of about 9,000 
people in the first three months of this year. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: in the face of these 
startling numbers, why didn’t your government introduce a job 
creation plan in the recent budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has, as its main focus on job creation, the 
attempting to diversify the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, attempting to diversify the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that diversification comes in many ways — that is 
involved with government programs; that is involved with the 
private sector programs. 
 
Now for all this week what we have seen is the members 
opposite, as they have done for the last two years, attacking a 
major program in south-western Saskatchewan . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — South-east. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . south-eastern Saskatchewan. Not 
only, Mr. Speaker, to save the water, to save the water that 
otherwise would flow into the United States for the benefit of 
south-eastern Saskatchewan, but in so doing to create many, 
many jobs; many jobs, more than what he has referred to, Mr. 
Speaker. And they stand against that. Now they stand up and 
say, what are you doing to create jobs? I ask them: what are 
they doing, other than trying to destroy jobs in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Economic Trade and Development, which surely 
must be one of the weakest answers the minister, for whom I 
have a great deal of respect, has given. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re hanging your hat on the diversification 
policies of this government for job creation, then how in the 
world is it you can explain the fact that there are 36,000 people, 
4 per cent of the total population, who have left this province 
because of the diversification policies, so-called. What’s gone 
wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as we have indicated many 
times before in this Assembly, the province of Saskatchewan 
has gone through some very difficult times in the field of 
agriculture, and those difficult times have been a product, quite 
frankly, of two areas. Number one, that we haven’t had any rain 
for a number of years; and number two, that the prices of those 
commodities are down significantly. The statistics, if they wish 
to read them, show that there is problems in the drought-related 
areas of agriculture in the province, but on the other hand there 
is significant growth in the area of processing and 
manufacturing. 
 
And every time, Mr. Speaker, that we bring in a new 
announcement of a new project, the members opposite are 
against it. You go through Weyerhaeuser; Weyerhaeuser has 
created many, many new jobs in the area of Prince Albert. The 
members opposite are against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have expanded in North Battleford, in the Hunter’s and in 
the food processing. The member from North Battleford is 
against that project, Mr. Speaker. We have developed many 
other programs in diversification. Over 3,000 jobs, additional 
jobs, by privatization and public participation have been 
created, Mr. Speaker. The members are against that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government continues and is committed to the 
concept of diversifying the economy. That is the way we’re 
going to preserve jobs, and that is the way we’re going to build 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. And if I may say so, Mr. Speaker, this is proof 
positive of how the rhetoric doesn’t match the reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Minister, your rhetoric talks about 
privatization. Your rhetoric talks about diversification. Your 
rhetoric talks about everything and anything except the simple 
facts which are: that this year alone 9,000 people have left this 
province, 40 per cent of whom are basically between the ages of 
15 and 29, and that’s in the first three months of 1989 — 9,000. 
We’re heading for 36,000 people leaving this province if this 
record continues. That’s the record in the face of seven years of 
privatization, deregulation and PC-style diversification. How in 
the world can you explain that population loss? Don’t give us 
speeches, give us concrete programs to get Saskatchewan 
people working and living here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply ask the 
member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, to take some 
time and go out and attempt to understand what happens in rural 
Saskatchewan when the commodity prices are very low and 
there is no rain and there’s no production. What happens when 
that happens, Mr. Speaker, is that farmers do not have the 
product to take to  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

826 
 

market, and therefore there is various jobs associated with the 
agriculture industry which the member opposite, which the 
member opposite, in his own words, Mr. Speaker, has indicated 
that they do not have a policy to deal with and they don’t 
terribly understand rural Saskatchewan. That is demonstrated 
once again today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is diversifying the economy. In 
the city of Saskatoon, Intercontinental Packers, which is in his 
riding, Mr. Speaker, have expanded their operation, created 
several hundred new jobs. The member opposite stands against 
that. There is a new rendering plant being built in the city of 
Saskatoon. The hon. member is against that. There is new 
projects being built in Swift Current, being built in North 
Battleford, being built in Melfort, being built in Hudson Bay, 
being built in Prince Albert, being built in Meadow Lake, and 
the members stand against that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Payment to Law Firm for Out-of-court Settlement 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Justice, the same minister. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday in public accounts the Department of Energy and 
Mines was before the Public Accounts Committee and we were 
looking at the 1986-87 Public Accounts. 
 
I asked the question of the deputy minister as to an expenditure 
made to the law firm of Shirkey Ulmer Ottenbreit Shirkey & 
McIntyre in the amount of $234,666.67. The deputy minister 
responded, Mr. Minister, by saying that that money was paid to 
settle a court action out of court. Could the minister tell us 
today, since his department — and he was the minister at that 
time — represented the Department of Energy and Mines, could 
you tell us what the settlement was for and who was the 
plaintiff in that action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not familiar 
with those types of details. That’s a normal question that would 
be asked in estimates, or a question that’s asked in public 
accounts. This is question period, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
undertake to take notice of the hon. member’s question and 
bring an answer back. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, how many out-of-court actions 
have been settled in the magnitude of a quarter of a million 
dollars against this government during an election year that you 
have no knowledge of, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me how 
many out-of-court actions in the magnitude of a quarter million 
dollars during an election year of public accounts that you can’t 
remember? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the most recent 
negotiations that I understand where there was an out-of-court 
settlement is with regards to the Squaw Rapids dam that has 
been going on for about 10 years, that the hon. members were 
in government. And we, in  

fact, settled that agreement, Mr. Speaker, and I think we’re 
quite proud of settling that agreement. 
 
That was a project that was built by the former NDP 
government. It flooded a number of acres of land in northern 
Saskatchewan; it robbed many of the native people of their 
livelihood, Mr. Speaker. There was never any compensation 
paid by the hon. members when they were in government. We 
sat down and negotiated that, and we should not apologize for 
anybody for negotiating that matter out of court. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister. 
This particular settlement is a little different. It’s secret. The 
deputy minister responded that it was part of the out-of-court 
settlement, that he was not allowed or did not have the authority 
to release any information. We assume, Mr. Minister, that there 
must have been a statement of claim filed with a court in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We had a search done at the Regina 
court-house yesterday. There is no statement of claim. Do you 
not recall, Mr. Minister, an out-of-court settlement with no 
statement of claim from a law firm that usually represents the 
government, instead they represent a plantiff; your department, 
sir, represents the department; you hand over a cheque for a 
quarter million dollars and you can’t remember? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I simply indicate that 
that’s a type of an information that ministers are not expected to 
have at their fingertips when they come to question period. I 
indicated to the hon. member I’ll undertake to investigate this 
thing, but what I can say, Mr. Speaker, is this. When the 
member opposite brings those allegations before this House in 
the normal way, they’re almost always, Mr. Speaker, proved to 
be wrong once one looks into the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No allegation — 
fact, Mr. Minister. Question asked in Public Accounts 
Committee yesterday morning by myself, a member of the 
Public Accounts Committee; deputy minister of Energy and 
Mines says, Mr. Minister, and I quote that it was for: 
 

 Yes, that money was paid to settle a court action out of court. 
 

Mr. Minister, as far as we can determine, that is fact; it comes 
from a deputy minister of the Crown, before testimony in 
committee. He has said that that money was paid. A search of 
the court-house has no statement of claim filed. The allegations 
you make against this side of the House are the only ones that 
are false, Mr. Minister. This is fact. We want to know why your 
government paid a quarter million dollars in an election year to 
someone, we don’t know for what or to whom, and I don’t 
believe, Mr. Minister, that you can’t remember that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

827 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I simply indicated to the 
hon. member that I would undertake to look into the file and 
bring the information back. If the hon. member persists, after 
having asked that question and I giving that answer, asks five 
more times the same question, I don’t understand the process in 
here. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would like to remind 
the hon. member that after the minister does take notice, further 
supplementaries are actually out of order and, if asked, they 
provoke debate. So the process is that you can certainly ask for 
further information, but not further supplementaries. 
 

Press Releases by Joytec 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for Science and Technology, and it 
concerns the lack of response to a question from the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland the other day, so I’ll ask it again. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this House when your government 
became aware of the fact that Technigen, Joytec’s parent 
company was releasing untruthful press releases about that 
company’s activities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I find it interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that the opposition is still interested in a company that 
they were successful in chasing out of this province. With 
regard to Technigen . . . it’s quite obvious they’re not interested 
in the response. 
 
The only company that I have been dealing with, Mr. Speaker, 
is Joytec, and as far as Joytec is concerned, that was a company 
that was formed back in 1983. Technigen, I believe, took over 
the company in late 1986. 
 
Now it’s beyond me why they are so interested in what’s 
happening with Technigen at this particular point in time. As far 
as the involvement of the company is concerned, it was Joytec 
Equities that were involved in getting the money to get this 
company going, the venture capital corporation. It was Joytec 
that was involved in getting a grant from the Department of 
Science and Technology back in ’85-86. So with regard to 
what’s happening now with the BC securities, I don’t see what 
impact that that has or what reference that has really as far as 
Joytec is concerned. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, I can believe that you don’t understand what that has 
to do with Joytec. I can also . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I can also, Mr. Minister, believe why the 
people of this province have $1.1 million in jeopardy. 
 
My question is this, Mr. Minister: last year Joytec lost $3.5 
million, never sold one golf simulator, and I want you to tell 
this House where Joytec is going to get the $1.1. million to 
repay the people of Saskatchewan for the  

money that you blew. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, if the 
member opposite will just be patient, I’m sure that he’s going to 
see, with the amount of work that is now being done in Japan 
with regard to the golf simulators, that there will be moneys that 
are going to be flowing into this company. Unfortunately, 
they’re not going to be flowing into Saskatchewan, they’re 
going to be flowing into British Columbia. 
 
But as far as the concern that he’s indicating this morning with 
the $1.1 million, the company full well understands that with 
the agreement that they have, that there has to be negotiation 
carried on with the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, that they 
are liable for paying back the money that was given as a tax 
credit back in 1986. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, your display of 
incompetence and lack of caring for the people’s money, the 
people of this province’s money, is absolutely beyond belief. 
My question is this: Mr. Minister, is there is anything that your 
government is doing to ensure that the people who invested in 
this venture capital corporation, that those investments are 
going to be protected from unscrupulous operators and stock 
manipulators and from the incompetence that your government 
is displaying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the member 
opposite to be talking about incompetence that’s been displayed 
by this government, is just . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, as far as the member 
opposite indicating . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the hon. member 
from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden knows that exhibits are not allowed, 
and using a newspaper . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, every precaution has 
been taken with regard to investors that have invested in Joytec. 
As far as the venture capital corp . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. We’re having a great 
deal of difficulty hearing the minister and I’m sure we all want 
to hear his answer, so let’s give him that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
just like to assure the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 
Joytec is in full compliance with regard to the regulations that 
are laid down in so far as the investments that Saskatchewan 
shareholders put into this company, and every move has been 
taken to ensure that  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

828 
 

these people are going to be protected. 
 
I would add also, Mr. Speaker, that we must keep in mind that 
Joytec and Technigen have invested some 6 to $8 million in this 
project, most of which was spent in the province of 
Saskatchewan creating jobs here and taxes and revenues for the 
city of Saskatoon and for the province. And I think it is 
unfortunate that because of adverse publicity, part of which was 
created by the members opposite, that this company has now 
moved out of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before the Minister of Finance graced this Chamber with his 
charm and presence, Mr. Minister, the Minster of Economic 
Development and Trade said that Saskatchewan was 
experiencing some difficult economic times. Growing numbers 
of Saskatchewan people are concluding that those difficult 
times have been made worse by Conservative economic 
policies, foremost of which is the increasing rise in interest 
rates. 
 
The minister will be aware that the interest rates went up 10 
points again yesterday — yes, 10 points. One-tenth of a 
percentage point, 10 points — same thing. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The member from 
Regina Centre is having great difficulty in being heard. He’s 
having great difficulty being heard due to constant 
interruptions. I would ask the members to allow him the 
courtesy of putting his question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Just a slight correction, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
having great difficulty in dealing with the former minister of 
Finance, but then he had great difficulty as minister of Finance, 
so perhaps we’re even. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Finance minister, 10 days ago your 
government introduced a motion on interest rates which would 
have sent a strong message to Ottawa that Saskatchewan is 
hurting under those interest rate policies. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
been playing hide-and-go-seek with it ever since. My question 
is: when are you going to climb out of Michael Wilson’s back 
pocket and move that interest rate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 
member, for the first time, did not ask a question of an article in 
the Leader-Post as the basis for question period. I was 
expecting the member . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I once more remind the hon. 
member that exhibits are not allowed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Every other day they use the Leader-Post 
as the basis for question period, and noticeably not today, Mr. 
Speaker. Let me indicate to the hon. members opposite that it 
was not 10 points interest  

increase. Mr. Speaker, there’s a big difference between 10 
points and 10 basis points. I could give a long dissertation on 
the difference if the hon. member wants it. It would probably be 
for the best interest. 
 
Let me advise the hon. member, as we have done in the past, 
that this government has taken a strong position against the 
interest rate policy of the Bank of Canada. We do not think it 
fair. We do not think it appropriate in the circumstances in that 
the stated reasons for the policy is the fear of inflation. Inflation 
is a fact of life in only one part of Canada. It is harmful to our 
farmers; it is harmful to the people of this province. 
 
But let me tell the hon. member, because in his question he 
said: what are you doing about it. Let me tell him what we’re 
doing about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe we’ll move to the next 
question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if it isn’t appropriate and it 
isn’t fair, then why don’t you move the motion which you 
yourself drafted and which was patterned after one we put 
forward? Why don’t you move the motion if it isn’t fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me indicate to the hon. member that it 
is only the people of the province of Saskatchewan that have 
interest rate protection for the average home owner, Mr. 
Speaker. It is under this government, this Premier, that we have 
helped Saskatchewan people keep their homes in the light of 
high interest rates with, Mr. Speaker, mortgage interest 
protection — something opposed by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have subsidized loans for our students so that they can go to 
university. Mr. Speaker, we have subsidized loans for our 
farmers. We have production loan programs at a subsidized 
interest rate, Mr. Speaker. We have programs for interest rate 
protection for public housing projects. Mr. Speaker, I could go 
on and on and on — loans to municipalities subsidized, Mr. 
Speaker. We have taken concrete action to protect the people of 
this province against high interest rates, something not only that 
you did not do when you had the chance, but secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, that no other government in Canada has taken the 
interest rate protection that this government has. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if your protection were that 
all-encompassing, then I suppose the motion which you move 
would not have been necessary. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’ll admit that your lack of courage, 
your vacillation on this motion is in fact doing more harm than 
good. It’s signalling to Ottawa that they can expect no serious 
opposition from this government on the question of interest 
rates. Will you admit that your failure to pursue that motion, as 
you’ve said you’ll do  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

829 
 

twice, is sending the wrong signals to Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I ask the hon. member how sitting on their 
hands and doing nothing when interest rates were 21 per cent 
sent any type of signal, except it sent a strong signal to the 
people of this province. 
 
Let me indicate to the hon. member that strong signals, strong 
messages have been sent by this government to the national 
government and to the Bank of Canada. But not only strong 
signals, Mr. Speaker; we’ve taken strong action, Mr. Speaker, 
that no other government in Canada has taken in many cases. 
No other government in the world has taken the action that this 
provincial government has done to protect the people of this 
province against high interest rates, Mr. Speaker. You get 
ample opportunity to debate the issue. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill respecting the Reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 10:31 a.m. until 10:33 a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 

Devine Pickering 
Muller Toth 
Duncan Johnson 
McLeod McLaren 
Andrew Hopfner 
Lane Petersen 
Taylor Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. We’re having 
difficulty hearing the vote. There will be ample opportunity for 
debate, and I just ask hon. members to be patient. Order. Order. 
 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 
 

Nays — 21 
 

Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Anguish 
Rolfes Goulet 
Shillington Hagel 
 

 
Lingenfelter Pringle 
Koskie Lyons 
Thompson Calvert 
Brockelbank Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky  
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to indulge 
the House today by introducing some students from Wymark, 
Saskatchewan. They’re seated in your gallery; there’s 21 
students. They’re grade eight students and they’re being 
chaperoned today by their principal, Mr. Knelsen, Betty Funk, 
and Wanda Olfert, and Shirley Friesen is the bus driver. I want 
to welcome them here and I’ll be talking to them later on. 
 
I just want the Assembly to know that these young fellows and 
girls have won the south-west basketball, and they did it in 
competition against my son who they’re going to have a little 
trouble with next year, I assure them. And we’re going to be 
visiting about that later on, and I thank you for coming and I 
hope you have a good time here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 
and with leave of the Assembly, I would move, seconded by the 
member from Meadow Lake: 
 

That an order for second reading of Bill No. 10, An Act to 
amend the Public Trustee Act, be discharged, and the Bill 
be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 
Assembly, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Meadow Lake: 
 

That an order for second reading of Bill No. 14, An Act 
respecting Consequential Amendments to certain Acts, be 
discharged, and the Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded 
by the member from Meadow Lake: 
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

830 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 15, An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act, be discharged, and the Bill 
be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would move second reading today of an amendment to The 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, 1989. 
 
Under the The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, a board is 
established to grant compensation to innocent victims of crime. 
The compensation is paid to persons who are otherwise unable 
to obtain compensation for their injuries, or the death of a 
family member which results from the commission of a crime. 
The amendment now proposed will improve the board’s ability 
to fulfil these obligations. The board is given authority to make 
interim payments to applicants who are in real financial need 
where it is likely that the board will make an order for 
compensation to them. 
 
The board’s ability to recover the compensation from the person 
responsible for the injury or the death is improved. The Act is 
clarified to provide that costs may be reimbursed only to 
applicants who have been awarded compensation. The board is 
given discretion to refuse to grant compensation to an applicant 
who refuses to co-operate with the police in solving the crime 
that caused his injury or the death of a family member. 
 
To improve the administrative efficiency of the operation of the 
Act, two changes are being proposed. The list of offences which 
compensation may be paid is moved from the Act to the 
regulations. The Lieutenant Governor in Council is given 
authority to make regulations respecting the calculation of 
awards and determining the ability for . . . or eligibility for 
compensation. 
 
I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments to The 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act should be read in 
conjunction with a later Act that I will introduce and give 
second reading to today, and that is victims of crime, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is part of the strategy of government, to deal more 
effectively with those unfortunate people who have suffered as 
a result of criminal activity. They are innocent. They are the 
victims of that activity, and this is a further enhancement that 
society moves through the legal system in order to provide 
compensation to those innocent victims. Too often they are the 
unsung people — the people that you don’t hear about or don’t 
see — and yet they are, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the most 
unfortunate  

people of all involved in crime. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a 
few brief comments in respect to the Bill. I think in general, the 
amendments that are being proposed, I don’t think we have any 
problem with. We are wanting to check out in more detail in 
respect to taking of the crimes . . . or the schedule of crimes that 
compensation is paid for, which is under the Bill at the present 
time, and putting them into regulations. 
 
We want to assure ourselves that that will not detract from the 
crimes that are covered, and we’re checking that out to see if 
there’s satisfaction with that being transferred to the 
regulations, and accordingly I move that we adjourn debate at 
this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting Regulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With this 
second reading, I propose to make some changes to The 
Regulations Act, 1989. 
 
This new Act will replace the existing Regulations Act, 
establishes a new test to determine what is a regulation. 
Presently it is necessary to make an interpretation as to whether 
a particular statutory provision is legislative in nature before 
knowing whether the power in that provision must be exercised 
by a regulation or a whether an order in council, minister’s 
order, or simple policy guide-line are required. 
 
In the proposed legislation, if the authorizing Act provides that 
the power must be exercised by regulation, then the regulation 
will be required. The use of the word “regulation” will be the 
sole determining factor, and the decision as to whether a 
regulation is necessary will be made by the legislature at the 
time of the passage of the authorizing Act, rather than by a 
subsequent interpretation. This removes a good deal of 
confusion regarding the issue of what is or what is not a 
regulation. 
 
As is in the existing Act, the new Act will provide for the filing 
of regulations with the Registrar of Regulations, the publication 
in the Saskatchewan Gazette, and other procedural matters 
relating to regulations. Provisions respecting referrals of 
regulations to the committee of the Legislative Assembly and 
the power of the Assembly to repeal and make changes to 
regulations remain intact. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, to put that into a different, perhaps, tone, what we 
are attempting to do with this Bill is to better define what is a 
regulation, so it becomes the function of the legislature to 
define that, rather than having to refer to the court for the court 
to interpret what in fact a regulation is. We hope that this will 
allow for a better interpretation of this Act and avoid a fair 
amount of confusion. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

831 
 

respecting Regulations. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. There are a 
number of substantive changes here. I want to have the 
opportunity to review the remarks of the minister, and also I 
want to get the feedback in respect to the effect of the changes 
that are being contemplated, and accordingly I want to move to 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 13 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 
Regulations Act, 1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is legislation 
consequential to the Act I just moved, and as a result of the 
replacement of existing statutes respecting regulations with The 
Regulations Act, 1989, certain amendments are required to 
several other Acts. These amendments will clarify in each of 
these Acts whether a power is or is not to be exercised by 
regulation. 
 
And in so doing, I think, Mr. Speaker, from the comments of 
the member from Quill Lakes, which is the concern he raised in 
his reference to the previous Act that we spoke of, this is an 
attempt to clarify through this consequential amendment as to 
what particular statutes we would see this applying to. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move An Act respecting 
Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Regulations Act, 1989. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since Bill No. 14 is 
consequential to Bill No. 13, and having asked to adjourn No. 
13, I therefore ask to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to rise to 
speak to second reading on the amendments to The Clean Air 
Act. The Clean Air Amendment Act, 1989, which we are 
considering today, is required to facilitate the preparation of 
regulations in the proclamation of The Clean Air Act passed a 
year ago. 
 
When drafting the clean air regulations, a problem was 
identified with clause 24(2)(e) of The Clean Air Act. The 
existing clause required industrial sources to be classified first 
before they could be regulated. This is not the intent. The new 
clause requires individual industrial sources to be regulated and 
also, if necessary, to regulate the classes of sources. In addition, 
minor changes to section 5 and 18(1)(a) of the Act were 
identified. These changes are of a housekeeping nature to 
clarify the authority provided by the Act. 
 
The Clean Air Act represents a substantial improvement in 
environmental legislation in this province. It is a tough but fair 
piece of legislation which will not only bring Saskatchewan into 
line with other Canadian legislation, but it will also help to 
protect and enhance the quality of  

life for residents of this province. 
 
This Act is welcomed by the general public and those with an 
interest in the quality of our environment. It will also be 
favourably received by industry. The Clean Air Act will ensure, 
with minor exceptions, that air pollution emissions from all 
industrial sources, incinerators, and fuel-burning equipment will 
be subject to an approval issued by the department. 
 
The existing Act only applies to new sources constructed after 
January of 1976, and this has led to an unacceptable double 
standard. At present, new industries and facilities are required 
to obtain an approval and to control air pollution emissions 
while older operations are exempted. By requiring every major 
facility to obtain an approval, this Act will ensure that all 
operations are treated equally and fairly. 
 
The Clean Air Amendment Act, which we are considering here 
today, is a high priority for this Legislative Assembly in order 
to finalize the clean air regulations and enable the speedy 
proclamation of this progressive environmental legislation. I 
invite the support of all members for this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The Clean 
Air Amendment Act, 1989. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Given 
this government’s spotted record on the environment, this 
caucus, the opposition wants to take every opportunity to 
examine this legislation. 
 
It’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government uses all the 
right phrases but does all the wrong things when it comes to 
clean air and the environment. The language the minister has 
used in his comments is unobjectionable. What this government 
has done, however, over the last two months, is highly 
objectionable and it’s got this government into difficulty. 
 
The member from Kindersley looks so surprised. Your record 
on the environment hasn’t exactly been your finest hour this 
week, has it? If the member from Kindersley and the other 
members of the cabinet had actually believed in the legislation 
and the law of this land with respect to environment, they 
wouldn’t be in the difficulty that they’re in with respect to the 
Rafferty dam. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker’s going to tell me this may be a little outside 
the parameters of The Clean Air Act, and that may in fact be. 
But that is by way of background . . . I say that by way of 
background so that the members of this Assembly will 
understand that when this government talks about the 
environment we want to see what they’re doing, and we want to 
take a great deal of care in examining what they’re doing. 
 
For those reasons, we’ll want to examine the legislation in the 
light of the minister’s comment, and I beg leave to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Please move the adjournment of the debate. 
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

832 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I did. 
 
The Speaker: — Don’t beg leave, just move the adjournment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m sorry. I move the adjournment of the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Victims of Crime Act. 
 
The way in which society, and more particularly the justice 
system, has historically treated victims has been recognized, I 
think in all circles, as being inadequate. Progress has been made 
through restitution programs and through criminal injuries 
compensation, but more progress needs to be made. 
 
The federal government has recently passed legislation which, 
once proclaimed, will substantially enhance the rights of 
victims. It will enable victims to seek restitution in many, many 
more cases. It provides for the establishment of victims impact 
statement program. Victims counselling and other services are 
contemplated. 
 
The federal legislation also authorizes a federal victims 
surcharge on criminal offenders. Moneys collected through this 
surcharge will be received by the province for victims 
programming. 
 
The legislation before this Assembly today establishes a fund 
for victims programming. This fund will receive money from 
two sources — a federal surcharge and a new provincial victims 
surcharge on fines collected under provincial legislation. This 
legislation authorizes that provincial surcharge. 
 
The fund will be used for a wide variety of victims programs. 
They include promotion and delivery of services and benefits to 
victims; research into victims services and needs; and 
information services and crime prevention. Initially we will use 
the fund to expand our restitution program. This will ensure that 
the victim’s claim for compensation will be placed before the 
court in every appropriate case. 
 
We are also considering the early establishment of a victims 
impact statement program. These programs are intended to 
ensure that the court understands the effect of a crime on the 
victim, enable the victim to participate in the criminal process. 
 
These initiatives are consistent with the principles adopted by 
the Canadian attorneys general. These include, one, victims 
should be treated with courtesy and compassion, and with 
respect for their dignity and privacy. Two, victims should suffer 
the minimum of necessary inconvenience from their 
involvement in the criminal justice system. Three, the views 
and concerns of victims should be taken into account, and 
appropriate assistance and information should be provided to 
them  

through the criminal process where appropriate, and consistent 
with criminal law and procedure. Four, whenever reasonably 
possible, victims should receive, through formal or informal 
procedures, prompt and fair redress for the harm that they have 
suffered. 
 
We believe this is an important recognition of the rights of 
individuals who have paid a personal price as a victim of the 
crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is very important progressive 
legislation where society does in fact recognize that in every 
crime there is also very often a victim, and that victim for too 
long now has not received his or her proper attention through 
the criminal process. 
 
With this, I believe we will move forward towards the 
beginning of redressing that concern. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act 
dealing with Victims of Crime Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to make a couple of comments on this, and it will be fairly brief. 
With respect to the thrust of the legislation itself, this provides a 
significant — at least would appear to provide — a significant 
extension of the crimes compensation Act passed many years 
ago under the Thatcher administration, actually in the late ’60s, 
and which has received really no changes since then. 
 
On the surface this would appear to provide a useful extension 
of the benefits of that program and I take no objection to the 
program that the minister’s outlined, and may well wind up 
voting for it after we have a look at it. We’ll have to see. 
 
I do object though to the method of financing. I think it is 
inappropriate to be earmarking certain funds for certain 
purposes. It seems to me to be a much more rational purpose to 
decide what the public needs are and then to put all the money 
into a common pot and to dole out enough money to fund them. 
The problem with this kind of a scheme is that some of these 
needs are underfunded and some are overfunded. This is, if I 
may say so with every affection to our good neighbours to the 
south, this is the American system of financing a government. 
Take a fund of money, earmark it for a certain purpose, and 
often the needs of society get badly out of whack. 
 
So I think the method of financing this is unfortunate. On the 
surface, however, I see nothing wrong with the program itself. 
We will want to examine the Bill in the light of the minister’s 
comments and I, therefore, move the adjournment of this 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1100) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

833 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to address a 
few comments on this Bill and on the general subject of 
privatization. This is one of these watershed issues which 
affects or society from time to time and it is one of those issues, 
too, which mark a clear line of demarcation between the 
government and the opposition. The members opposite are on a 
campaign to privatize everything in sight. It has become 
something of a holy war, holy crusade, with them. 
 
In its naivety and in its pure, unbridled destructiveness — I tend 
to remember the children’s crusade, actually, when one talks 
about a crusade — this appears to be the children’s crusade. 
 
This government is . . . I may say, Mr. Speaker, by way of 
general background, there is nothing innately wrong with the 
notion that some government assets should be disposed of. As 
government grows and takes on new functions, old functions 
may be completed. There’s nothing therefore innately wrong 
with government disposing of some assets and picking up some 
new ones. However, this government is disposing of assets 
which we need, which are going to require . . . and which have 
made money. 
 
I want to take a couple of examples, and I’ll take the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, since that happens to be in the 
public eye at the moment. We, for policy reasons, in the 
mid-1970s the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the 
potash companies in Saskatchewan — I’m sorry, I meant the 
private potash companies in Saskatchewan — said in 1975, 
we’re not paying the taxes, and just dared us to make them. As 
a policy reason, therefore, and not with any ideological need to 
own a major portion of the potash industry, we said, we need a 
window on the industry, and we took over some 40 per cent of 
the industry. 
 
Partially through good management — and here I credit the 
former member from Elphinstone, Mr. Blakeney — partially 
through his good management, partially through good luck, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made a lot of money over 
the years. The year we were . . . the last year we were in office, 
$120 million was paid into the Consolidated Fund. That funded 
hospitals, roads and all manner of government services. That’s 
true of most of the Crown corporations which have been 
privatized. Earlier this government privatized the Saskatchewan 
. . . Saskoil. Measured in terms of its return on the investment 
we put into it, which was not very much, that was the most 
profitable Crown corporation we had. And one sees this pattern 
emerging. One sees the government selling off the profitable 
Crown corporations — and the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan has been a profitable Crown corporation, as was 
Saskoil, as was Sask Minerals — has privatized these Crown 
corporations and is retaining those corporations which aren’t so 
profitable. 
 
And one of the things that I find most objectionable about this, 
is that in this process of privatizing Crown corporations, the 
taxpayer’s being lost sight of. 
 
Let us look at what you’re doing with the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Completely  

unnecessarily, totally unnecessarily, you took . . . this 
government took over the debt of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. There’s no need for that. Nothing about the 
balance sheet suggested that that corporation was in imminent 
need of that sort of money. It was done, a year and a half ago, a 
couple of years ago, to make the corporation saleable . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, it was a prelude to 
today. 
 
Now you’re going to sell the corporation for a great deal less 
than it was worth. The gentleman from Georgia’s name escapes 
me, I think it’s Mr. Douglas, has said that, the person you hired 
has said that you’re going to sell the corporation for a great deal 
less than it’s worth and you’re not selling the debt with it. 
You’re retaining the debt. You’re giving those shares away at a 
lot less than they’re worth. And what we see here is the height 
of irresponsibility. 
 
You people . . . I must say, your vision of the future has never 
been clouded by a sense of responsibility to the taxpayer. You 
certainly have not allowed yourself to be distracted in this by 
any thought for the taxpayer. Because it’s the taxpayer that’s 
going to have to pick up the debt that you people have, by this 
mechanism, elected to retain. The same disregard for the 
taxpayer is seen in SaskEnergy for a variety of reasons over the 
years. SaskEnergy has made money. The electrical system at 
best has broken even. It doesn’t take a great deal of imagination 
to know which half of the company you’re selling; you’re 
selling the one that makes money, and in doing so you are 
short-changing particularly the rural people. It is urban people, 
by and large, who utilize and make use of natural gas. The 
distribution system is so costly that it is a slow and difficult 
process taking it out to farms. 
 
Rural people who live on farms are great users of electrical 
energy. When you sell off the gas system, it’s the rural people 
in this province whom you’re short-changing. And I say to 
members opposite, if that fact hasn’t dawned on you now, it’s 
going to be when you call the next election. The privatization of 
SaskPower is going to be a very, very negative issue. 
 
It is also totally irrational. The philosophy which lays behind 
privatization is that competition breeds efficiency; competition 
breeds a competitiveness and a lower cost. But what on earth, I 
ask, is the sense in privatizing a monopoly? What on earth is the 
sense in turning a public monopoly into a private monopoly? 
You then simply have a corporation which is even less sensitive 
to public needs and even less amenable to the public will. 
 
So you people are bent on privatization. You’re doing so with 
no regard for the taxpayer. The taxpayer is being short-changed 
in this process. It is the height of irresponsibility to be selling 
companies for less than what they’re worth, particularly where 
there is debt remaining that the taxpayer is going to have to pay 
off. It is just, as I say, the height of irresponsibility to be doing 
what you’re doing. 
 
At the very most, the assets ought to be sold for what they’re 
worth. The very least the taxpayers deserve, Mr.  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

834 
 

Speaker, is fair value for the assets. That’s the very least they 
deserve. 
 
It is a cheap, contemptible trick to sell assets for less than what 
they’re worth so that those who buy them will achieve 
immediate profit and will be pleased with their investment. That 
is a cheap and contemptible trick, cheap and contemptible 
because it’s transparent. It is stated by the gurus of privatization 
as something that should be done. 
 
It’s contemptible because you’re short-changing the vast 
majority of Saskatchewan people who never buy equities. The 
vast majority of Saskatchewan people invest in interest-bearing 
securities and wouldn’t think of buying an equity. By doing 
what you’re doing, you may be delighting those who invest in 
them, but you’re really short-changing the public of 
Saskatchewan because they’re left with the debt, and the assets 
have been sold for less than what they’re worth. 
 
In addition to that, you are short-changing the taxpayer because, 
in some cases, the service which is going to be provided to the 
taxpayers cannot possibly be as good. And I want to raise in this 
context, Mr. Speaker, I want to raise the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance office. 
 
It was brought into this province . . . Well I see the member 
from Thunder Creek finding these comments objectionable. I 
say to the member from Thunder Creek that the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance office was brought into being to provide 
adequate insurance coverage through the length and breadth of 
this province. The insurance . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — In the forties. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that’s right, in the 1940s. And, Mr. 
Speaker, let us look at what the province was in the 1940s. City 
of Regina had around 30,000 people; Saskatoon was much 
smaller. There was a much larger population in rural areas in 
the 1940s. In order to provide cheap economical insurance, you 
have to adjust the claims. Selling insurance is not like selling 
combines or tractors. When those items move off the lot into 
the farmyard, it doesn’t matter a whole lot to the dealer whether 
he sells it in Estevan or five miles out of Regina, five miles 
from his lot. The profit is approximately the same. 
 
That is not true of insurance. When you sell the policy, you’ve 
got to service it. That means you’ve got to have people 
relatively close by. This means that Saskatchewan, with a 
relatively sparse population, is an expensive jurisdiction in 
which to sell insurance. 
 
The theory behind SGI when it was set up was that the same 
kind of insurance coverage, at the same cost, would be available 
in Regina and in Coronach or Big Beaver. When you . . . and 
that, by and large, has been maintained. SGI, by and large, has 
made money in the cities, and the rural areas have been much 
more expensive to service because a large part of selling 
insurance is servicing the claims when they finally come. 
 
When this government sells SGI, once again you’re not  

short-changing the people that live in my riding. The people 
who live in my riding, downtown Regina, have always had a 
choice available to them. They can buy SGI or they can buy 
The Co-operators or they can buy Royal Trust or they can buy 
Wawanesa, and the list goes on and on and on. But that’s not 
true of the people who live in Big Beaver or even, for that 
matter, some of the communities in a place like Shellbrook. All 
of those companies are not available. The industry is not 
competitive and it’s a lot more expensive. 
 
But when you sell what is virtually a public utility, what you’re 
doing once again, you are short-changing the rural people of 
this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
from Meadow Lake says in caustic terms, you’re defending the 
rural people. I say to the member from Meadow Lake, you’d 
better start thinking about the rural people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We have been. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well your actions don’t show it. The 
member from Meadow Lake, in this ongoing dialogue which is 
contributing so much to the debate, the member from Meadow 
Lake says they have been thinking about it. They may have 
been thinking about it, but their actions don’t suggest that. Their 
actions suggest that they have completely forgotten the 
make-up of this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if 
the members opposite want to call an election on this, I’ll tell 
you what, we’re ready. Are you — are you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s one challenge you won’t take up, 
I’m quite certain of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all of these reasons I will be voting against this 
Bill when it comes up for a vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
this debate today. I want to start by simply starting my speech 
with the premise that we are in Saskatchewan and not New 
York. Things that work in the major trading centres in the 
United States do not always work well on the farm in 
Saskatchewan, don’t always work well in the town of Waldeck, 
don’t always work well in my home town of Beechy where I 
was brought up. 
 
Saskatchewan has a long and proud history, Mr. Speaker, of 
working together, of co-operating, neighbour with neighbour, 
friend with friend. When something needs to be done, we all 
chip in and we make whatever it is that needs to be done 
happen. Community halls, community recreation facilities, 
service clubs, all rely on that special Saskatchewan 
co-operation, on that special Saskatchewan knowledge, that 
understanding that we’re in it together and we have to always 
work together. And that’s just simply the Saskatchewan way, 
and we’re quite proud of it. 
 
What this privatization Bill is all about is destroying the  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

835 
 

Saskatchewan initiative, the Saskatchewan way. It is all about 
having Saskatchewan Crown corporations sold primarily to 
out-of-province corporations. A good example is Kam-Kotia, 
which took over our sodium sulphate mine in Chaplin and the 
other one in Fox Valley, and as part of that deal I understand 
there was the peat moss operation in Carrot River. 
 
Crown corporations previously all had their head offices here in 
Saskatchewan. Now we have — I realize I can’t show it, but I 
can certainly look inside of the Kam-Kotia Mine’s annual report 
for 1988 which previously would have been the Sask Minerals 
annual report, and what do I see but the smiling faces of four 
people, I believe all of them from Toronto, certainly none of 
them recognizable from previous annual reports where there 
were Saskatchewan people in it. 
 
Not only now does that mean that the profits from Sask 
Minerals are flowing out of Saskatchewan — in this case to 
Kam-Kotia — but it also means that for the six people in 
Chaplin alone that have lost their jobs, it’s pretty devastating 
because you can’t just go any place in Chaplin and expect to 
find a job, expect to find meaningful employment. So for those 
six people and their families, the sale of Sask Minerals to 
Kam-Kotia of Ontario has been devastating. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s really what this debate is really all 
about. It’s, do we choose to stand up for Saskatchewan workers; 
do we choose to stand up for Saskatchewan profits, profits that 
can be used to pay for hospitals and education and various 
health services; can be used for building highways; can be used 
to fund social services. And indeed because of the profits that 
come from our Crown corporations, it reduces or eliminates the 
need to increase personal income tax. 
 
Because the Minister of Finance doesn’t give a hoot whether he 
gets the money from me as an individual citizen or whether he 
gets it from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, or from 
Sask Minerals, or from SaskTel, or from SaskPower, or from 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). It 
matters not. The fact is he’ll spend that dollar, and indeed he’s 
shown he will spend that dollar several times over and borrow 
very heavily on our future. 
 
But the point I’m making here is the Minister of Finance 
doesn’t care where the dollar comes from in the budget. The 
fact is he needs the money to sustain our provincial economy 
and sustain the things that the provincial government is 
expected to do for us all. 
 
It is interesting, while I’m talking about the Minister of 
Finance, in his budget he was explaining, well yes, we are very 
heavily taxed. Yes indeed, Saskatchewan taxes have not 
decreased 10 per cent as they promised before they were 
elected. Indeed they’ve gone up well in excess of 10 per cent, 
but he said, Saskatchewan people are still better off because of 
three things. And you’ll find that in the Leader-Post if you care 
to look at it. Not today’s, but the Leader-Post of a day after the 
budget. 
 
The three arguments the Minister of Finance used why 
Saskatchewan people are indeed better off than people in  

many other provinces are: one, we have lower home heating 
rates. Lower home heating rates. Two, we have amongst the 
lowest insurance rates in Canada, and the third was the 
telephone rates. The third reason was the telephone rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just listed three Crown corporations that 
they’re going to sell. The Minister of Finance says we’re better 
off in Saskatchewan because SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) provides cheap insurance, low-cost insurance, both 
on automobiles of all kinds and on homes and businesses, that 
sort of thing. 
 
Now we see grandiose announcements that SGI is going to be 
sold. Well what does that mean for Saskatchewan people? What 
does it mean for the many hundreds of people who are working 
in SGI’s head office? Not in Toronto or Winnipeg or New York 
or Tokyo. Not in any of those places. The head office is right 
here in Regina, in Saskatchewan. Sons and daughters of farmers 
and working people and business men all across Saskatchewan 
are working in the SGI head office building right here in Regina 
and have for a good number of years. 
 
So in addition to providing the best insurance rates in Canada, 
we’re providing many hundreds of jobs right here in 
Saskatchewan. Not in New York, not in Winnipeg, not in 
Tokyo, not in Yew York, but right here in Regina. That to me is 
one of the greatest arguments for maintaining SGI as a Crown 
corporation. Forget this insanity of trying to sell it off or give it 
away just to a few select friends, a few big money friends, a few 
people that perhaps — not likely just perhaps, but in all 
likelihood will, make donations to the Conservative Party. 
 
Instead of that, let us keep the best insurance system in Canada. 
Let us keep the many hundreds of SGI employees employed 
right here in Saskatchewan. And let’s keep the profits of SGI 
right at home. 
 
When SGI was first set up — Tommy Douglas and the CCF set 
it up in the mid-1940s — the major reason for setting it up, Mr. 
Speaker, was quite simply that the other insurance companies 
refused to insure many of the farms across Saskatchewan; 
refused insurance at any cost. And indeed the premiums were 
very high in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon where we had 
fire-fighting capabilities, but the premiums were higher in 
Saskatchewan than they were elsewhere. 
 
Right within two years of SGI being set up, the private 
insurance companies had their schedules, their insurance 
schedules laid out, and they had a rate for western Canada and it 
said, deduct 10 per cent for Saskatchewan — deduct 10 per cent 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
So the insurance rates plummeted right after the inception of 
SGI and insurance was provided. Many, many people across 
this province know exactly what I’m saying. They were refused 
insurance by other carriers, and SGI stepped into the breach and 
sold them good, basic insurance. 
 
One of the other reasons that the Minister of Finance said the 
cost of living was going to be lower in Saskatchewan, he was 
using the example of home heating costs. Well that’s what 
we’re debating today in that this Bill deals  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

836 
 

with the privatization of SaskPower, the natural gas portion. In 
other words, the home heating portion of SaskPower is going to 
be privatized. 
 
Up until now, Mr. Speaker, we have only . . . all SaskPower has 
needed to do is generate enough income to maintain its facilities 
and pay off whatever debts it has incurred in building those 
facilities, but in the long term there has been no need for a 
profit for shareholders from Ontario or shareholders from the 
United States or shareholders from Europe or anywhere else. 
You can’t make money, you can’t make a profit from yourself, 
so SaskPower simply operates with the lowest rates it can in 
maintaining its infrastructure, and we would wish nothing 
different than that. 
 
But under this Bill we’re going to see the natural gas portion of 
SaskPower privatized. Then we see quite simply the profit 
motivation stepping into the picture. We’re going to see 
SaskPower natural gas rates jumping up. And why are they 
going to jump up? For no other reason than so they can pay a 
dividend to the shareholders. 
 
I wonder what the Minister of Finance will use then in other 
years, how he will justify Saskatchewan having a higher tax 
rate, a higher personal tax rate, plus he won’t be able to go and 
say we’ve got lower home heating costs than other provinces. 
He won’t be able to say we’ve got lower insurance rates than 
other provinces. 
 
And indeed they’re taking steps to eliminate any of the benefits 
that we’ve had with SaskTel. And by that I’m talking, of 
course, of the privatization that has already occurred with 
regards to the computer operations of SaskTel, WESTBRIDGE 
having taken that over. Now it’s privatized, so when SaskTel 
needs their computing work done, they farm it out and pay a 
price to WESTBRIDGE, and WESTBRIDGE wants to make 
profit. I don’t object to WESTBRIDGE wanting to make a 
profit, but what I object to is why would we privatize a portion 
of our Crown corporation simply so that we can pay the money 
out to a private company. It makes no sense at all. You’ve 
added about 20 per cent cost to the previous cost of doing the 
computing. 
 
The latest example we see in SaskTel is the privatization of the 
telephone directories. Telephone directories which . . . you take 
all of the telephone directories in Saskatchewan, and they have 
been making between 7 and $14 million profit in each of the 
last four years for SaskTel; 7 to $14 million profit, annual 
profit, for SaskTel. 
 
The profit, Mr. Speaker, is there, then used to do any number of 
things. One might be to make improvements in equipment; one 
might be to help keep SaskTel rates lower. Because if SaskTel 
is losing out on, for example, $10 million profit this year, they 
have to find that money somewhere, and increasingly it is being 
found in our monthly phone bill — the monthly telephone bill 
that all users of SaskTel pay. 
 
So in another year we’re not going to have that argument either. 
And just watch, later this year, later this year there’s going to be 
deregulation of long distance telephone calls, opening up the 
market for competition  

from private industry. SaskTel is going to be the biggest 
financial loser of all telephone companies in Canada; of all 
telephone companies, SaskTel loses the most money under this 
deregulation and privatization. It’s going to be real interesting 
to watch government members trying to oppose this 
deregulation of long distance telephone lines. 
 
I ask the people of Saskatchewan to think about it long and hard 
this summer when they see the minister responsible for 
telephones standing up and saying, well I’m opposed to this 
long distance deregulation. Well where is the minister 
responsible for telephones today? Where is the government 
today? Silent on that issue, because it hasn’t hit the public yet. 
But mark my words, later this year deregulation of long 
distance lines is going to come up. 
 
We on this side of the legislature are firmly opposed to that 
deregulation of long distance lines because it’s going to mean 
increased cost in our monthly rental for our telephones. Our 
monthly rates are going to have to be elevated simply to replace 
the lost revenue that SaskTel will in fact be losing. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the election government members were 
promising no privatization of public utilities; no privatization at 
all of public utilities. But I don’t know how that squares with 
what we’re here debating today. 
 
How does that “no privatization of utilities” square with the 
privatization of SaskPower’s natural gas arm? How does the 
promise by the government that they would not privatize any 
utilities, how does that square with the sell-off of SGI 
insurance? How does that square with the privatization to sell 
off the computer services at SaskTel? How does it compare 
with the virtual give-away, but I’ll call it a sell-off, of the 
telephone directories at SaskTel? How does it square with the 
deregulation of long distance telephone calls that is going to be 
taking place later this year? 
 
And the answer is, quite simply it does not square. The people 
of Saskatchewan were misled prior to the election, and now 
we’re reaping the benefits of a government that has gone 
completely out of control, doesn’t care a whit about the people, 
doesn’t care a whit about their promises. They think that 
promises made, whether it be during an election or any time 
before that or after, promises are just meant to be broken. 
 
Not much wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the general public holds 
politicians in such low esteem — not much wonder. I resent it 
because it reflects on us on this side of the House — on this 
side of the House, we who have a long and proud tradition of 
keeping our election promises. We have faithfully, since 
Tommy Douglas was first elected in 1944, we have faithfully 
tried our level best to keep our election promises. 
 
You talk about elections on issues — 1978 the election was 
fought . . . one of the major issues of the day was the NDP plans 
to purchase into the potash industry and to set up the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. We fought an election on that, or 
members then on this side of the  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

837 
 

government fought an election on that very issue. 
 
Not one peep from the government opposite about privatization 
before or during the election, and now they come in with this 
massive game plan to fundamentally change our province in a 
very, very hurtful, negative, harmful way that’s going to put 
workers out of work, going to move head offices out of 
Saskatchewan, going to drive whatever profits there are out of 
Saskatchewan — out of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ve seen a government that has taken $139 million 
surplus, turned it into a nearly $4 billion debt and they’re now 
saying: trust us; trust us just one more time. Everything we’ve 
tried so far has gone sour, but if we roll the dice enough times, 
one of these times we’re going to get sevens, they’re saying. 
Trust us; trust us. How long, Mr. Speaker, can we be expected 
to keep going on in this blind faith that something somewhere is 
going to turn out right for the government. 
 
People in my constituency are fed right up. They have seen the 
property improvement grant snatched away from them. It was 
$230 a year. The election promise that Allan Blakeney and the 
New Democrats had in 1982 was that $230 property 
improvement grant would be moving to $260 annually — not 
one penny of it now; not one penny of it now. They’re fed up. 
 
There’s people in my constituency who bought used cars, and 
remember when you had that infamous used car tax? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Another cash grab. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Another cash grab. A used car sales tax imposed 
on primarily middle class and poorer people, because the 
wealthy tend not to buy a whole lot of used vehicles. It’s some 
of the rest of us who buy used vehicles. 
 
Now we see further injury added. We see a 2 cent tax on 
unleaded gas, unleaded gas which is going to disappear, is it the 
end of this year? 
 
An Hon. Member: — End of ’90. 
 
Mr. Trew: — End of 1990. Within two years unleaded gas will 
be unavailable anyway because the refiners are going to stop 
manufacturing it. But we see another tax grab on the poor from 
the members opposite, the government, particularly the Minister 
of Finance, 2 cents a litre imposed on drivers of primarily older 
vehicles. And people who drive older vehicles, as I pointed out, 
tend not to be the wealthy people that the Tories want to 
represent. They tend to be the people that are struggling and just 
trying to get ahead. And at every turn they’re met with 
problems. They buy a used car; suddenly they have to pay the 
education tax on it. They were renting; the renters’ rebate 
disappeared. They buy a house; the property improvement grant 
disappears. They see their school taxes escalating annually. 
They see the civic taxes going up, and why? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Privatization. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Because of privatization and this government’s 
inability or lack of desire to share some of  

the revenue with the municipalities and the local school boards, 
so we’re being taxed to death. 
 
If we’re not taxed by the member for Lumsden, the Minister of 
Finance, we’re being taxed at the more local level, but simply 
because the revenue sharing is not there to the extent that it was 
under the New Democrats. It’s a level of . . . there are levels of 
funding needed for municipalities and for school boards, and I 
very much look forward, Mr. Speaker, to being part of a 
government that again moves in that direction, that again moves 
towards increased revenue sharing to the local areas where the 
tax revenue can be used. 
 
I mentioned that Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was an 
election issue in 1978. The government privatized the PAPCO 
(Prince Albert Pulp Company) pulp mill at P.A., and they were 
telling us it was losing $91,000 a day. I very much . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Let me talk about it. Sit down and I’ll 
talk about it. 
 
Mr. Trew: — You want to talk about the big sheeter again? I 
very much disagree that that mill, that pulp mill was losing 
$91,000 a day. We are on record of talking about how that plant 
had made money under the New Democrats, had made lots of 
money under the New Democrats, and only lost money under 
the Tories. But I’m going to use their argument, I’m going to 
use your argument. You sold it because it was losing $91,000 a 
day, so you say. Well you say that Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is making nearly $300,000 a day profit for the 
people of Saskatchewan in 1988 — nearly $300,000 a day to 
fund schools and education, and if you chose, you could put it 
even into highways. Obviously you haven’t chosen to do that. 
 
But if ever there was an argument for maintaining a Crown 
corporation, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan with $106 
million profit last year for the people of Saskatchewan, that is 
an argument for not privatizing; that is an argument for keeping 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, along with a good number 
of the other Crowns. 
 
Incidentally Mr. Speaker, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
is one company. There are — is it five or six other potash 
companies in Saskatchewan? It matters not whether it’s five or 
six. PCS is the only company that has its head office here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s here in Saskatoon; head office employing 
just shy of a hundred people. I suspect if you counted the 
building maintenance people and so on, it would be in excess of 
100 people. That’s 100 jobs in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan — not 
in New York, New York. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why is it here? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Why is it here? my colleague from Regina 
Victoria asks. Why is the head office of Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan here in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan? It is here 
because Allan Blakeney and the New Democrats bought into 
the potash corporation, into the potash industry, created Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and moved that head office from 
New  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

838 
 

York to Saskatoon, Saskatchewan — a hundred jobs. 
 
Members opposite may laugh about a mere 100 jobs, but I 
suspect if you paid a little bit more attention to a mere 100 jobs 
here, a mere 50 jobs there, a mere half a dozen jobs at Chaplin, 
if you’d paid attention to the multitude of little things that have 
gone wrong, we wouldn’t be faced with the massive out-flow of 
people that Saskatchewan is faced with today. People are 
leaving because, well it’s only 100 jobs, or it’s only six jobs. 
 
But whether it’s 100 jobs or six jobs or just one job, Mr. 
Speaker, if that job happened to be your job, it would 
profoundly affect you. If it happened to be my job, it would 
profoundly affect me. For the person losing the job it is 
absolutely devastating, and there are not any great number of 
jobs to be had out in Saskatchewan. Although I do confess, I 
think it’s part of the privatization scheme. 
 
I was reading the April 13th Western Producer, and I see 
there’s a tender call out for mowing of the ditches, as my 
colleague, the member from Regina Elphinstone pointed out. 
We sold PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser from Tacoma, Washington, 
allowed them to move in their management expertise, allowed 
them to tell us how to run a pulp mill. We were saying quite 
clearly to Weyerhaeuser and to the world, well obviously 
Saskatchewan people aren’t good enough to run a pulp mill, 
aren’t good enough. So we bring in their expertise so they can 
tell us how to run a pulp mill, but we can still tell them how to 
mow ditches. Mowing ditches is plenty good enough for 
Saskatchewan people, but managing a pulp mill is not. 
 
Running a potash company is not good enough for 
Saskatchewan people. You’re saying, by your movement 
towards privatizing, you’re saying we will let out-of-province 
and, in many cases, out-of-country companies come in, run our 
businesses. They can take all of the cream off it; they can use 
and exploit our workers however they want. We’ll let them do 
that, but we’re going to keep all of the jobs that really don’t 
require a huge amount of training. 
 
And I do apologize to anybody who mows ditches that I may 
have offended. I realize that it’s not nearly as easy as what I’m 
suggesting, but I also realize that they didn’t need to go to 
university for four years to learn how to do it. There’s a great 
many safety considerations come into mowing ditches, and 
indeed it can be a dangerous job because of the danger of 
vehicles tipping over and that sort of thing. So I want to assure 
people who mow the ditches of Saskatchewan, my comments 
were not intended to be personal. 
 
I’m going to go back to Sask Minerals in Chaplin, which I 
started my speech with, Mr. Speaker, and I have mentioned that 
the picture in the Kam-Kotia annual report, which should have 
been the Sask Minerals annual report, has four people . . .  
 
(1145) 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they’re smiling. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And smiling, and they have every right to be 
smiling — four people from Toronto. Kam-Kotia, a little  

operation that had some shares in a worn-out uranium mine, had 
a few shares in that, and were essentially given Kam-Kotia. 
Certainly . . . or pardon me, were essentially given Sask 
Minerals. 
 
The company, the Sask Minerals Crown was grossly 
undervalued, grossly, grossly undervalued, in excess of $5 
million undervalued, sold it to an Ontario firm. As a result now 
six Saskatchewan people in Chaplin alone are out of work, six 
people. Where are the profits going now? Certainly not into the 
provincial treasuries. The profits are now going to shareholders 
primarily . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Those smiling. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes, the smiling shareholders, primarily from 
Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Sask Minerals, though it was small in the grandiose scheme 
of things, in the scheme of Crown corporations in 
Saskatchewan, it is symbolic and very, very important because 
as they did with Sask Minerals, so they want to do with 
everything else. Undervalue, grossly undervalue a company and 
then sell it for less than you value it for, and then sell it to 
shareholders primarily from out of province. And that’s a 
shame, because we’re losing control of our province. 
 
The deal selling Sask Minerals was good for the buyer, but it 
was bad for the people of Saskatchewan, bad for the taxpayers, 
and it was devastating for those six individuals who have lost 
their job in Chaplin, devastating. But you don’t hear anything 
from the government about those jobs lost. 
 
A final footnote on the Sask Minerals operation. It was sold, 
Mr. Speaker, for a price that equalled three years profit of Sask 
Minerals, equalled three years profit. Now I can hardly blame 
Kam-Kotia for wanting to buy Sask Minerals under those terms. 
Anybody would be an absolute fool and an idiot — and I’m not 
accusing the Kam-Kotia people of that — anybody would be a 
fool or an idiot not to take up this government on the chance to 
take over a going concern, an operation that made money every 
year since 1944 with the exception of one year when they 
showed a loss of something less than $100,000. And not a peep, 
Mr. Speaker, before they sold to the workers. They never asked 
the workers if they wanted to buy. 
 
This Sask Minerals sale in many ways goes back to one of the 
earliest sales that the government made, and that was in 1982 or 
’83 when they sold the Manalta coal-mine — sold the 
coal-mine down at Coronach to Manalta Coal from Calgary — 
Manalta owned by a Mr. Mannix, a multimillionaire who 
resides, actually has an estate in downtown Calgary with a nice 
creek running by his property. 
 
This coal-mine, Mr. Speaker, cost SaskPower $137 million to 
develop the coal mine, to get it where they start bringing coal 
out. One hundred and thirty-seven million, and what did they 
give it away for? One hundred and two million dollars, and that 
isn’t even the half of it. Eighty-five million of that 102, 85 
million was guaranteed and financed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan at an 8  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

839 
 

per cent interest rate. And that’s called a good deal! 
 
It is ludicrous to think that the government members opposite 
are even capable of making a good deal, because you can’t 
stand up and you can’t point to one single good deal that you’ve 
made. All of your privatization schemes have resulted in loss of 
money to the people of Saskatchewan, loss in potential profits 
for evermore, and in most cases it’s meant loss of jobs, loss of 
jobs. 
 
And what are we all here for but to look after our constituents, 
whether they be in Regina North or whether they be in Saltcoats 
or whether they be in Regina South even, or anywhere in the 
province. We are here essentially to look after our constituents. 
The sale of the coal-mine down at Coronach clearly did not 
look after my constituents’ interests, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest 
to you they didn’t look after yours either. You were not well 
served in sitting on your hands and allowing that give-away to 
take place. That’s what part of what this debate is really, really 
all about. Who is going to control Saskatchewan? Do we want it 
again to be controlled by out-of-province wealthy companies, or 
do we want to maintain some control of our province right here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll take you on a little historical trip, Mr. Speaker. In 1944, 
when Tommy Douglas came into office here in Saskatchewan, 
civil servants would take their pay cheques to the bank and they 
would say, can you cash this pay cheque? And the banker, 
depending on whether the government had been able to scrape 
together a little bit of money that day or not, would say, yes I 
can cash your cheque today, in which case it was quickly done 
and the person took all of the money with him, because they 
were afraid that the government would find out the cheque was 
not good; or what also happened was cheques were not cashed 
because the government had not been able to make a deposit. 
 
Within three years, Mr. Speaker, of that taking place, within 
three years of Tommy Douglas and the CCF being elected, we 
in Saskatchewan had our financial affairs pretty well in hand. 
We were not a wealthy province. We were still a have-not 
province, but Tommy Douglas and the CCF introduced 
hospitalization. You were still responsible to pay the doctor’s 
bill, but the hospital was provided free of charge. So it took that 
out. And then it was some 15 years later when full-bore 
medicare became a reality, started in North America right here 
in Saskatchewan under Tommy Douglas and the CCF. 
 
They had managed this province so well, Mr. Speaker, partially 
through the creation of Crown corporations, and the wealth that 
that produced was used by the Government of Saskatchewan for 
the people of Saskatchewan. We had full medicare, as we 
understand it today, funded 100 per cent by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. The government of Saskatchewan had run this 
province so well that we had full medicare, medicare which, the 
Minister of Finance is so quick to point out, is the biggest single 
item in the budget, in the provincial budget — medicare, the 
biggest single item — but today the costs are split between the 
province and Canada. Not so for the first number of years. Not 
so. We funded it  

collectively 100 per cent here. That’s Saskatchewan’s greatest 
gift to Canada. It was our absolute greatest gift to Canada, one 
I’m very proud of. 
 
Then the people of Saskatchewan in their wisdom decided that 
the CCF(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) needed a 
little bit of a break, and perhaps they were right — I guess they 
were right; the voters always are — and they elected Ross 
Thatcher and the Liberals. Well the Liberal era, from 1964 to 
1971, saw the sell-off of Crown corporations, saw the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan’s assets that Tommy Douglas and the CCF had 
worked so hard to build — sold the assets off. And many of us 
will recall the 1967 election when there was literally thousands 
and thousands of political highways paved. 
 
I recall the highway coming down from Macrorie past Lucky 
Lake in 1967, and they got about a half a mile west of Lucky 
Lake on the road towards my original home town of Beechy, 
and there was a pile of asphalt still sitting there. There was all 
the equipment sitting there. They shut it down on the Friday 
and, you know, that never turned another wheel. 
 
The election was held; the equipment disappeared the next day; 
the highway we had been promised simply was not delivered. 
And to make matters worse, the highway that they had paved to 
Lucky Lake broke up within two years because it was such a 
thin, thin layer of asphalt and they hadn’t done the necessary 
preparation. All they were interested in was make it look good 
for the election, and it worked. In 1967 it worked. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, in 1971 it sure didn’t work. One 
of the proud things I recall that day, the Liberal candidate came 
around to our school; we kicked him out. We students kicked 
him out. We ran him off the property. We’d had enough of their 
broken promises, enough of their corruption, enough, enough, 
enough. We wouldn’t talk to him. He was gone and he never 
came back. Indeed, he didn’t get elected either. 
 
But I was quite proud of that, Mr. Speaker, simply because the 
people of Saskatchewan in 1971 had had enough of the 
Thatcher Liberals, had enough of that free enterprise 
government that was taking them nowhere. They saw their 
farms were in desperate shape. They saw that the towns and 
villages and hamlets of Saskatchewan were going downhill. 
They saw that the only people that counted to that government 
was the wealthy corporations and the most wealthy of people. 
 
So Allan Blakeney became the premier then, in 1971, with his 
new deal for people — Allan Blakeney and the New 
Democrats. And we in Saskatchewan enjoyed very good times. 
People coming out of high school today, Mr. Speaker, I know 
whenever I say it to them they just find it almost impossible to 
believe. But I graduated from grade 12 in 1971. I have never in 
my life been refused a job. When I was unemployed, the first 
place I asked was where I got a job. And that sure isn’t the case 
today. I’m delighted that I’m not unemployed today. The 
member for Saltcoats says I was probably working for the CCF. 
Yes, my first job was working for the local co-op garage. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Same thing. 
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

840 
 

Mr. Trew: — Same thing. Another job was working for an 
Esso service station in Saskatoon. Oh, same thing, same thing, 
he says. How ludicrous! 
 
People in Saskatchewan through the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, many 
of us considered ourselves to be essentially non-political. I 
know I was very happy with the opportunities that there were 
around Saskatchewan. My neighbours were all doing well. I 
was advancing at my work, raising a very small family, but it 
seemed like there was opportunities abundantly for everyone. 
Things were going ahead. 
 
Indeed, I talked to the member for Saltcoats about my first job 
in 1971, working at the local co-op garage. I was paid $1 an 
hour; that was the minimum wage. Dollar an hour — minimum 
wage in 1971. By 1982 the minimum wage under Al Blakeney 
and the New Democrats had increased by $3.25 to $4.25. There 
was two more 50-cent increases on the books, ready to be 
implemented. That would have taken the minimum wage to five 
and a quarter today, if there had been no other changes. But 
what’s the minimum wage today, Mr. Speaker? Four dollars 
and fifty cents. There’s been one miserly, two-bit increase in 
minimum wage in seven sorry, long, Tory years — two bits. 
 
(1200) 
 
The government opposite has given up saying, oh well, we’re 
the government of the working people. They’ve given up on 
that, and as they should. Action speaks volumes. Action speaks 
far, far louder than words. A lousy two-bit increase in the 
minimum wage clearly shows what this government thinks of 
people starting employment and people working at the 
minimum wage jobs that do not require a university degree, do 
not require a course from a technical institute. 
 
There’s some conflict as to the amount of people, Mr. Speaker, 
in the province that are on minimum wage, but I’ve heard 
anything from 40 to 80,000 of Saskatchewan’s working men 
and women are on minimum wage. Forty to 80,000; I don’t 
care, use your own number, but for a minimum of 40,000 
people, actions of this government have been absolutely 
devastating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been making an argument against 
privatization of Crowns, based on a number of things: one, the 
revenue that will come into the coffers of the government; 
second, the job loss; a third argument I’ve been using is the 
control that we would have for Saskatchewan people. 
 
But I just want to talk about the revenue for a minute, and what 
that means to Saskatchewan people. Since 1982, Saskatchewan 
farm property tax has gone up from 80 to $116 million, or a 45 
per cent increase — a 45 per cent increase since the Tories 
came into power, at a time when agriculture is in a crisis. 
 
Electrical and telephone expenses have gone up in the same 
time period 38 per cent. I’m talking 38 per cent, from 50 
million to $69 million, Mr. Speaker, all of those increases 
necessary, in part, because this government is  

afraid of Crown corporations. They are afraid to make them 
work, because if a Crown corporation works well, it means 
those horrendous socialists — me and my colleagues — maybe 
are right, maybe we’re right. 
 
So I liken it, Mr. Speaker, to if you wanted to buy a 
confectionery . . . you have two people wanting to buy a 
confectionery. One of them is convinced the confectionery is 
the greatest business to be in and it’ll make money. The second 
person thinks a confectionery simply means all kinds of long 
hours; means most of the customers will shop-lift; it means high 
business taxes; got to pay wages to employees; you can’t make 
a go of it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, of those two people, you know which one is 
going to make a go of it. It’s the one that thinks the 
confectionery business is the greatest business in the world to 
be in. The one that doesn’t make a go of it is the one, the person 
who thinks the confectionery business is no good. 
 
And that is exactly what this government thinks about Crown 
corporations. They think it can’t work. Despite that from 1944 
to present, we have had a history, a long, proud history in this 
province, of Crown corporations being used to the benefit of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite that, government members opposite are just in a mad 
dash to give away all of the Crown corporations. The terms 
don’t matter. Just get rid of them. The terms don’t matter. They 
showed that with the Weyerhaeuser deal — a quarter of a 
billion dollar give-away. Then . . . bad enough that they gave 
away a quarter of a billion dollar asset with no down payment; 
bad enough for that, but then they turned around and paid 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington for the roads that 
PAPCO had built, paid them for the roads that PAPCO had 
built. Close to $6 million in cash went from the provincial 
treasury to Weyerhaeuser to pay Weyerhaeuser for roads that 
PAPCO had built. 
 
It doesn’t somehow sit right. The people of Saskatchewan know 
it doesn’t sit right. They want this tired, worn out, rusted 
government to get out of the way, let the New Democrats 
govern, let the member for Saskatoon Riversdale turn this 
province right side up. And that day is coming, and it’s coming 
faster than government members think it is. It’s certainly 
coming faster than you will want it. 
 
I urge you to call an election on this privatization issue because 
you’ve never asked the people of Saskatchewan for a mandate 
on privatization. You have ignored it in campaigns; you have 
ignored it in your campaign literature. I urge you, call the 
election. If you’re so cocksure of yourselves that this is the way 
to go, call the election; let the people of Saskatchewan decide. 
And they will decide, and they’ll make the right decision. 
They’ll make the right decision . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re history in Regina North anyhow, 
Trew, so it doesn’t matter. 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Regina South, I hear him saying 
he’s going to come back and run against me in Regina North. 
I’m glad to hear that. That’s not exactly what he said; he said 
I’m history in Regina North. I  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

841 
 

thought that meant that you would be coming back to the 
constituency you represented before you knew you didn’t have 
a snowball’s chance in Hades of getting elected there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I started by saying that Saskatchewan is not New 
York; this is not New York, this is Saskatchewan. Things that 
have worked in New York don’t always work here. 
 
We in Saskatchewan must continue the tradition, the very proud 
tradition of neighbour and friend helping neighbour and friend, 
working together, making the three engines of Saskatchewan’s 
economy work, those three engines being private enterprise; the 
co-operative sector — ignored by this government, but which 
will be rejuvenated under the New Democrats — private 
enterprise; co-operative sector and the Crown corporations, the 
Crown sector which is a vital and important part of our 
Saskatchewan tradition, our Saskatchewan heritage. It’s a part 
of Saskatchewan that you members opposite are going to have 
to explain to your children and to your grandchildren, if they’re 
still in Saskatchewan, if they don’t join the thousands that are 
fleeing the province. You will have to explain to them why it is 
Saskatchewan is going to be perpetually, for ever, a have-not 
province, because you gave away the Crown corporations. 
 
So I end my taking part in this debate, Mr. Speaker, simply by 
urging government members to get out, talk to your 
constituents, find out what they’re saying. If you’re that certain 
that you’re on the right track, call an election. Legitimatize this 
thing. Call an election. Let the people of Saskatchewan decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am firmly and adamantly opposed to this 
privatization, piratization — whatever you want to call it. I am 
firmly opposed to this give-off, give-away, of Saskatchewan’s 
assets. I fear for our very future, for the jobs, for the taxes, the 
profits that are going to be lost. I will be opposing this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
able to take part in the debate on Bill 1 today. Bill 1 is an Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program put forward by the 
Minister of Public Participation, the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley. 
 
I do find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that not one member 
from the government side has risen in their place to debate this, 
which is a very important Bill for the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s important to the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because it drastically changes the 
face of Saskatchewan from what we have known Saskatchewan 
to be in the past, and it certainly is not something that all people 
in Saskatchewan are happy with. 
 
I would say that the people who are most happy with it are not 
the members opposite, but their friends in big business, the 
corporate sector, the card carrying Tories throughout the 
province who have reaped benefit in their own pockets at the 
expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers  

and Saskatchewan citizens. And I think it’s a very sad day when 
this Bill passes. And it likely will pass because the government 
has such a large majority. 
 
I do find it disgraceful though however, Mr. Speaker, that not 
one member on the government side has risen in their place to 
put forward their case as to why there is a need for Bill 1, An 
Act to establish the Public Participation Program in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a very short Bill; many longer Bills 
than this. It’s just a matter of a few pages. In fact, the total 
content of the Bill including the cover page, is a total of six 
pages. And in those six pages we identify two separate parts to 
the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First off, the Bill’s first section is somewhat worrisome to us. 
And the first part, it appears that it gives the minister enormous 
powers to privatize or piratize anything that the minister wants 
to privatize or piratize. And I think public participation is an 
inaccurate term. As I mentioned, it’s more an item of 
privatization. In some cases it is piratization because the people 
of Saskatchewan get no benefit. The people who are receiving 
the benefit are those who are in favour with this Tory 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister says that this first section is not to be worried 
about. He says that it’s . . . this sweeping omnibus powers are 
really not sinister and alarming. But if they’re not sinister and 
alarming, why would they want to have that section in the Bill, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I want to talk about the very essence of this Bill a little 
later. But first, the second part has to deal with the protection of 
employee benefits for those employees that are affected by 
privatization, those people who have worked in the public 
sector, either for a Crown corporation or an agency that has 
been privatized by the government. And I would welcome an 
explanation from that side of the House as to how this Bill will 
in fact protect or give benefits to employees who are displaced 
by the cruel and harsh treatment that has been taking place up to 
this point by the privatization plan of this government. 
 
And now I find it astounding that this Bill comes in at this time, 
when we look back over the past number of years, in fact since 
1982, at the number of things that have been privatized in the 
province of Saskatchewan. There are many of them, and I’ll go 
on to listing those a little later. 
 
I maintain to you, Mr. Speaker, that the only reason the 
government puts forward this Bill now is because they want to 
try and develop it into an election issue. The government is in 
trouble. They need something as an issue to stand on that would 
maybe balance the scales in their favour, and they think that this 
Bill on privatization is going to be the item that they can go into 
the next election campaign with. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
this is not the item that they’re going to win the next election 
on. It doesn’t matter what item they go on, they’re not going to 
win the next election in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a useless piece of legislation, other than 
the government looking for that election issue. If you look at 
the government’s record from 1982 when they  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

842 
 

were first elected up until October of 1986, they were fairly 
moderate in the changes they made to the face of Saskatchewan 
and the way the public, private, and co-operative sectors 
interacted with each other. In fact, the only major one I can 
remember during that period of time was the privatization of 
Saskoil. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know today what happened with 
Saskoil. Saskoil had shares trade on the stock exchange. Today 
we have 75 per cent of those shares owned outside of the 
province of Saskatchewan. People in the province of 
Saskatchewan no longer have the ownership of Saskoil, the first 
big privatization move by this government. 
 
(1215) 
 
Immediately upon the privatization move of Saskoil, many of 
their operations moved outside the province. Some of the 
operations in Saskatchewan were closed down. I can remember 
an operation in the heavy oil patch by Meota, close to the area I 
represent, Mr. Speaker, where Canterra and Saskoil — Canterra 
was the operator; Saskoil was a partner — Saskoil pulled out on 
an enhanced recovery project in the heavy oil patch. Where did 
they pull out and put their intensity in their operation? Into 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. What happened to employees? Hundreds 
of employees were laid off from Saskoil because of the 
privatization move. 
 
And now they’re saying in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to provide protection to employees. We have a section in the 
Bill that actually deals with employee benefits, and it starts on 
page three and runs through to pretty well the end of the Bill, 
Mr. Speaker. Well you tell those employees from Saskoil that 
were laid off how much protection they got. 
 
Will this protection, Mr. Speaker, be retroactive for all the 
people that you members on the government side have 
devastated in the province of Saskatchewan? I don’t see any 
retroactivity in the Bill. So the Bill is a farce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only other thing besides Saskoil between 1982 and 1986 
that was privatized were really minor services that didn’t 
receive much attention in the media, and the people in the 
province were really very much unaware of the thrust of the 
government towards privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But then people really became aware of what was happening 
after the election of October 20 in 1986, when this government 
never asked permission of anyone. It didn’t ask permission of 
the Legislative Assembly. I don’t even know if they asked 
permission of their own caucus. Maybe it was just the inner 
cabinet got together with the cheer-leader from Albert Street 
South, and decided well we’re going to privatize this, we’re 
going to privatize that. They certainly didn’t ask anybody in the 
province of Saskatchewan because people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, would have said no, if for no other 
reason, just on the basis of what had happened with the 
privatization of Saskoil. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what are some of the things that  

happened, and there are many. Let’s look at SaskCOMP. Let’s 
look at the SaskTel computer services and SaskTel’s data bank. 
All of a sudden, WESTBRIDGE comes along. WESTBRIDGE 
acquires a very good deal from this government, from the inner 
cabinet to acquire SaskCOMP and SaskTel’s computer services. 
 
And now that brings up some very interesting questions, Mr. 
Speaker. What about the security of information in the data 
banks, security of information that was taken care of by people 
who were in jobs, who had the interests of the citizens of the 
province at heart as their primary, number one responsibility? 
 
What about WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker? Is their number one 
priority security of information in data banks? Will they give us 
their assurance that information about people’s medical 
backgrounds and histories, about people’s personal information 
will be held with confidentiality? Is that WESTBRIDGE’S 
number one responsibility, Mr. Speaker? No, it’s not. The 
number one responsibility of WESTBRIDGE is to make a 
profit, to make a profit for their shareholders because that’s the 
nature of the private sector. 
 
And I don’t criticize profit, Mr. Speaker, because the private 
sector is very important. But when you’re dealing with the vital 
interests of the province and the people of Saskatchewan, 
number one should be a responsibility for confidentiality of the 
information that’s contained in the computer systems and the 
data banks that were under the public sector prior to the 
government privatizing those public sector operations and 
putting them into the hands of WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s only one little thing that happened. It’s a big thing, but 
it’s a little thing in the overall scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look at the school-based dental program. Four 
hundred dental therapists fired; called into a room by the 
Minister of Health and fired. No forewarning, nothing. They 
turn over the plan to private sector dentists. What’s the 
objective of private sector dentists, Mr. Speaker? Well I would 
say it’s the same as WESTBRIDGE. It’s to make a profit, 
because that’s the reason they’re in business. 
 
I don’t criticize that again, Mr. Speaker, but why should we pay 
more for a program that provides less service to children 
throughout the entire province of Saskatchewan? A 
world-renowned program, Mr. Speaker, that was acknowledged 
to be the best in North America, at least the best in North 
America, if not anywhere in the world. 
 
People from underdeveloped countries, people from developed 
countries, industrialized countries, looked at the school-based 
program that was started in the province of Saskatchewan, 
because they know throughout the world that Saskatchewan has 
been the leader in health care since the beginning of public 
health care anywhere in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I maintain that that was a bad move, and that 
happened well before this Bill came in. Does the employee 
benefits section of this Bill give any protection to the dental 
therapists that were laid off and fired in the  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

843 
 

province of Saskatchewan? No, I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t provide them any protection at all. In fact the dental 
therapists should be on to the minister, asking whether or not 
they’re going to get the same protection as this Bill provides for 
the glossy times that this government wants to put into place, to 
call an election campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those dental therapists should be writing, phoning, asking the 
minister what’s going to happen with them. Do they get 
benefit? What was their benefit? They were turned out to give a 
chance to work in the private sector. Have they got jobs, all of 
them? No, Mr. Speaker, because everybody knows there are 
less jobs in Saskatchewan today than there were five years ago, 
six years ago, 10 years ago. There’s going to be less jobs in 
Saskatchewan every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Month of February, 6,000 people left the province of 
Saskatchewan. The number of unemployed goes from 21,000 in 
’81 to about 37,000 or more . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Forty-three now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Forty-three thousand now. The hon. member 
from Moose Jaw tells me that it’s 43,000 people in 
Saskatchewan on unemployment right now. 
 
So this turning out to be able to work in the private sector is a 
farce, Mr. Speaker. That was the famous words of the flying 
Jimmy Garner who was the former minister of Highways. 
That’s something else that happened, Mr. Speaker, before the 
last election. I shouldn’t have said that was a minor thing 
because he laid off hundreds of Highways workers in the 
province of Saskatchewan to give them a chance to work in the 
private sector. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are they working? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Are they working? No, they’re not working. 
Why aren’t they working? Because the private sector highway 
firms that are Saskatchewan-based aren’t working very much 
either, Mr. Speaker. Truckers who drive over the highway 
between here and Saskatoon, when they get out of their trucks 
after they’ve reached Saskatoon and reached Regina coming in 
the other direction, they sound like they’re stuttering, whether 
they have a speech impediment or not, because the road is so 
rough in their trucks their voices vibrate. Ask any trucker who 
has to haul over highways in the province of Saskatchewan. So 
I guess those Highways workers that were given a chance to 
work in the private sector didn’t have the opportunity to work in 
the private sector because there’s no work in the private sector 
either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I notice the member from Regina South is gibbering from his 
seat. If he wants to make an intervention on this Bill, I’d be 
very happy to hear his comments in defence of this regressive 
legislation, some of the most regressive in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sit down. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — He’s asking me to sit down, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Regina South, if he would rise  

immediately now and give his government’s position in the 
defence of this piece of legislation, then I would consider taking 
my seat and allowing him to rise in his place. There’s a 
35-minute period left before adjournment, and we’d be very 
happy to hear what the minister has to say about this Bill, but 
not one of them has stood up and spoken yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is that that you have not spoken on this Bill? Second 
reading on the principle of the Bill: the most important part of 
debate on any Bill is during the second reading. They won’t 
defend their actions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at Sask Minerals, Mr. Speaker. Sask Minerals was 
sold under value. Kam-Kotia got a very good deal. Now they’re 
talking about closing it down. There’s workers being laid off. 
Sask Minerals was a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, since the 
1940s. Every year they made a profit. Maybe one year . . . I 
recall one year, I think, looking at the record, that they maybe 
lost money, a small amount of money. But all the other years 
from the 1940s to the present made money that went into the 
Crown investments corporation every year. And the Crown 
investment corporation, Mr. Speaker, is sort of the bank of the 
Crown corporations. The profits that are made go into Crown 
investments corporation. Crown investments corporation 
sometimes gives money back out to fund other programs in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve noticed most recently, Mr. Speaker, and the members 
would have to acknowledge this, that in the budget that was 
brought down by the Minister of Finance, that we just 
concluded the debate on and we’re currently in Estimates, 
there’s $200 million going from Crown investments corporation 
into the general revenue to make the books almost balance. 
They don’t balance; it’s still the . . . the debt side has got the 
heaviest weight there. But $200 million going from Crown 
investments corporation into general revenue in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I guess Sask Minerals won’t be putting any more money 
into Crown investments corporation. So if Crown investments 
corporation isn’t getting money from that Crown corporation 
and other Crown corporations and other public sector 
ownership, how is Crown investments corporation in the future 
going to be able to put money into the general revenue of the 
province of Saskatchewan? Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, they 
might not be able to. 
 
So what does that mean for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan? More taxes. More taxes, Mr. Speaker, because 
the government is going to obliterate any other source of 
revenue other than personal taxation. They might say no, we 
have a corporate tax. Well corporate tax continues to decline, 
Mr. Speaker. And if you draw a line across the top of the scale, 
eventually corporate tax will disappear, Crown investments . . . 
money going into general revenue will disappear. Then what is 
left? Personal taxation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the government continues on the this course, we will see 
the highest taxation in the history of any place in North 
America, maybe throughout the world, Mr.  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

844 
 

Speaker, because there’s no other source of revenue if the 
government continues to go on the path that it’s proceeding on. 
 
The government did say at one time, Mr. Speaker, that they 
weren’t going to privatize public utilities, those things that are 
important to the vitality, to the vital interests, I should say, of 
the province of Saskatchewan. So let’s look at Sask Power 
Corporation. They split it into a gas division and an electrical 
division. And do you know what happened, Mr. Speaker, what 
people were astounded by? They ended up getting two power 
bills. They get one for their electricity and one for their gas. It 
used to be on one bill. People in the province can’t understand 
why you’d pay double the administration, double the postage, to 
send them out their power bill. 
 
What was wrong with the way it was before, Mr. Speaker, 
where you got one bill and it itemized your gas and it itemized 
your electricity? Why do we have to now pay 74 cents to send 
the same bill out when it used to go out for 37 cents, Mr. 
Speaker? People in the province can’t comprehend why this 
government would do that. 
 
But what a lot of people don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the electrical division of SaskPower always had to be 
subsidized, Mr. Speaker. How was it subsidized? Do the 
members opposite know? It was subsidized by the gas division 
of SaskPower because the gas division always made a profit. So 
profits from the gas division subsidized the electrical. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, we hear the government saying they are 
going to sell off the gas division of SaskPower. What does that 
mean, Mr. Speaker? Well that means we’re selling off the most 
valuable part of the asset and we’re retaining the part that loses 
money. And because of the philosophy and the ideology, I 
suppose I should say, of this government, they’re not going to 
subsidize it through a broad tax base. It’s going to mean that 
electrical rates are going to go up in the province of 
Saskatchewan because the profitable side of SaskPower is being 
sold off and the liability side is being retained, Mr. Speaker. 
That is not fair for people in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 
unfair to deceive people by calling this public participation. 
 
(1230) 
 
There are some things that are popular, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would want to acknowledge that, but they are very few and 
small compared to the magnitude of the rip-off in the province 
of Saskatchewan of selling off our assets. The things that appeal 
to people are things like the TeleBonds, things like bonds for 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, because people can understand that 
they should have an opportunity to invest in money that’s used 
by publicly owned corporations in the province of 
Saskatchewan, just as they have the opportunity to invest in the 
stock exchange for a privately owned company that may or may 
not deal in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the 
reason they see the logic of investing in Saskatchewan public 
corporations is because they might as well get a return on that 
investment rather than having their tax dollars going to paying a 
bank, or another financial institution, or some European market, 
or a  

Japanese market, or an American market, where we pay 
taxpayers’ dollars in interest. 
 
So that makes sense, but that is where the sense stops, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s like using Canada Savings Bonds, but that’s where 
the sense stops, Mr. Speaker, because what’s happening? We’re 
selling off our assets and retaining the debt. 
 
The government members during the last election campaign 
said that PAPCO, Prince Albert Pulp Company, was losing 
91,000, or some amount of dollars per day. That was money 
being paid on the debt that PAPCO had. 
 
So they said, we’ve got to sell it. And so they went into an 
agreement with Weyerhaeuser and, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t 
one volume; there wasn’t two volumes; there wasn’t three 
volumes of the agreement, Mr. Speaker, there was more. What 
happened? Well let’s look at the document, Mr. Speaker. They 
decided, Mr. Speaker, that PAPCO was worth, in the 
agreement, page two, volume one — $248 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 100 million too cheap. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And the member says, one of the members 
says, Mr. Speaker, that was 100 million too cheap. Well it may 
have been. I wonder who wrote this agreement. Did 
Weyerhaeuser’s lawyers write this agreement? Well I would 
think so, because it’s not very good for people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why is it not very good? Because although it was worth, 
according to this document, $248 million, we never got a cent 
— never got a cent. And so that means that if Weyerhaeuser 
now has the Prince Albert pulp mill, the Big River saw mill, the 
chemical company in Saskatoon, and 7 million acres of forest, 
prime forest in northern Saskatchewan, they got that — for 20 
years it says in the agreement, they’ve got the forest. What will 
be left of 7 million acres after 20 years? Nothing, nothing! 
 
We never got any money. They got the asset; I’ve got to assume 
we’ve still got the debt. So we’re losing now more than $91,000 
a day, Mr. Speaker, because of the rotten deal that’s contained 
in this document, this document that was written by some 
Philadelphia lawyer. And I hope we have a lot less Philadelphia 
lawyers after the next election campaign, because they’re 
ruining the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s look just a little more at this agreement. What are they 
doing here? Well, Highways don’t build roads any more. 
Weyerhaeuser tenders the roads. Here’s an ad that they got 18.5 
kilometres from Cowan Lake forestry access road and 11 
kilometres for Revo forest access road, and it’s contracted out 
while highways workers and equipment was sold off at fire sale 
prices. 
 
Let’s see what’s in here. Oh, Weyerhaeuser, I guess, doesn’t 
pay for all of it because it says here, and I quote, volume 1, 
page 9, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(d) Immediate upgrading of road system: Saskatchewan 
will construct the following structures and roads at its 
expense in order to  

  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

845 
 

accommodate Weyerhaeuser Canada’s traffic on the road 
system: 

 
Turn the page, page 10, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(i) a new bridge over the Shell River on Highway 3 
which will be completed prior to December 31, 1986; and 
 
(ii) a road and interchange connecting Highway 3 and 
Highway 55 at Prince Albert, such that Weyerhaeuser’s 
traffic does not need to proceed down Highway 2 in order 
to access Highway 55. Saskatchewan shall make its best 
effort to complete this work prior to December 31, 1988, 
but, subject to prompt approval by the Canadian Transport 
Commission, will complete such work no later than 
October 31, 1989. 

 
Well we’re paying for that road, Mr. Speaker. I wonder what 
else we’re paying for in here? I would imagine we’re paying for 
other things. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that Weyerhaeuser is 
given exclusive right to harvest timber in the forestry 
management lease agreement for a period of 20 years, and I 
think I mentioned that. And now listen. 
 

If the minister receives an application to harvest timber 
within a reserve timber supply area from a third party 
(that’s someone else other than Weyerhaeuser or the 
Government of Saskatchewan because they’re the two 
parties to this agreement), Weyerhaeuser Canada shall 
have right of first refusal on harvesting that area for a 
period of 30 days after they have received notice of such 
application from the minister. 
 

So that shows you that they have exclusive rights over 7 million 
acres of forest in our prime forest area in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now I think it’s shameful that the 
government would give away our resources, our vital resources 
that take years and years to renew by such an agreement, 
written not by our people in the province of Saskatchewan but 
by Weyerhaeuser’s people from Tacoma, Washington, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think that’s a disgrace. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s very little that’s good about this piece 
of legislation. The only thing I mentioned was in terms of some 
of the bonds, people can accept that. But to give away our 
heritage in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a 
disgrace, an absolute disgrace. And I think people have to ask 
themselves, in the province of Saskatchewan, what they’re 
getting out of privatization and piratization in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What do ordinary families have to show for it? Is more taxes a 
benefit, Mr. Speaker? I would think not. I don’t know many 
Saskatchewan families who would see increased taxation as a 
benefit. That’s what’s happening with privatization. The 
ordinary Saskatchewan family, Saskatchewan individual, is 
paying more taxes, because we have retained debt while those 
bandits over there gave away our assets. 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I know the member in his 
enthusiasm perhaps can get carried away, but referring to hon. 
members as bandits is unparliamentary, and I ask the hon. 
member to rise and withdraw those remarks. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I’d certainly withdraw that comment if 
it’s unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker, and I wouldn’t even try and 
qualify it. If that’s your ruling, I certainly withdraw the word 
“bandit.” Thank you for drawing that to my attention, Mr. 
Speaker. I got so carried away with my enthusiasm and my 
anger for what’s happening in the province of Saskatchewan 
that I guess I just lost control there for a minute. 
 
But have Saskatchewan people got more jobs? No. Forty-three 
thousand people unemployed in the province. Are more people 
off of the social service rolls in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker? No. There are more, increasing every day, on the 
social assistance plan in the province of Saskatchewan. Are 
there more opportunities for young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Are there? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you. Because 6,000 people left the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in the month of 
February. Are there more health services? No, there’s not more 
health services. 
 
What privatization has meant for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is lost jobs, lost revenue, higher 
taxes for ordinary people, huge budget deficits that we will have 
a long time getting under control, deteriorating public service, 
and a loss of control to foreign corporations for things that were 
controlled and owned in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And I hope that the government gets up and talks on 
this Bill No. 1, and I hope that they do carry through in making 
this their mainstay as the issue in the next election campaign, 
because we won’t have to look at those faces on the government 
side of the House after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to start out by saying 
that a lot of the members from across are chattering away from 
their seat, but they won’t stand up and . . .  
 
The Speaker: — I agree with the hon. member that there are 
simultaneous debates going on. I believe that we respect his 
desire to be heard, and let’s give him that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would again like to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that while the members will chatter 
from their seats, they will not get up and protect their position 
in regards to the privatization Bill that is before us right now. I 
think they’re just too ashamed to stand up because they know 
that the public opinion is against them. 
 
When I look at the whole aspect of the privatization Bill, 
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

846 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s couched behind some soft rhetoric of public 
participation, but really in the long history as we have come to 
know Saskatchewan history, we know that they are going 
against Saskatchewan history, and that’s what I can see in this 
Bill. 
 
I think I may say, from a general statement, is that they are 
going against the working-together strategy of Saskatchewan 
economic history and social history, and also state that we have, 
here in Saskatchewan, taken a world leadership position in 
many areas, whether it’s in health or education or in mining or 
in forestry, because we had utilized a mixed economy approach, 
that indeed we were here looking at our situation from both the 
business sector, the co-operatives, and also the Crown 
corporations. 
 
And in order to go about explaining why I am totally opposed 
to the concept of the privatization Bill, I have to look at it from 
a concrete, historical basis. And I think I will go back, Mr. 
Speaker, in regards to the time of the settlement of the West and 
so on, and look at the period of the 1800s and during the rise of 
industrialization at that point in world historic development. 
 
One has to look at that and look at even England where when 
the power of private industry and the merchants were on the 
rise, a lot of the people developed the concept of co-operatives. 
They had to be able to withstand the fact that private interest 
only would lead only to private control of a few rich at the top. 
It would not benefit a great number of people. A lot of people 
knew that by the early 1800s, so co-operatives were born to be 
able to counteract the effect of the 17th century theory of the 
invisible hand. So the invisible hand met up with resistance by 
the early 1800s during the time of the birth of co-operatives. 
 
When we look at the late 1800s, we see that the merchants, the 
private competitive capitalists of the day, had moved into a 
larger scale, and they had moved into the West at that time. And 
one has to look at that period in time and history because . . . I 
would like to say this because that was a period in time when 
the Conservatives were all hell-bent in giving all the money to 
the big business interests of the day. And remember, Mr. 
Speaker, they lost the election in the 1870s just when they 
pursued that strategy. 
 
And I will recall that when the members from across forget the 
history, and when they were going only on the private interest 
basis, one recalls the situation of the CPR. They gave all this 
money to the CPR and they said, give even not only money, but 
land. Twenty-three million acres of land were given to the CPR 
when they came out west. So a lot of the money . . . and there 
was a lot of corruption and crooked deals that were made during 
that period in time, and the Pacific scandal came out and the 
Tories of the day lost the election. 
 
(1245) 
 
When I look at it a little bit later on by the Dirty Thirties and 
. . . Well before I get into that, Mr. Speaker, one has to look at 
the initial stage of development that we had to get into 
extremely cheap labour. And cheap labour was  

brought in from all over the world, whether it was in China, or 
wherever, to bring in the building of the railroad, and so on. 
And a lot of the money, moneys that we had in the public purse, 
were transferred over to the big corporations such as in the 
initial phase of the CPR. 
 
So one of the things that I might say . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — This guy’s against the building of the 
railroad. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The member says I was against the building of 
the railroad. I’m not against the building of the railroad. That 
railroad could have been built without corruption. That railroad 
could have been built with a lot more input from the people of 
the West at that time than that member doesn’t understand as 
yet. So that simply shifting off a whole pile of dollars to the 
large-scale industry of the day, proven to be the defeat of the 
Tories, which will be the defeat of these Tories in the next year 
and a half. 
 
I might say that during that time there was a lot of cheap labour, 
and even children were working 16, 18 hours a day at that time 
because that’s the only way they could make the big bucks that 
were required to keep her rolling. 
 
When I looked at later on, during the 1930s, at that time the 
private industry was saying, well government should stay out of 
business. And during that whole period in time, of course, that 
was the case. But the only counteraction in the day was the 
co-operatives; the only group working together in spirit, you 
know, was under the co-operative sector. And then as 
companies got bigger and bigger and bigger, the monopoly 
stage, you know, came into sphere during the 1920s, and they 
were going all over and it was going at supposedly a great scale. 
 
And people look at the 1920s in that fashion, that supposedly 
this would be the magic solution of the world, that if we leave 
everything to the private interest and private market we will 
automatically get, you know, the benefits that accrue to 
everybody. 
 
But what happened in the 1930s was quite the reverse. What 
happened is that the big monopolies of the day started hoarding 
all the money. And it wasn’t getting into the hands of the 
ordinary workers and the smaller business of the day, and the 
farmers. What we ended up with was the Dirty Thirties 
situation. You combine that with a drought, and from historical 
reasons one knows that the drought in the past couple of years 
was even more dangerous than the 1930s was, but it was 
combined with economic mismanagement and corruption of the 
day and also a little bit of the drought. And bingo, here you had 
a situation where we had a depression. And it was basically 
economic mismanagement and corruption in the Dirty Thirties, 
which was created by the Tory government of the day, that 
caused that. 
 
And a lot of people, when you look at a lot of the older people 
in the province, they know that history. A lot of the younger 
people like myself had to read history and so had to learn about 
that. But I know that the policies of this Tory government, 
which was the same as the one in the 1870s, they lost the 
election there. In the 1930s, the Tories did  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

847 
 

the same thing; they lost the election when they went only with 
private interests. 
 
Now we look at 1889. They will lose an election in 1890 if they 
call it, if they only go on private interest. And that is the reality 
of the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In 1890? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So the member looks and says that it’ll be 1890 
from across . . . I must have mentioned that it was 1890, but 
what I was saying was in 1990 there, Mr. Speaker. And when 
we go into the 1990s and we look forward into the future, we 
have to take a closer look at our modern history to see what we 
have done. 
 
We know that during the modern era we have not only 
combined the period of co-ops, we have come in to take control 
of the government and utilize government for the benefit of the 
people. And during the ’30s and ’40s, and especially during the 
post-40s period, we did a lot more in regards to the 
development of Crown corporations. That we felt that when the 
assets were in foreign interests — when the assets were in 
foreign interests, they went outside the province; they left our 
country. 
 
We quickly found out that we had to control the economy, at 
least to challenge and provide a competitive base to private 
industry, through the Crown corporate sector. And a lot of 
people understood that it was necessary to beat the monopoly 
giants in that way. There was no way that . . . only the 
co-operative movement could challenge large-scale business of 
last 30 years, so the Crown corporate sector came into being. 
 
And the other thing that a lot of the private enterprise of the day 
knew is that they didn’t want a lot of those services to be 
controlled by private interest because they would be held at 
ransom in regards to how they developed themselves. Because 
if one big industry monopolized, let’s say SaskPower, or if they 
monopolized the telephones or they monopolize this and that, 
they could move into the area of monopolizing the whole 
economics base that exists right now. 
 
There would be less competition and more roads to greater 
monopoly. And that has been the basis of this history in 
Saskatchewan, and that is the basis on which Saskatchewan 
people fought against this simplistic idea of only providing 
dollars for private industry. And I think that we have come to 
realize that the mixed economy approach then is the answer, 
and has been the answer which provided us with . . . Even when 
we had crisis conditions in the ’74-75 period, in 1978 period — 
we had a world crisis at that time, but we looked at the record in 
Saskatchewan government, the NDP, we only had 4 per cent 
unemployment rate. We looked at the situation of providing 
greater services in health and education and so on. 
 
When I look at the privatization history I look at, of course, the 
most immediate thing in regards to northern Saskatchewan. I 
look at my own constituency. I look at the fact that 
Saskatchewan people of the day felt that the experience was 
this. They had the forestry industry that was controlled from 
New York. They knew that all the  

moneys and the assets which were being owned in the forestry 
industry were being channelled back into the South, and that 
there was only a great exploitation basis that they looked at 
northern Saskatchewan forests. In mining we tend to look at it 
as I-grading, but in forestry there is a similar term. But I feel 
that what they wanted to do was straightforward exploitation of 
our resources. 
 
And during the period of course in the past 20 years, we then 
looked at the development of our own mining and forestry 
sectors then to challenge the big monopoly basis of the big 
companies, you know, that were from foreign soils. And we 
said, let’s look at this and re-examine this and challenge them 
right in our home turf. Let’s see that we can prove to the world 
and what . . . That economic myth that we couldn’t get into 
Crown corporate sector and make money had to be demolished. 
 
That type of myth had existed in the 1800s and also the early 
1900s to the middle 1900s, and that myth came to be 
demolished basically because people said, from way back, that 
the only way that education, that health, that economic 
development could ever work is in the private hands. We knew 
that from the historical background. 
 
During the early 1800s we had to fight for public schools 
because everything . . . only the schooling went to the rich. We 
had to fight then for the many situations in health. And there 
was a big fight in Saskatchewan of course in the 1960s in health 
education, in the health issue, where a lot of the Tories 
supported only privatized health. And a lot of them felt it 
couldn’t be done; only the business hand can develop health 
resources and our health system, you know, at a great rate. 
 
And the history shows that to be completely false, that indeed 
public school systems throughout the world have shown an 
example and a leadership in having good education. And what 
we have shown in Saskatchewan, where we have had medicare, 
is that most of the world is now following our example, that 
publicly controlled health is the only way to go. 
 
And the Tories today, in terms of privatization strategy, want us 
to go back into the Dark Ages of history; that they feel, look, 
the only way we could develop this is through big businesses 
and we have to monopolize those things. 
 
I recognize that strategy of privatization, and especially in 
SMDC. When the privatization of SMDC took place, I looked 
at it and I said, well here we have a tremendous amount of 
assets. We have, with the amalgamation of Eldorado Nuclear, 
we would have close to $2 billion worth of assets. But what the 
Tories are doing is that they’ve privatized it now into a new 
corporation called Cameco, and through a seven-year period, all 
of that will be sold off. 
 
And my feeling on that is that we already control, we already 
controlled quite a bit of the mining industry. We had invested in 
gold and zinc and copper and uranium and many other things 
throughout the North, and we didn’t do monopoly control in the 
way that the Tories want. They want monopoly control by big 
business on this mining. We did joint ventures with business. 
We felt that it was very important for us to look at joint 
ownership  
  



 
April 14, 1989 

 

848 
 

with business through SMDC. 
 
SMDC had 16 per cent ownership in one case; 33 per cent 
ownership in another case; 51 per cent ownership in another 
case, and so on. But they did not have complete monopoly 
control on the mining industry because they were doing a 
diversified approach in terms of investment. You had to be able 
to invest, not only in uranium, but in copper, because when the 
prices go up in uranium they tend to go down in copper and 
vice versa on the different metals. So you had to have a 
diversified investment in regards to the mining industry. And 
that’s what SMDC did. 
 
And a person such as Roy Lloyd, who got knocked off by the 
Tories, proved that the SMDC system was working. It was 
making $60 million. It was $60 million which could go back 
into our health and education systems. 
 
What the Tories are saying is that Cameco now, which now 
made about 52 million this past year, what they’re saying is that 
that $110 million should now go into private industry — at a 
time when we have a 50 to 80 per cent unemployment rate in 
the North; at a time when we want a lot of services; at a time 
when I mentioned the issue of suicides and the rising suicide 
rate in the North. The people want to put it back into the hands 
of private industry only. 
 
And I feel that’s a wrong approach. It’s a very narrow-minded 
approach when they recognize that in terms of international 
investment that you have to be able to invest in different sectors 
to be able to withstand, you know, the effects of the large-scale 
monopoly ownership that’s taking place throughout the world. 
And I really feel that not only is there a sell-off of our assets, I 
mean nobody goes in and says, my goodness, I’m going to 
make a long-term economic decision by selling off the farm; 
I’m going to make a long-term economic decision by selling off 
my house; that I will sell off everything. And pretty soon you 
won’t have anything left. 
 
Selling off your assets is not a solution. All you’re doing is 
transferring the assets that are controlled by Saskatchewan 
people over to big-scale monopoly capital, whether it’s from 
Japan or whether it’s from the U.S.A. or whether it’s West 
Germany or whatever. And I really feel that this whole aspect of 
transferring assets is just not the right way to go. We already 
control it. Those are our crown jewels. We should keep them 
and use them for the time that we have economic downturns. 
 
It’s very ironic that this Tory government this year, the only 
saving grace that they had was they were able to get $200 
million from the Crown corporations to save them from that $4 
billion deficit that they put us in a hole already this year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll have to adjourn then, Mr. Speaker, because I wanted to 
speak again later. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


