


















































June 15, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 15, 1989 
 

1933 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I . . . this afternoon 
spoke a few words in respect to the latest privatization Bill of 
the government opposite and that is in respect to the 
privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan or a 
portion thereof. 
 
I want to lay to the public of Saskatchewan what, in fact, are the 
plans of this government. The plans of this government is 
essentially to privatize a portion, at least at this time, of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Essentially what they are 
saying is that some 55 per cent of that privatization of the 
potash will be sold to residents of Canada and a further 45 per 
cent will be sold to foreigners. And that’s how it’s defined 
within the press release and the government’s commitment as to 
what this Bill in effect will do. 
 
I want to say to the members opposite that when we deal with 
potash, we’re dealing with a resource we have been blessed 
with. It is estimated that at the present rate of consumption — 
there is an extraction or a processing — that there would be up 
to estimated 5,000 years of supply of potash in Saskatchewan. 
That is a tremendous resource that the people of Saskatchewan 
have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to go in a little bit into the history tonight of why 
the Blakeney government got into the potash industry. And I 
want to say that much of our potash was being produced by the 
private sector. And in 1975-76, the Blakeney government put 
into place a particular regime of royalties and tax structure. And 
the private industry of Saskatchewan, the resource owned by 
the people of this province, the potash corporations who were 
developing our resource at that time, indicated to the 
government, the duly elected government whose duty it was to 
extract as much profit for the people of Saskatchewan in respect 
to that resources as possible . . . And during that time, I want to 
indicate what were the steps of the private sector in respect to 
the government’s rightful action to seek from its resources the 
maximum benefit for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
First, they refused to open up their books and produce the 
production and financial data that would justify their claim that 
they were really poverty stricken. And only in Saskatchewan as 
a favour to the people of this province, we asked them, we put 
into place a regime to get for the people of Saskatchewan the 
maximum benefit. And the private corporations indicated that 
they just couldn’t possibly pay it. That’s what they said. 
 
Secondly, they launched what is called the capital strike  

by announcing that they would take their future expansion plans 
and invest elsewhere. So in a sense they were holding the 
people of Saskatchewan and the government of Saskatchewan 
at ransom. 
 
And third, they launched a series of court actions which they 
later lost. And finally, Mr. Speaker, they deliberately fell behind 
in the payment of the taxation regime that was imposed upon 
the potash corporation. In other words, they defaulted and were 
refusing to pay to the duly elected government, representing the 
people of Saskatchewan, a fair royalty and tax structure. 
 
And at that time the Government of Saskatchewan was being 
held at ransom by the private sector. And what the government 
of the day indicated is that we have the duty and the obligation 
to see that the resources, and indeed potash, would provide the 
greatest amount of revenue possible for the people of this 
province because, after all, the people of Saskatchewan own the 
potash resource, not those that are developing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And at that time no individual in Saskatchewan 
. . . There’s no individual person financially in a position to be 
able to own a potash mine. And the option was then that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, would indeed take an interest and purchase some 
of the mines in the potash industry. And what they did is to 
leave in place exactly the royalty and taxation structure, applied 
it to the public sector as well as to the private sector, and, I’ll 
tell you, the results were astronomical as to what benefits 
flowed to the people of this province. 
 
Public ownership of potash mines was not an ideological thing 
for the government of the day. The purpose of it was pure 
economics in order to garner for the people of Saskatchewan the 
best return on their potash reserves that was being developed. 
And I’ll tell you, the history under the Blakeney administration 
is one that the people of Saskatchewan can be proud of in 
respect to the potash industry. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, now what we are doing . . . 
We have this wonderful resource, we have the public 
ownership, we have a financial statement indicating some $106 
million of profit that can be paid for benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And at this time the government has said in this 
Bill that we’re talking about, that they are going to privatize, 
and they are going to privatize the potash corporation or a 
portion thereof. And it seems to me that the question that the 
people are asking: it’s a good deal for private investors; why 
isn’t it a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan to own it? 
That’s the question that they’re asking. 
 
And you know, I want to go, Mr. Speaker . . . The whole 
problem that this government has with its privatization of 
potash and other privatization is, one, as I indicated, the people 
have lost confidence in the competence of that government. The 
people actually do not feel that they can put together the sell-off 
of potash mines in Saskatchewan where an independent expert 
has indicated is in excess of  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1934 
 

$2 billion in value. That’s the asset that the people of 
Saskatchewan collectively own. And what they’re fearful of is 
that this government, through their incompetence again, will 
indeed bring about a bad deal in privatization of potash. 
 
And the other thing, I guess is, Mr. Speaker, is that the people 
of Saskatchewan have lost faith in what the government says, 
because in 1982 Pocket Politics was put out, and there is a 
statement of the then leader of the Progressive Conservative 
Party and now Premier of this province, a message from the 
now Premier. But I want to indicate these are talking points and 
positions of this government. 
 
And one of the things that they ask on page 14 of this booklet: 
is it true the Conservatives plan to dismantle Crown 
corporations? And you know what the answer in here that they 
told the people? Absolutely not; that’s a scare tactic the NDP is 
using. That’s what they told the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we can go to a previous statement. Question: NDP cabinet 
ministers are always saying it isn’t in the public interest to 
answer questions about Crown corporations. Is that true? The 
answer — this is the Tory manual, gospel — Crown 
corporations belong to you the taxpayer, they said. So if it isn’t 
in the public interest, then in whose interest is it? That’s what 
they said to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, what they are proposing to do is to 
dismantle the publicly owned Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And any comparison of previous types of 
privatization that this government have put in place — I’ll tell 
you, the people of Saskatchewan see no benefits. 
 
I want to go into a little bit of the history of this potash industry 
that we should be very proud of. I mean we have the potash 
corporation headquartered in Saskatoon. We’ve built up all of 
that expertise and we brought back men and women from 
across Canada to come home and to work — engineers, 
lawyers, and so on, and they’re all right in Saskatoon, building 
an expertise and developing the province. 
 
But I think we should take a look at what this industry has been 
doing for the people of this province. And I take a look at some 
of the NDP years, and we had it under public ownership from 
1976 until 1981. And the taxes — royalties paid to the province, 
the taxes and royalties paid to the province . . And I want to go 
through these and impress upon the people of Saskatchewan, 
and the members opposite, that a substantial amount is paid to 
the people of this province. 
 
In 1976 when it was first started, $1 million; 1977, $16 million 
paid to the province in tax and royalties; 1978, $35 million paid 
in taxes and royalties; in 1979, $58 million paid in taxes and 
royalties; in 1980, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the 
public sector, paid in taxes and royalties, $90 million; in 1981, 
the last year in office for the New Democratic Party, $71 
million. The total paid in during those six years — the total paid 
in taxes and royalties to the people of this province — was $271 
million. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Two hundred and seventy-one million dollars. 
That’s paying the taxes and royalty structure exactly the same 
as what is imposed on the private sector. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the profits that the public corporation 
— the potash corporation — made for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And if we take a look: 1976, that’s the year that 
the Potash Corporation was founded, $540,000; 1977, $1.12 
million; 1978, $24.72 million profit; 1979, $77.96 million in 
profit; in 1980, the potash corporation, the public sector, made a 
profit of $167.45 million; and in 1981, 1981, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan made $141.721 million profit. 
 
(1915) 
 
In six years the public sector of the potash industry owned by 
the people of Saskatchewan, as confirmed in the Tory manual, 
that it belongs to them — that’s what you said — the total profit 
over those six years to the people of Saskatchewan, retained by 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, was $413.51 million. 
Not bad — $413.51 million. Now I ask you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . In six years. And we’ll get to your operation 
and the incompetence of your government. 
 
But here we have . . . here what the government opposite says: 
we’ve got to get rid of it; we’ve got to give it to the eastern, Bay 
Street, Ontario investors. They’re going to make it run better, 
they said, going to make more money for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to stay on this Bill, but the people of 
Saskatchewan no longer trust PC-style privatization. They don’t 
trust the mechanism that they’re using, they don’t trust their 
managerial capabilities, they don’t trust their competence. 
 
Here we have an asset that’s worth $2.1 billion, says an expert 
in the industry, if valued properly — maybe more. And here we 
have a government that can’t even manage the affairs of this 
province going into a transaction to give away a part of the 
heritage and a part of the economic strength of this province. 
 
It’s PC privatization that’s the issue here. It’s the Premier of 
this province — what he alludes and calls privatization is at the 
heart of the matter. The people of Saskatchewan have watched. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in respect to Saskoil . . . No, in 
respect to the oil industry. Under our administration, when the 
oil prices were less than they are today, we made $760 million 
profits for the people of this province. Today the price of oil is 
higher than those years when we were in office; the production 
is up on the government’s own figures. And you know what 
they’re budgeting after privatizing Saskoil for the revenue of 
the people of this province? One hundred and seventy-three 
million dollars is what the total take from the oil industry after 
it’s been privatized. 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1935 
 

And so I say to the people of Saskatchewan, under PC 
privatization the result . . . Under the privatization, potash will 
be no different than the results that we have in respect to 
Saskoil. I say that the ownership will drift not to the people of 
Saskatchewan in shareholdings — the people of Saskatchewan 
will not be the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries will be those 
foreigners that have 45 per cent, and it’ll be the Bay Street boys 
from Ontario then owning. 
 
And what will happen to the profits, what will happen to the 
$413.51 million that we made during the period ’76-81? I’ll tell 
you, that money stayed here in Saskatchewan, working for 
Saskatchewan people, and building a future for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And I’ll tell you, you turn this over to the eastern Bay Street 
boys and those from Hong Kong or from China or from Japan 
or from Taiwan, or wherever, and the profits that we have made 
here in respect to the public ownership of over $413 million 
will go anywhere they decide. Out of the province, over into 
other countries, setting up various competition in respect to our 
very own industry — maybe in the Soviet Union, using the 
profits from this industry here to go and to compete against our 
own industry which we have given to them. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, our potash corporation . . . 
And the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, I welcome him into the 
debate with his brilliant mind that so reflects the Tory 
philosophy. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, not a bad record. Getting into the 
industry and building for the future of Saskatchewan a powerful 
corporation that can deal throughout the world and distribute its 
God-given wealth, a gift that we have been given. 
 
And then I want to look at the operation of this here potash 
corporation under this group across the way. Well during the 
PC government’s years, 1982, they paid $15 million 
approximately into tax royalties paid to the province; in 1983, 
almost 11 million; in 1984, 17.7 million; 1985, they paid in 
10.7; 1986, 13.3; 1987, 12.6; and 1988, 19.8. 
 
Under the government’s operation of the Crown sector, which 
they don’t believe in and which they said before they even took 
an examination of it that they were going to get rid of it, 
because, after all, that’s not philosophically in tune with them 
. . . It doesn’t matter whether it’s a benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s not important. We have an ideology and 
we say that we’re going to get rid of it whether it’s good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well how much did they pay under their stewardship? How 
much did they pay in total on tax and royalties paid to the 
province? And remember, Mr. Speaker, under the six years 
under the New Democratic government, under Premier Allan 
Blakeney, 271 million; under the PCs’ government, 100 million 
— 271 million compared to 100 million. 
 
And let’s take these great business men that were going to  

turn this province upside-down and really give her snoose. They 
really are going to give her snoose. Open for business, they 
said. Yes. 
 
Well let’s take a look at their profit while they were running it. 
Well 1982 they still hadn’t destroyed it so they got 607,000; in 
1983, a loss of $18 million; 1984, had a profit of 25 million; but 
in 1985, $68.7 million in loss; 1986, $103 million loss; 1987, 
$21.7 million loss; and this year, they have finally organized 
that they had a profit of $106 million. 
 
Well let’s just take a look. Let’s compare the six years, the six 
years under the direction of the New Democratic Party 
government running the potash corporation. It brought in a 
profit of $413.51 million. Do you know what the total loss 
under these geniuses across the way, these administrative 
geniuses? Almost $78 million loss. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan know they’re incompetent 
and that’s why the people of Saskatchewan in respect to this 
potash Bill are saying to us, as the opposition, stand firm; do 
not let them dispose of that valuable asset. 
 
And what I say to you, Mr. Speaker, across . . . The problem 
that we have is that right wing governments across the country 
are in fact using the same advisers. There’s the Adam Smith 
foundation in Great Britain, which is the laissez-faire 
philosophy, and the Fraser Institute. And they’ve tried 
privatization in other provinces. And I’m telling you, the people 
of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada where it’s being 
privatized are taking an awful beating. If we were selling off the 
asset at its true value, if the business deal was transacted, was 
firm, and with experts that could handle it, the people of 
Saskatchewan may consider it. But what is happening is that 
this government is incapable of the administration of the 
government’s affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The same advisers that are advising the 
Government of Saskatchewan, as I said, the Fraser Institute and 
the Adam Smith Institute in Great Britain, and they’re advising 
the Vander Zalm provincial government as well, which have 
gone into a massive privatization. And what I say here is that in 
potash we have such a tremendous resource, non-renewable, but 
the supply, as I said, is large, huge. And it’s very valuable not 
only for this generation, but tremendously valuable for future 
generations. And it seems to me that unless you have economic 
control, control of your economic destiny, I don’t think that you 
can have control of your political destiny. I think that the two 
go hand in hand. 
 
And we are not talking here ideology; at least I’m not. I’m 
talking the benefits for the people of this province. Which one 
is working? Which way will be of greatest benefit to the people 
of this province? 
 
I want to refer, as I said, to privatization, the risks of 
privatization. I’ve used some illustrations here in respect to this 
Bill and I want to maintain, stay primarily on this Bill, or 
essentially, I mean, totally. 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1936 
 

But in British Columbia they went through the same thing. And 
there there was a land flip. "Land flip furor builds in British 
Columbia," and they’re selling off there too and privatizing. 
And they sold off a piece of land, just three quarter hectares, I 
believe it was, Mr. Speaker, along the waterfront. And they sold 
it to a numbered company, the public corporation did, for $2.2 
million. 
 
That same day, another company owned by the same ones that 
had bought it for 2.2, bought it for over $10 million. There was 
a loss to the people of that province on privatization of that of 
somewhere around 7 to $8 million. And the bankers actually 
gave out a mortgage on that property that same day of over $7 
million and said that the appraisal of the property that was 
flipped, on the day that it was flipped, was 11 . . . 
approximately . . . Not approximately — the appraisal said it 
was $11 million. 
 
So this is the danger in privatization. It’s really a transfer into 
the hands of a few major economic units of production in 
Saskatchewan. And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have to move 
with tremendous amount of caution in respect to the 
privatization of potash. 
 
I want to say that the Minister of Mines and Energy indicated 
the other day that . . . said that the NDP leader is overlooking 
the fact that PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) made 
more money in 1988 than ever before. Well the facts don’t 
support her. The facts aren’t important to the members opposite 
because, as I’ve indicated, 1980 it made $167 million and in 
1981 made $141 million. And so that is not the top performance 
for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that much has been said in respect 
to the potential of our potash industry here, the public sector 
part. And I’ve looked at some of the quotes in the annual 
reports, of the evaluation by some of the chairmen of the potash 
corporation under the PC government. 
 
(1930) 
 
I want to look at the annual report in 1982, and the chairman 
was the member from Yorkton, and this is what he had to say in 
respect to their evaluation of the public asset, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan: 
 

It is our firm belief that a new and stronger PCS can 
emerge. With this belief in mind the board of directors 
supported management’s recommendation to continue with 
all of our major projects in Saskatchewan. I refer to the 
PCS Mining Lanigan expansion phase 2 which is now 
under way. This clearly illustrates (said the member) our 
commitment to and our belief in the future of PCS as a 
viable and vibrant commercial entity. 
 

That was in 1982, and I’ll tell you, the member, the chairman of 
the board at that time, the member from Yorkton, was dead on. 
The potash corporation, owned partly in the private sector and 
partly in the public sector, gives it the best of all worlds. 
Because I maintain that while right wing governments indicate 
that what you can do is leave everything in the private sector 
and tax — you  

don’t have to own — well the history of the potash industry 
demonstrates that that’s not true, because if you don’t have an 
option and all of the potash is owned by multinational 
corporations, multinational corporations are then in a position, 
Mr. Speaker, to set their own royalty rates because they’ve got 
the hammer. 
 
They can say to the government of the day, we won’t pay those 
royalties; they’re too high. And what does the government do? 
They get down on their hands and knees and say, yes, you’re 
right. Because what else can they do? It’s all privately owned. 
They can get together and they say, well we’re going to pull out 
our investment. Do you think the government has the courage to 
stand up and to take on the multinational corporations to get a 
good deal for the people of Saskatchewan? Of course not. 
 
But I think there are other advantages in respect to public 
investment. I think that public investment, or a portion of it as 
we have here in Saskatchewan, it helps us to maximize, as I say, 
the profits for the people of Saskatchewan; it gives them an 
economic base for diversification and development. It also, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, lends itself to an advantage of, as I said 
before, of making it the centre of development. After all, 
Saskatchewan is the second largest reserve of potash in the 
world, second only to Russia. 
 
And what a future we have to build on that great industry. And 
as I say also, Mr. Speaker, public investment, as I’ve said, is a 
window to the industry for the government of the day. They can 
take a look and see the costs. They can see the profit margins. 
They can look and see whether their taxation regime is indeed 
fair. And having set up a fair regime, then they can impose it to 
the private multinational corporations, because after all, if the 
public sector, which the private say is less efficient, can operate 
within the sphere of the same rules and make a profit for the 
people of Saskatchewan, then surely the private sector should 
also be able to. 
 
And I think the other thing is that if we have an asset of the 
value of potash, which is fertilizer, used for fertilizer across the 
world, and as it has been indicated that the population of the 
world is likely to double by the year 2000, and so the 
production and the use of that resource is going to continue to 
increase in order to feed the millions and billions of people 
across the globe. 
 
And I say that if foreign governments like Japan, China, Korea, 
other governments, are anxious to come and purchase our 
potash, there’s a clear indication that it has a future because 
they come for an advantage. And if it’s a private corporation, it 
comes for profit. And so the future of potash looks very, very 
good for the future. In fact, I will deal with some of that in the 
annual report which demonstrates that it has a very positive 
outlook as predicted by the present board of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess the other aspect that I think why public investment 
has some use is that, as I said, it’s very accountable. Crown 
corporations have to be accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. No private corporation goes through the amount 
of scrutiny that a Crown corporation goes under. We have a 
Crown  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1937 
 

Corporations Committee, and there obviously should be some 
improvements to that. But one thing is certain, is that the public 
of Saskatchewan have a full disclosure of an annual report and 
know the facts in respect to it. I say in respect to the private 
multinational corporations that that is not possible. 
 
So what we’re dealing with here is the Tory-style privatization, 
which every evidence indicates it doesn’t work, and it’s a very 
contradiction of what they seem to be saying at other occasions. 
It’s a contradiction because this government has indicated that 
the eastern Canada, central Canada, is in the favourable position 
with a massive amount of development. And at the very same 
time what this Bill will do is, in essence, just as with Saskoil, 
turn over the shares and the ownership probably of a great 
percentage of the potash that is being privatized to eastern 
investors. 
 
I say that under the Tory type of privatization, if that’s what 
happens, the ownership will go outside of Saskatchewan; it will 
go outside of Canada; it will essentially be landed up in eastern 
Canada and foreign countries. 
 
I say that under the Tory privatization, as they are purporting in 
this Bill, that the revenue generated for the people of this 
province will be far less than it would under the public 
corporation. The other aspect of the Tory privatization is that 
they’re on an ideological kick. They are committed to the 
privatization regardless of whether or not public, private, 
co-operative, joint ventures is the best mix for Saskatchewan. 
They are deciding now that there’s going to be only one engine 
to our economic development, and that has to be the private 
sector. 
 
Well on this side, as we have said before, we believe in a mixed 
economy. We believe that Saskatchewan, which is land-locked, 
Saskatchewan, which has harsh weathers, has been able to 
develop here and build us into one of the wealthiest provinces 
in Canada, as I indicated, through a mixed economy. 
 
And so I don’t think that what we should do is get the 
ideologues indicating that we have to necessarily sell off that 
because it’s public ownership. 
 
And I guess Tory privatization also leads to the factor that he 
who pays the piper will call the tune. And it seems to me that 
the economic control will be handed off to other people, and as 
a result they will be making many of the political decisions in 
this province in the future. 
 
And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
are deeply concerned, deeply concerned about the incompetence 
of this government. I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that oil was 
shipped from Alaska through the port of Valdez and thousands, 
or literally thousands and thousands of gallons of oil were 
shipped through without accident until a drunken captain took 
charge of a ship and ran it aground. 
 
And I think that’s really basically what’s the problem here in 
Saskatchewan. The economy of this province under the Tory 
type of privatization is running the ship aground. And so I say 
Tory privatization has not benefitted the  

people of this province. 
 
But they have tried to say to the people of Saskatchewan, well 
buy a Sask bond or a SaskTel bond or a SaskPower bond, and 
boy, you are participating like never before. Well how many 
people participated in the SaskPower bonds? Forty thousand 
people. How many participated in SaskTel? Less than 40,000 
people. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the average Saskatchewan 
person is not in the business of buying shares in private 
corporations. I’ll bet you can go across Saskatchewan and you 
wouldn’t find more than 10 per cent, if that many, that have 
shares in private corporations — so-called participation of 
ownership. What a farce! 
 
And more importantly, the examples of experiences that people 
have had with other private corporations lead them to be 
suspicious, and rightly so. Many people invested in Pioneer 
Trust and got burnt; many people in Principal Trust and got 
burnt. And so I say, what happens under the Tory privatization 
is that what it’ll be is foreign ownership, and the effects will be 
a loss of economic development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having been in this House now for a number of 
years, I think that any legislation or any government policy has 
to have at its heart and purpose, the benefit to the people of this 
province. That should be the objective. The major objective of a 
government should be to bring in policies and legislation that 
will maximize the benefits for the people for which it governs. 
 
Maximum control of their economic and political destiny 
should be in the hands of the people. And I say that this Bill 
here, what it will do is to take that economic lever from the 
people of Saskatchewan and divest it into the hands of 
foreigners and outside multinational corporations. 
 
I used my experience, Mr. Speaker, on a trip that I had some 
time, through the parliamentary association, and had the 
opportunity to go down to New Brunswick. And the Speaker at 
that time — was a Progressive Conservative government — and 
the Speaker of the day was our host and toured us through New 
Brunswick, and I saw privatization in New Brunswick at its 
best. 
 
And I had the opportunity at that time to meet one of the, I 
guess one of the most successful entrepreneurs in Canadian 
history, K.C. Irving. K.C. Irving and three sons he has, I had the 
opportunity to meet with him. And I’m not knocking the genius 
of K.C. Irving because he has built a tremendous empire of 
economic development. 
 
That company’s into shipping, into forestry, into gas 
distribution, into filling stations, almost half of the New 
Brunswick economy. And he has contributed some jobs. But I 
want to say, also what happened is that . . . out of that, that’s 
privatization. And you know where the major assets, the taxes 
are being paid by the multimillionaire . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It’s in Bahamas where there is no taxation. And 
he operates his companies in foreign jurisdictions  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1938 
 

where the taxation burden is not paid to the New Brunswick 
government. 
 
And so I say to you, the genius of private entrepreneurs we 
respect, at least I respect, and I think they have a contribution. 
But any deal that is to be negotiated, any deal that is to be 
negotiated has to be done with competent people. And I look at 
the little guy, they call him jack-in-the-box . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. I don’t 
think the hon. member wants to make reflections of that nature 
of any member in the House. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I apologize, Mr. Minister. It was his hilarious 
laughter that stirred me into my comments. 
 
The hon. member from Regina South, I want to refer to, who 
used to be the hon. member from Regina North, but he was 
afraid to run there so he ran to the South to try to get elected — 
that’s the one that I’m referring to, Mr. Speaker, the one that ran 
from the working class and went over to the high-priced boys, 
and ran so he could save his political hide. That’s the one that 
I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, the guy that was afraid to face 
the people that he represented the previous four years because 
they were going to whip him. 
 
(1945) 
 
So let us get back. I want to get back to the main core of my 
comments here. I say that the objective . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. The hon. member from 
Quill Lakes is attempting to make some points in his remarks 
but is having great difficulty because of a second debate taking 
place. Let us allow the hon. member for Quill Lakes to continue 
with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate 
it because we are dealing with a very important subject matter, 
and I view it with importance. 
 
And I say again that the objective of any government should 
first of all maximize the control of the economic destiny by the 
people of this province. I think that we should be working here 
for diversification, spin-offs from the industries that we have 
here. I think also that what we need, and should be our 
objective, is to be fair with private investors, but be most of all 
fair to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And therefore what we have to be able to do is 
to have a window into the industry itself in order that we can 
guarantee fairness and a fairness of return to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member 
from Saltcoats, I’m sure, is going to give his brilliant 
dissertations like he does so often. About as far as he gets into 
debate is introducing a group of school children; that’s the 
extent of his debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koskie: — So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there are 
ways in which . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
indicate, Mr. Speaker, that there are various things that can be 
done in respect to public ownership. And I often thought and 
urged that in respect to potash and in respect to Saskoil, the 
public sector, the government, people of Saskatchewan, getting 
knowledge of the industry and what can in fact and could be 
done, is that part of the inventory of information that we had in 
respect to . . . Let me use Saskoil as an example, or potash. 
 
And what we could have been doing here is taking 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, 
Saskatchewan investors, and we could have been giving to them 
information in order that they could in fact facilitate exploration 
of oil, or they could . . . Actually we can get into the potash 
exactly the same way. We could spread it over a number of 
years. And if we want the people of Saskatchewan to own it, we 
can put it over a series of years in order that it be owned by 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Secondly, what we can do and has been done is allowing 
industrial democracy where the workers themselves are 
participating. But that doesn’t happen. Because if you go over 
to Great Britain and look at the record of privatization in 
whether or not the public really have a large number of shares, 
the workers, the facts of the matter is that it does not bear up at 
all. 
 
Workers which are initially given or granted shares soon after 
disposed of them, and the amount of share investment by the 
workers in Great Britain has dropped substantially. And I have 
the statistics in respect to a large number of the corporations in 
respect to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that here in Saskatchewan, we want 
to ask in respect to privatization: can the people of 
Saskatchewan, in fact, help develop some of their resources? I 
have a great faith in the people of this province, the initiative 
and the entrepreneurial abilities. And therefore I think we 
should continue to give that opportunity. And I don’t think that 
we need Easterners to run our potash mine, and I don’t think 
that we need foreigners to run our potash. I think that the people 
of Saskatchewan can run a portion of our potash mine as they 
have so well demonstrated under the Blakeney’s years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to continue, Mr. Speaker, and to say to 
you here this evening that what we’re dealing with is very 
important. This corporation is one of the finest in the industry; 
there’s no doubt about it. 
 
I want to indicate another statement which really supports that. 
And this is not from one of our members, it’s from another 
respected individual who was chairman of the board of the 
potash corporation, and that’s the former mayor of Saskatoon, 
chairman of the board, Mr. Cliff  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1939 
 

Wright. In the 1983 annual report he had this to say: 
 

The optimism with which the board of directors and the 
provincial government view PCS is reflected in the 
decision announced shortly after the year end, that the 
corporation would move into new headquarters in 1985. 
 
While their decision was based primarily on economic 
reasons, the fact that it involves a 20-year commitment 
indicates the confident way in which the future of the 
corporation is seen. 
 

And that’s the statement of the chairman of the board. And 
what has happened to the confidence that they exhibited in that 
annual report? 
 
In 1985, Mr. Wright indicated one other thing in respect to the 
annual report. 
 

The corporation believes its mines are among the most 
efficient and productive in the world. 
 

And one final one, and I don’t want to continue to read, but just 
to show the point of what the chairman of the board under the 
present administration had indicated. And this is a chairman, a 
former minister in the present government, chairman Paul 
Schoenhals. He says: 
 

While the corporation has experienced hard times, it 
continues to be among the industry leaders in mine 
operation, technology, transportation, customer service, 
research and development. 
 

What more? What more could you ask for from a corporation 
than to have that said by the chairman of the board? Is it too 
good for the people of Saskatchewan when we have to ask? 
Such a fine operation, leading the industry, and they say, no, 
we’ve got to privatize it. We’ve got to get rid of it. We’ve got to 
get the Chinese communists to come over and own a part of it, 
or the Japanese government to come over and own it. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no doubt that when 
the present government assumed office that many of the 
governments that had been dealing with the publicly-owned 
potash corporation here in Saskatchewan felt very comfortable 
dealing with one government to the next government. And the 
Japanese indicated that they had complete confidence in dealing 
with the Government of Saskatchewan in the purchase of 
potash, and that privatization, they would be more reluctant to 
deal for the purchase of potash. 
 
And the Chinese in essence are the same. Many of the Pacific 
Rim countries have no fear of government ownership and they 
deal with governments. And it was a positive aspect of public 
ownership. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what we have to ask 
ourselves, why are we taking this direction? Why are we hastily 
moving ahead on privatization rather than dealing with other 
important issues facing the province? 
 
And while we’re dealing with privatization here, I  

checked the paper and I take a look at Ontario. And there they 
have very high rates of auto insurance. And what they are not 
ruling out is, to go into public auto insurance hasn’t been ruled 
out. And here, while other governments contemplate public 
involvement, here we’re on a mad, mad dash towards 
privatization. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side are 
supporting the people of this province. And not only that, the 
people of Saskatchewan are supporting us in our stand in 
respect to the privatization of potash and the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So when we take a look and we see that they’re 
going to be offering a part of it to the private sector, that shares 
will be made available for people to buy, I guess the question 
that we have to ask: is it the single parents with children, of 
Saskatchewan, who will be buying those shares? And I say it 
won’t be. They were invited . . . And they will be invited, 
rather. But they will have no opportunity because they have no 
money to participate. 
 
Is it the hard-working Saskatchewan farmer with his saving 
account dwindling under the lack of agricultural policy? Well 
they will be invited to participate, Mr. Speaker, but they can’t 
afford to participate. 
 
Will it be the ordinary worker across Saskatchewan that will 
have a large shareholding in this sell-off of the privatization of 
potash? And I say again, they may well be invited. But I say 
also, Mr. Speaker, under this present government, they cannot 
afford to participate either. And so I guess all of these will be 
invited, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they won’t be 
participating. 
 
The government talks a lot about public participation and how it 
involves the Main Street, Saskatchewan. That’s what they were 
told to say by their high-priced advisers. But the reality of 
popular capitalism, of shareholders’ democracy, does not match 
the rhetoric which we hear. And I want to say as I said before, 
the privatization of this potash corporation will not divest shares 
and ownership to the people of this province. The people of this 
province, I say, will have less control over the potash 
corporation than they have at the present time. 
 
In Great Britain — to use as an example of privatization to 
demonstrate my point that the people of this province will not 
be participating — when the British Telecom was put up for 
sale, what happened there is that they undervalued the shares. 
And then shortly afterwards, because it’s undervalued, those 
shares go up and many of those that have bought divest them, 
sell those shares, and those shares are taken up and held by a 
very few individuals who then have control of the company. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s likely to happen here 
in respect to the potash privatization in Saskatchewan. It will be 
owned by a very few people, even if initially there’s a large 
number of shareholders. 
 
You can go to British Columbia too, with the operation they 
had there with the BCRIC (British Columbia  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1940 
 

Resources Investment Corporation) — it was called the BCRIC 
— and that’s what happened. Shares were distributed to people 
but what happened is that the shares in that instance became 
virtually. . . (inaudible) . . .yes, brick, virtually valueless. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker — and he was talking about the 
privatization of potash — one economist has referred to 
privatization as this being a taxation by privatization; for the 
taxpayers as a whole paid for the underpricing of those who 
purchased the shares and got the benefits. And that’s really 
what’s happening, is that you undervalue that asset, and that 
undervaluation of that asset has to be picked up by the people of 
Saskatchewan, because the asset is worth, say, twice as much as 
they’re offering it for, and the people of Saskatchewan, in 
effect, are picking up that loss. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do the taxpayers of Saskatchewan lose, 
but what happens to the wonderful idea of public participation? 
And just to give a couple of examples here, and I predict will 
happen in respect to the privatization of potash, the number of 
shareholders for cable and wireless in Great Britain sank from 
150,000 shareholders to 26,000 within one year, and so what 
was supposedly held out to be a distribution of ownership — 
from 150,000 to 26,000.  
 
British Aerospace demonstrates the same thing that will happen 
in this, with potash: British Aerospace, from 158,000 to 27,000; 
the numbers of small shareholders sank by 93 per cent — from 
44,000 to 3,300. That’s all that remains as small shareholders. 
 
And so this is a myth that the Tory government is perpetuating 
and spreading and trying to convince the people that they’re 
going to be able to get some shares and they’re going to have 
real control over this potash. 
 
And just one more illustration here for Amersham International. 
The number of shareholders fell from 62,000 to 10,000 within a 
month. That demonstrates, I think, what happens; that there is 
. . . Eventually there is — and very rapidly — is a share 
concentration, and the effective control will be in the hands of 
those from eastern Canada and whoever may invest from 
foreign governments. 
 
There’s another myth that they try to perpetuate, and that is that 
if they have the privatization of potash, that somehow the 
workers are going to really be able to participate. And they offer 
them up a piece of paper and call it a share. And they say to the 
worker, now you’re going to be better off. 
 
Well experience shows that worker participation and the rate of 
participation by workers in any privatization — and that will 
happen in the potash — is minimal, minimal, experience shows. 
 
Look at some of the initial percentages of share ownership by 
employees. And I use these examples to demonstrate to the 
people of Saskatchewan and to the workers, who they are going 
to try to convince that they will, in fact, be  

involved in this share take-up, that it won’t happen. 
 
Here we have Amersham International. You know how many 
. . . The workers have 3.7 per cent of the share offerings. I’ll 
just give you a couple more. Britoil, 0.l per cent; one-tenth of 1 
per cent in privatized Britoil is held by the workers of Britoil. 
Enterprise Oil, 0.03. British Aerospace, 3.6. And British 
Telecom, 4.6. 
 
So the point I’m making, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s very 
relevant, that the workers who will be offered and given some 
shares perhaps, initially, or help to buy some shares, the total 
effect of their share held by the workers will be so small that 
they will have no effect upon the control of that company. 
 
And the other thing that we should know is that with large 
multinational corporations, which has brought a lot of 
development to North America and throughout the rest of the 
world, there’s no doubt, but essentially the operation is run by a 
board of directors and the executive management. Let there be 
no doubt about it. It’s not the shareholders that go down to 
Toronto and meet for a shareholders meeting that are making 
the major decisions. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the question which this government has 
never asked, and even as it is prepared to place PCS on the 
market, the question it has never asked is that if this public 
participation, this shareholders’ democracy which they are 
saying is such a fundamental part of private enterprise and such 
a telling indication of its natural superiority, why has share 
ownership in Great Britain, home of the Margaret Thatcher 
privatization, actually been declining? Why has the share 
participation in Great Britain been declining? And the obvious 
is that the concentration ends up with a very few. 
 
And that leads, I think, to another question that the government 
should be asking. What is the point of artificially creating 
shareholders’ democracy, as they call it, by government 
intervention, when private enterprise has failed so dismally to 
generate it as a part of their own dynamic? You take a private 
corporation and it’s the same. 
 
What the government is doing here is, as I said, privatizing a 
potash corporation, and they are saying that by people being 
able to buy shares are able to participate. Well if that’s the 
gospel of private enterprise, that share offerings is the way to 
go, then why doesn’t shareholders effectively have control of 
major corporations? 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that shareholders do 
not. It’s controlled by a very few, and that’s what will happen in 
respect to the privatization of potash. I think what is even 
worse, Mr. Speaker, is that the members opposite know that 
public participation as a means of ownership is basically a myth 
and that public participation as a means of controlling 
privatized corporation is a even crueller myth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two American scholars, Adolph Berle and 
Gardiner Means, in their book, The Modern Corporation and 
Private Property, pointed out that, and this is a quote from that 
learned book: 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1941 
 

 The ordinary shareholder is left with a mere symbol of 
ownership, while the substantive ownership is left in the 
hands of management and the board of directors who are 
effectively the economic autocrats. 
 

That’s the fact of the matter. So you get the privatization, and as 
I said before: 
 

The substantive ownership (will be) left in the hands of 
management and the board of the directors who are 
effectively the economic autocrats. 
 

I say, Mr. Speaker, given that public participation isn’t 
producing the benefits that it has alluded to or claims, I say that 
the economy of Saskatchewan will be adversely affected if this 
privatization goes forward. 
 
I think that it’s a myth; that the shareholders’ democracy, I say, 
is a myth. And I think that the members opposite have been 
deluding the public into thinking that it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, how did the leader of the 
government opposite handle this aspect of convincing the 
public that privatization is the way to go? Well I think there’s 
various ways in which the Premier and other members of his 
government have tried to indicate that there’s a benefit for the 
people of this province. 
 
And they held a whole series of meetings throughout with the 
Minister of Public Participation. And I want to say the people of 
Saskatchewan did not attend in great numbers and in great 
excitement and great anticipation, as the member of Public 
Participation went around this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, it has been the same with other efforts 
that the government has put forward. SaskEnergy is another 
example again. And it demonstrates, I think, once and for all 
that the people of this province are not prepared to adopt or 
accept privatization as proposed by the PC government 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there will be 
some winners if this Bill goes ahead. And I think the winners 
will be those who, as I say, not the ordinary farmer in 
Saskatchewan because not many of them will be buying shares. 
There’ll not be many single parents who will be participating. 
There will not be any effective participation by the workers, but 
there will be some winners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the winners who will be those who have won in the other 
schemes of privatization, which is so clearly demonstrated here 
in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I think any entrepreneur 
would be anxious to have PC-type privatization go forward. I 
think it must be exciting for those who sit on the board of 
Saskoil and control it now;  

control a large, developed oil company, developed here in 
Saskatchewan for the people of this province, now under 
control of the board of directors, who many of them sat and 
gained all the information when it was a Crown corporation and 
then moved in when it was privatized because they had inside 
information as to the value of the corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s what’s going to happen in respect to the 
potash corporation. You watch and see who are going to be the 
winners in respect to the privatization of potash corporation. 
 
I think the American that is currently running the potash 
corporation, Mr. Childers, Chuck Childers, I think he’ll do all 
right. Because I would think that what they’ll do is issue a 
substantial number of shares, because this is customary; they 
tried to do that in one other privatization which we rejected in 
Saskoil. 
 
But executive officers and board members are traditionally 
given large issues of shares. And I think that the present 
manager of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, I think 
he’ll do all right. 
 
And I would think that the chairman of the board, who was a 
former minister in the present government, I think he’ll do all 
right because he’s on the inside track. He knows how valuable 
an asset it is. 
 
And I think the big investors down East know how good a deal 
it is. And I’ll tell you, the tycoons from Bay Street will just lap 
it up because they know what kind of an asset they’re going to 
be getting control of. So they’ll win. 
 
And there’ll be other winners because they’re going to go and 
help the foreigners too. They’re going to invite the Chinese, 
communist China, to come and invest. The Japanese, they said 
they would; Korea and Taiwan, India. He was going to give 
them each 25 per cent when he was over there and he went to 
five people. And he gave them 25 per cent, he offered to each of 
the five countries. And they were all excited. 
 
And I say, well they should be excited, because this government 
is incapable of handling a transaction of that magnitude because 
of their incompetence, gross incompetence that has been 
demonstrated time and time again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be a few 
other winners, because the boys that come and take over, they 
don’t have a little sock with 150 million or 200 million in it. 
What they do is they go and borrow the money. That’s what the 
big boys that are going to be buying . . . and so what they’ll be 
doing is borrowing. 
 
(2015) 
 
And the bankers are going to do pretty well. And the bankers 
will be in New York, in Chicago, and they’ll be over in Hong 
Kong perhaps, and they’ll be down East in  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1942 
 

Bay Street. 
 
And this same corporation here that they purchase, the same 
corporation that they’re buying, or being gifted to from the PC 
government, they’ll be paying a sizeable amount to finance the 
borrowings which they instituted in order to purchase the share 
in the ownership of the potash corporation. 
 
And I want to say that there will be other winners. Those who 
are selling the shares are winners. The underwriters are winners. 
But the Saskatchewan people, I don’t think they’re the winners. 
 
The Saskatchewan people haven’t had one demonstrated 
privatization that has demonstrated to them that it works. And 
I’ll tell you that the ordinary worker won’t be buying the shares 
because he can’t. He’s looking for a job under this here 
privatization society. 
 
Thousands of them, as I indicated before, Mr. Speaker, flocking 
out of this province to seek a future somewhere else. The 
largest exodus of people in the history since 1930. Thirteen 
thousand in the first five months have left this province because 
privatization is not working, and privatization of potash is not 
going to offer greater benefits to the people of this province. 
 
But the losers again, I say, will be the people of Saskatchewan, 
because all of that sizeable profit which I indicated, there is no 
guarantee; in fact there is no suggestion that that profit, that 413 
million that we made in the first six years, will stay in 
Saskatchewan. That money will go back to the foreigners that 
invest, to that country, or to the other parts of the world. And I 
say that the stability of the Saskatchewan economy will also be 
the loser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan this government prepares to 
sell off yet another hard earned asset, PCS. The tragedy here, 
Mr. Speaker, is that even as the members opposite ignored the 
British and European experience as being irrelevant to our 
situation, and even as they refused to admit the substantial 
difference between the rhetoric of the Margaret Thatcher 
advisers and reality, what is worse, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
cannot even comprehend what have been the results of their 
own activities right here in Saskatchewan. They are not even 
prepared to accept that even here in Saskatchewan their own 
public participation agenda has been studded with failures. 
 
And I want to look briefly so the people will clearly understand 
what is happening. As I indicated, what will happen here is 
happening with other examples of privatization. Two years ago 
they privatized Saskoil. It was supposed to be participation. 
And all I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that we have not been 
receiving revenue from, in proportion to what we did before as 
a public utility, public corporation. But what is more, that 75 
per cent are now owned . . . of Saskoil is owned down East, and 
that’s what will happen in respect to the potash corporation 
under this privatization. 
 
I think we saw also, Mr. Speaker, under other forms of 
privatization, is that what happened is that, once  

privatized, investment went to another province and many of 
our workers were laid off, so our workers have no experience of 
being the gainers under privatization. 
 
We’ve seen the same in respect to other examples. No, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say that the employee participation will not 
be effective, nor will there be a large amount. There will be 
little public participation of the people of Saskatchewan and no 
increased opportunities for economic future. What we have here 
is, I say, a bad deal for Saskatchewan, which violates even the 
rhetoric used by the members opposite. 
 
I say the privatization of Sask potash corporation, that that deal 
makes no sense. The only thing it does is really indicate the 
nonsense of the members opposite. 
 
But there’s more. Since 1982 the government has been 
privatizing bits and pieces of SaskPower. And what has this 
achieved? Not very much. You know, for privatizing parts of 
SaskPower for the residents of Saskatchewan, the most visible 
change is that we now have . . . We receive not one, but we 
receive two bills, a SaskPower and a Sask gas. 
 
And this is job creation, Tory style. This is truly Devine 
inspiration, not one bill but two bills. And who prints these two 
power bills? Who is the recipient of this bureaucratic dream? 
None other, Mr. Speaker, than WESTBRIDGE computers. 
WESTBRIDGE computers, Mr. Speaker, who has also taken 
over SaskCOMP, another company privatized by this 
government and therefore in the need of government assistance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what better way than of having to print not 
one bill but two bills? Great Tory efficiency: twice the waste, 
but that’s not the important thing, Mr. Speaker; twice the cost, 
but that’s irrelevant to the members opposite; twice the profit, 
now that’s what’s important. 
 
This is public participation, Saskatchewan style, PC style. We 
have seen loss of jobs, loss of investment, loss of control, 
increased waste, increased cost, increased bureaucracy. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, no wonder the people have been leaving this 
province in droves during the last year and a half. 
 
Those of us who remain here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
offer the Premier and the government a challenge: if you really 
truly believe that your vision of public participation has any 
degree of validity, Mr. Speaker, then we say to the members 
opposite, then allow the public, allow the public to participate 
fully in this decision. And what we have challenged the 
members opposite is, before they go and again destroy yet 
another asset and give it away, that what they should do is go to 
the people of the province, call an election on the issue before 
they pass any more privatization legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I say, let the people participate in the decision. 
Let them render the verdict of their past performance. Yes, I say 
to the Premier, if you have the courage of your convictions, let 
the public decide; let them participate fully in this process. I 
would suggest, Mr.  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1943 
 

Speaker, that this is the farthest thing from the minds of the 
Premier and this government, to truly allow the people to 
decide, to truly allow the people to participate. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, no, what this government will do 
is to . . . What this government will do is, rather than let the 
people decide through an election, what this government will do 
is to spend millions of more dollars of taxpayers’ money on 
advertising, trying to explain to us, trying to explain to us why 
it’s so important to continue to privatize. We must give up all 
our assets, Mr. Speaker, and once more give control of our 
economic future to the outsiders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we debate this motion to privatize PCS, this 
government has carefully neglected to mention why PCS was 
indeed established in the first place. As I indicated, PCS was 
formed after a bitter fight with the private potash producers, 
largely foreign owned, over the level of royalties. The world 
price of potash had shot up dramatically and the companies 
were making windfall profits. And at that time we decided that 
the people of Saskatchewan should get a fair return, and that’s 
where the fight began, and I alluded to that. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, these actions were not in the . . . These 
actions that we took at that time were indeed in the best interest 
of the people of Saskatchewan. And certainly we can say that it 
was not in the best interest of the multinational corporations, 
but it was in the best interest of the people of this province. 
 
And I say our government’s response was to establish PCS, and 
as a result we finally had a potash corporation with its head 
office and jobs here in Saskatchewan. This gave us effective 
control of the industry here in Saskatchewan and made 
Saskatchewan the centre of the potash expertise in all of the 
western world. 
 
Well, all of that will change now, Mr. Speaker. It will be a 
return to the good old days when an industry owned, for the 
most part, by foreigners will once again control a major 
resource of the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
members . . . Will the members opposite ever learn that regional 
Crown corporations, because they are rooted both physically 
and psychologically in their own regions and with their head 
offices in their respective regions, also benefit all the 
advantages that this local ownership provides? 
 
I want to say that strategic decision-making experience . . . 
Self-confidence is built up by the experience, vital people 
knowledge about the region, and a keener awareness of the new 
economic possibilities arising at home that might be 
overlooked, ignored, or co-opted by absentee ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should remember that public ownership of a 
Crown corporation gives it a very special entrepreneurial energy 
and commitment that comes from regional patriotism. Mr. 
Speaker, regional patriotism is a powerful motivating factor in 
economic history; and then at the bottom of this regional 
patriotism is the profound desire to control one’s own fate, 
one’s own destiny. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, in order to control one’s destiny  

there is no substitute for the spirit of self-reliance that comes 
from keeping hold of one’s resources, including profits and 
savings for reinvestment — reinvestment, Mr. Speaker, not 
elsewhere but here in Saskatchewan; jobs here in Saskatchewan 
and opportunities here in Saskatchewan. And I would suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, that privately-owned corporations do not share 
this vision, and we have only to look at Saskoil’s performances 
I have alluded to for proof of that. 
 
The sad part of this story, Mr. Speaker, is that this new doctrine, 
which comes from Adam Smith Institute, as I said, in England, 
and from the Fraser Institute in Canada, which supposedly 
looked to the classical economists and their free market 
philosophy, actually betrays that philosophy. Eric Kierans, in 
his lecture "Globalism and the National State," points out that: 
 

Men and women were citizens, the foundation and source 
of national strength. They were the substance of the state, 
not mere instruments and factors of production to be 
moved to and from at the bequest of capital flows and 
feedback systems. 
 

Mr. Kierans further stated that: 
 

Sovereignty, as understood in 19th century thought, not 
only depended on a strong citizenry, proud of their rights, 
but also depended on the control of one’s resources. 
 

And basically, that’s what we’re talking about here. And this 
brings us, Mr. Speaker, to the ultimate irony for the people of 
this province. We have here the rhetoric of the Premier. We 
have the rhetoric of this premisses, full of superficial western 
patriotism, but who aids and abets the centralization of 
economic power elsewhere by denigrating and suppressing 
public enterprise here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(2030) 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, the end result of these actions will be 
that once our public assets such as PCS have been sold off, not 
necessarily to the highest bidder, Mr. Speaker, the end result 
will be that the people of Saskatchewan will be reduced to 
being beggars in their own home. We shall have to cater to 
outside investment on their terms. We will no longer have any 
locally developed investment or ownership. We will have to 
offer, as our Premier has already done, Mr. Speaker, to weaken 
our trade union movements, to lower our labour costs, to 
provide cheap land to those to entice them to come and invest, 
in order to create a reasonable return on whatever investment 
they would be so kind to bring to Saskatchewan. We will have 
to take all the risks and put up most of the money so that the 
foreign investors will be able to provide us with the dubious 
benefits of their economic expertise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this government moves to privatize PCS, the 
people of Saskatchewan have to ask themselves a simple 
question: since this government began its campaign of selling 
off our publicly owned assets, have any substantial benefits 
been provided to the people of Saskatchewan as a result of their 
actions? And I say, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 
answer is simple and  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1944 
 

unequivocal — no. 
 
No jobs have been created for the people of this province; no 
investment for Saskatchewan people; and in the end, no future 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support policies that will create jobs in 
Saskatchewan, create opportunities for small business here in 
Saskatchewan; to keep control and ownership here in 
Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people. I support a 
Saskatchewan future determined by Saskatchewan people for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have considerable amount more that I want to 
allude to, and it is at this time I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The minister could introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure this evening to introduce my 
officials. On my left is Mr. Ron Kesslar, the deputy minister. 
Directly behind him is Mac MacGillvray, the superintendent of 
insurance. Behind me is Mr. Al Dwyer, who is the director of 
human resources and administration; and Mr. Al Higgs, who is 
a special adviser to the department. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I’d like to begin tonight 
by asking a few very simple questions. One, may I have a 
complete list of your personal staff including their names, 
present salary levels, and any changes in those salary levels that 
have occurred in the past 12 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We have that and we’ll send it right 
over. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Secondly, Mr. Minister, do you have any 
members of your personal staff who have access to government 
vehicles either permanently or intermittently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — No in response to both questions — 
permanently or intermittently? Okay. Third, Mr. Minister, could 
you please list all out-of-province travel by yourself or your 
staff in 1988-89, and could you please include the date, 
destination, number of persons on the trip, why the trip was 
necessary, and the total cost for each trip. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, we have that. We can send it 
over with the other list that you asked for. 
 

Mr. Koenker: — And fourth, Mr. Minister, would you please 
supply a list of any travel by executive aircraft that you or your 
staff did in ’87-88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We’ll send that over with the other. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, while we are on the subject of 
aircraft, could you list for us the use of all or any chartered 
aircraft during ’88-89, including the total cost and what amount 
has been budgeted for charter aircraft in ’89-90. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That’s zero and zero. There wasn’t 
any for the last year, and there’s none budgeted for the current 
year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And could you please share with us the total 
amount spent by your department on advertising for ’88-89 and 
also what your department has budgeted for advertising in 
’89-90. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We have all of that here, and I’ll 
send it all over to you now. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we’re off to 
a very good start. I commend you for having most of this 
material on hand, and I just add that when we come to Science 
and Technology estimates I’ll be asking the same questions, so 
to be forewarned. 
 
And that concludes my questioning for right now. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it’s 
been nearly two years, actually July of 1987, that the Principal 
Trust affair first broke here in Saskatchewan and in Alberta — 
nearly two years ago. 
 
And in our questioning tonight on the estimates for 1989-90, I’d 
like to begin by talking a bit more about the people behind the 
Principal Trust affair, the many people in Saskatchewan who 
have been hurt by what happened and who are still waiting for 
your government to take some action to redress the wrongs that 
they’ve suffered. 
 
I’d like to begin by sharing with you a letter that’s come to you 
from two constituents in my constituency. It’s a very nice letter, 
a well-written one that outlines very clearly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to table that? Are you 
going to table that letter? Table it. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well it was addressed to the Hon. Ray 
Meiklejohn, so I know that he’s had a copy of it. 
 
And the letter, I want to point out, emphasizes . . . It’s written, it 
emphasizes the number of people that have been involved in the 
Principal Trust issue, not just the personal affairs of the people 
themselves who wrote the letter. And so I want to share the 
whole letter with you, sir, because you’ve received it as well, 
and it forms a base for us to begin our discussion tonight. 
 
It says this: 
 

  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1945 
 

Dear Hon. Ray Meiklejohn: RE: The Collapse of Principal 
Trust and Its Subsidiaries/The Code Inquiry: The 
Requirement for Immediate Compensation by the 
Saskatchewan Government (and that’s underlined). 
 
We are writing to express our extreme concern that the 
provincial government live up to its obligations with regard 
to the 6,733 Saskatchewan taxpayers, many of whom, like 
ourselves, are senior citizens, and who also lost their 
hard-earned life savings due to the collapse of Principal 
Trust and its subsidiaries, First Investors Corporation and 
Associated Investors of Canada. 
 

An Hon. Member: — What was the date of the letter? 
 
Ms. Smart: — May 12, 1989 is the date of the letter, so it was 
just last month. 
 

The Saskatchewan government to date has refused to 
assume any responsibility in this matter, and has not 
protected the interests of Saskatchewan depositors. The 
province’s legal counsel was not even present to 
cross-examine key witnesses at the Code inquiry. This has 
been the case in spite of the fact that we, and almost 7,000 
other Saskatchewan citizens, lost our savings 
unnecessarily, because the Government of Saskatchewan 
failed to regulate the unscrupulous operators of Principal 
and its companies — Associated Investors and First 
Investors. Your government failed to enforce your own 
Investment Contracts Act (the letter says). Therefore, 
thousands of trusting Saskatchewan people, who relied on 
such provincial legislation as the Investment Contracts Act, 
and the Saskatchewan Department of Consumer Affairs, to 
protect their interests, tragically and unnecessarily lost 
their life savings as a result of the provincial government’s 
negligence. 
 
Financial statements were received from the Saskatchewan 
Government as far back as 1983 which indicated that 
Associated Investors and First Investors were essentially 
bankrupt, yet their licenses to operate in Saskatchewan 
were renewed. Their Annual Reports were filed late in 
1983, in direct violation of Saskatchewan law, yet their 
licenses were renewed. The 1985 Quarterly Reports for 
Associated Investors and First Investors, required by law to 
be filed with the Saskatchewan Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs, were never received; still, their 
licenses were renewed. The provincial government, and 
you yourself, have no acceptable explanation as to this 
incompetency, criminal negligence, blatant lack of 
enforcement of your own legislation (the Investment 
Contracts Act), and your failure to protect Saskatchewan 
investors. 
 

That’s the first page of the letter, Mr. Minister. It’s a very 
well-written letter, written by two senior citizens in my 
constituency outlining their concern about Principal  

Trust. 
 
And they go on like this: 
 

Risk may be associated with many financial investments. 
However, losses which result directly from regulatory 
failure are totally unacceptable. In addition, at a sales level, 
we were led to believe that we were investing in a solid 
company: Principal had been in operation for over 25 
years. Like many senior citizens on limited pension 
income, we were extremely cautious investors. We would 
never even have considered investing our limited and 
hard-earned life savings in a risky venture or with a 
suspicious investment corporation. We were also led to 
believe that our investment was in Principal, and that it 
would be protected by the federal Canadian Insurance 
Deposit Corporation. Our investment was therefore 
obtained through fraudulent means. 
 

(2045) 
 

However, if the Saskatchewan government had enforced its 
own legislation to protect Saskatchewan investors, we, and 
the thousands of other Saskatchewan investors who lost 
their life savings, would never have been duped in this 
manner. Your Government had access to information 
which should have resulted in the cancelling of these 
businesses’ licences to operate in the Province of 
Saskatchewan. We did not have access to this information, 
and counted on you to protect us. You did not. 
 
The needless loss of significant life savings, particularly to 
senior citizens like ourselves, is distressing not only 
financially, but also emotionally. Due to the lack of 
protection from our provincial government, we have been 
placed in a tragic situation. 
 

The next sentence is underlined, Mr. Minister: 
 

We expect the Government of Saskatchewan to finally take 
action and fully compensate us for our unnecessary 
financial losses. 
 

And the next sentence is really important: 
 

Justice demands that the Saskatchewan Government pay 
out those of us who were needlessly victimized as a result 
of your Government’s negligence, by compensating us for 
100 per cent of our principal losses, as well as for our lost 
interest, and then pursuing settlement with Alberta and 
Donald Cormie. 
 
On top of our already tragic losses, we have also been 
required to "throw good money after bad" to hire legal 
counsel to help us regain part of our losses. Many 
Saskatchewan people were not in a position to do so, given 
their losses in this fiasco. This "added insult to injury": 
why, at the absolute least, did the province not provide us 
with free legal counsel in this matter? 
 
 

  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1946 
 

Many Saskatchewan voters, and not only the ones who lost 
their savings directly, have been watching the Government 
of Saskatchewan’s inaction very critically with regards to 
this matter. Further inaction and refusal by the 
Saskatchewan Government to assume their rightful 
responsibility in this matter could have serious results for 
this Government in the next election. 
 
We look forward with hope that our Government will, 
finally, assume its rightful responsibility by guaranteeing 
that we and other Saskatchewan investors are fully 
compensated for our losses in this matter. We should 
receive compensation for not only our full original 
investment, but also for the lost interest which we would 
have received over the past years. 
 

And this letter was signed by Nell and Franklin Litz, and a copy 
sent to me, but the original sent to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let me point out again how powerful I find that letter as a 
summary of what’s been happening in the last two years. Let 
me point out how moved I am by the fact that these two senior 
citizens have focused not only on their own plight, but on the 
plight of the 6,733 people in this province who depended on 
your Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs to take 
action to protect them when they invested their life savings. 
 
And I’ve heard you say in this legislature earlier that no, they 
didn’t lose their life savings, they got back a certain percentage. 
But when you lose the majority of the money that you’ve saved 
up to help you in your old age, you have lost your life savings. 
 
The seniors are cautious investors, Mr. Minister. They don’t go 
out to find risky things that they can put their money in. They 
are cautious; they wanted security; they depended on your 
government to provide them with that. They depended on your 
government to follow the rules and laws of The Investment 
Contracts Act. 
 
They speak in this letter about the failure of your government to 
date, to assume any responsibility in this affair. And as you 
know, recently the Alberta government has said that they’re 
going to help the citizens in Alberta. 
 
We have many questions we want to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
about this Principal Trust affair on behalf of the people that 
have been so badly hurt by this fiasco that’s gone on for two 
years already. So stand up, Mr. Minister, stand up and speak to 
the people in my constituency. Stand up and speak to the people 
across this province who have lost their investment because 
they trusted in your government and they trusted in your 
department. Answer them now, because this situation has gone 
on for far too long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman, and I am very pleased to stand up and respond to the 
letter that we’ve just heard. It was a very well-written letter and, 
I might say, also fairly well read. 
 

But I would like to take the hon. member back a little bit in 
history and maybe we can save ourselves a little bit of time, 
because I think that some of the questions that you have asked 
this evening, you asked . . . were asked last year in estimates 
and they were asked the year before. 
 
And I think that we have to clarify just what the whole situation 
is as far as the companies are concerned. You’re talking a lot 
about Principal Trust, and let me point out to you that really 
what we are concerned about is Associated Investors 
corporation and also First Investors Corporation. Those are the 
two companies that we’re really talking about. And I would also 
like to correct you on the number of people that were affected, 
and then I am going to go into a little bit of the history of this 
because you are in error again. 
 
Firstly, you’re in error about talking about people who have lost 
their life savings. Until the Code report has come down on 
around July 6, and until it’s decided whether or not the Alberta 
government is found responsible and are going to be paying out 
these contracts, nobody has lost their investments to this point. 
They have received . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well just 
listen now. I sat and listened to you. I sat and listened to you; 
now you just behave yourselves. If the member from Moose 
Jaw wants to get into it later, he’ll have his chance, and I’ll 
listen to him. 
 
The number of contracts, in actual fact, were around 8,600. 
Now you’re talking about a figure here of 6,733 — that was the 
original number of contracts, the number of contract holders. 
The number of people in Saskatchewan that were actually 
involved was around 4,400, so we’re talking about 4,400. Now 
regardless of that, this is a serious matter, and I fully realize, 
and the government fully realizes, that several people have been 
affected by these two companies going down. 
 
Now let’s go back in history. These two companies didn’t just 
start up during the time of this government. These two 
companies have their beginnings back in the early 1950s, one of 
them in 1952 and one in 1954. 
 
Both of them were registered in the province of Alberta. The 
province of Alberta is the primary regulator, or was, for both of 
those companies and has been ever since they were started back 
in the early ‘50s. The common practice, since those companies 
were started back in the 1950s, and that takes us through the 
reign of three different parties, three different political parties in 
this particular province — three different parties, and nothing 
different has been done in so far as the regulating of those 
companies since they were started in the 1950s. 
 
And you try and make out like all of these problems have 
suddenly just arisen in the last few years. Well I would point 
out to the hon. member that during the Code inquiry, I believe it 
was brought out that some of these concerns were raised back in 
1966. And I believe if you check the records at that time, we 
had a Liberal government in this province. Now one would ask 
the natural question then: why didn’t the Liberal government in 
the province of Saskatchewan do something about these 
companies then, because people in Saskatchewan  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1947 
 

were investing in those companies at that time? Now the main 
reason why they didn’t do it is because probably they didn’t 
have the information. 
 
Now let’s go on into the 1970s when your party was in power, 
because this is also information that came out during the Code 
inquiry. And I know that your colleague, the member from 
Sutherland, visited the Code inquiry as I did, and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So did I. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well that’s good. More power to 
you. You know the amount of evidence that was put out at that 
particular time, and back in the 1970s it was also indicated that 
these two companies were having difficulty. Now one would 
ask then, why didn’t your government do something about 
pulling the licences of them here in Saskatchewan then? And I 
can tell you, the same way that I told you last year, because 
your government of the day did not have the information that 
these companies were in difficulty, because the provincial 
government in Alberta was working with these two companies, 
and the problems that they were undergoing at that time were 
resolved and the companies carried on. 
 
Now at the same time, one would ask, well what was happening 
here in the province of Saskatchewan? Whether we talk about 
1966, whether we talk about the 1970s when your party was in 
power, or whether we talk about the 1980s when this party was 
in power, the fact of the matter is that Alberta was the primary 
regulator. And I’m going to give you a little bit of information 
on that as well, so that you understand what we mean by 
primary regulator. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the governments in Saskatchewan 
of the day, in ’66 or in the ’70s and in the ’80s, did not have the 
information that these companies were having any difficulty. 
Now that’s obvious from the fact that your own party didn’t do 
anything if there were problems at that particular time, because 
you were in power. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Were there problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — There wasn’t. It was clearly 
indicated in the Code inquiry that there were problems back in 
the 1970s when you were in power. So the primary regulator 
did not pass on this information. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan, and your government and the 
government before that, and our government, have carried on in 
the same manner ever since these companies were formed. It’s 
been the same process, that when the annual report was filed 
and when the auditor’s report was filed, the annual licence was 
given out. Now you did the same thing. We have carried on that 
same practice from 1982 until today in the same way that you 
did for the 11 years that you were in power. 
 
Now so that you understand just what we mean by primary 
regulator, I’ve got a little bit of information here that I’d like to 
read to you so that you understand what it means, because you 
keep bringing this out and you keep  

trying to indicate that the province of Saskatchewan has been 
negligent in the regulating of these companies. And I can point 
out to you that that is not the case at all. 
 

Primary jurisdiction. In the regulation of financial 
institutions by provincial governments, trust and insurance 
companies, no formal definition of a primary jurisdiction 
exists in legislation or regulation. The term has been 
borrowed from Securities Commission regulation. 
 
With regard to financial institutions, trust and loan 
companies, primary jurisdiction tends to refer to the 
province where the company has been incorporated and 
has its head office. 
 
Sometimes home jurisdiction is also used. Trust and 
insurance regulators have relied upon the home or primary 
jurisdiction to assume responsibility for active monitoring 
of the corporation to ensure compliance to that 
jurisdiction’s legislation and regulation. Included in 
compliance are audits by that jurisdiction and detailed 
analysis of company and external auditor reports. The 
expectation has existed that should problems or issues be 
identified, these would be communicated to the reciprocal 
licensing authorities. In Saskatchewan, investment 
contracts are now regulated by the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission, as The Investment Contracts Act has been 
repealed. 
 
The concept of primary jurisdiction arises out of practical 
necessity (the same way today that it did when your party 
was in power). No province has the capacity to fully 
regulate all financial institutions they license. To do so 
would require having sufficient capacity to audit 
thoroughly, every licensed company. This would mean 
extensive out-of-province travel costs, if staff could be 
recruited to work under such circumstances. 
 
Inherent is the ludicrous situation where a corporation 
could be subjected to audits by 10 provincial jurisdictions, 
one federal, internal corporate auditors, and external 
auditors. The cost to the corporation, excluding the 
impracticality due to time, space, and convenience, would 
be horrendous. The application of primary jurisdiction 
provides jurisdictional convenience arising out of 
necessity. If required, the licensing authority can intervene 
with capacity to control the corporation as needed. 
 

So the same practice is carried on today, I would point out, Mr. 
Chairman, as was carried on ever since the time that these 
companies were formed. So nothing different is being done. 
 
Now with regard to a question that the member raises about the 
fact that the lawyer was not there for questioning with regard to 
some of the hearings, this was the cross-examination. And I 
would point out to the member that there was no need for Mr. 
Brumlik’s act of participation at the inquiry because special 
council  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1948 
 

appointed by the court, in the persons of Robert White and John 
McNiven, have capably directed . . . directly represented the 
interests of investors. 
 
Now Mr. Brumlik was available if his attendance was 
warranted. But I think that when you had two lawyers that had 
already been appointed as acting for the investors it really 
wasn’t necessary to have a third person there, but he was 
available if he had been needed. 
 
Now you go on and make a lot of allegations about the fact that 
this department was negligent in its duties with regard to these 
particular companies. And I’d point out to you that that is not 
the case at all. 
 
(2100) 
 
These companies were relicensed each year after the annual 
report was received. Now that was the same thing that happened 
when you people were in power. So you’re suggesting, and as 
the people that wrote the letter had suggested, that there should 
be compensation going forward to the people who had invested 
in these two companies. 
 
Now I would ask the hon. member, the Government of Alberta 
has already compensated the investors to the tune of 44 cents 
for Associated Investment Corporation and 35 cents for First 
Investors. Pending is another 12 cents and 15 cents respectively, 
which will give them 56 and 50 respectively. 
 
Now granted, that’s only half of what they had put into these 
companies, but you were asking last year why the government 
isn’t doing something about compensating these investors. Now 
by doing that, you’re suggesting a change in policy of your own 
party. And I would take you back to 1985 when Pioneer Trust 
went down and it was the policy of your party at that particular 
time that there was no way that the government of the day 
should be reimbursing the people who had money deposited, 
had money deposited with Pioneer Trust. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! If the member for Moose Jaw 
North wants to get into the discussion, certainly he can rise in 
his place and be recognized and ask the questions of the 
minister. There’ll be lots of opportunity for that, so I’d ask him 
to let the minister make his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — So I would point out to the member 
opposite that you were suggesting, then, a change in policy of 
your party, because just four years ago there was no way that 
your party, which was in opposition at that time, was in favour 
of reimbursing the people who had deposited money with 
Pioneer Trust. And I have a quote here from your House 
Leader, and this was in Hansard of May 10, 1985, who 
indicated: 
 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, for this 20 million (and 
that’s what the amount was at that particular time) a family 
of five will pay $100 extra in taxes this year. Add this to 
the other major tax increases, and I believe the people in 
this province are very disappointed. 
 

There is no way. And then one of your other members at that 
time, the member at that time from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
who is now history, he was very concerned too, and felt that 
there was no way that this should be happening. He said, you’re 
prepared to give a blank cheque and take any amount of money 
that’s required for depositors, for shareholders, for 
mismanagement because of mismanagement by the company 
directors. 
 
Now what are we dealing with when we talk about First 
Investors and Associated Investors. How can you blame it on 
the government? Because it’s clearly come out in the Code 
inquiry, if you’ve been listening and paying attention to it — 
and I’m sure you have — that if there was ever a case of 
mismanagement within companies, and we know that the Code 
inquiry was set up to see why these companies went down, I 
think it’s quite clear to most of us why the companies went 
down. It was because of mismanagement and other things that 
were going on with the senior management of those companies. 
So it certainly wasn’t the government’s responsibility. 
 
But here you have some of your own members then who were 
very opposed at that time with doing something for Pioneer 
Trust depositors, the very thing that you are now suggesting that 
this government should be doing for the investors in those 
companies which were registered in the province of Alberta. 
 
The final point that I would make, and then we’ll continue on 
with your questioning, we have maintained from the very outset 
that the primary responsibility for these two companies was 
with the Government of Alberta. And to this point the 
Government of Alberta have distributed the funds to all 
investors no matter where they lived — whether they lived in 
Alberta, or whether they lived in the other provinces. 
 
The only exception to that was this latest announcement by the 
province of Alberta which amounted to something like 4 cents 
on the dollar, I believe, that they were going to refund to the 
investors in Alberta and to people who had put money into 
Principal Trust, I believe it was at that time. 
 
So we feel that the Government of Alberta still has that 
responsibility. We don’t think that they should be 
discriminating against investors that are from outside the 
province. We continue to maintain that position, and until such 
time as the Code report comes down — and I understand from 
an article I was reading today that it’s supposed to come down 
around July 6 — that there will be no move made by any other 
province where these investors reside, to pay out any of the 
investors. We feel quite strongly that if the Government of 
Alberta has found that they were negligent in regulating the 
companies that they had primary jurisdiction for, that the 
Government of Alberta and the Premier and the treasurer have 
both indicated that they would be paying out those investors. 
 
Now we will ensure that after the Code report comes down, if 
that in fact is what’s going to happen, we feel very strongly that 
the province of Alberta should be paying out the balance of the 
money to those investors residing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And upon the  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1949 
 

payment of the next payment that’s going to come out, which 
will bring them up to the 50 and 56 cents per share, we are still 
looking at about $20 million for our Saskatchewan investors. 
And we would feel that the Government of Alberta, if they are 
found to be responsible, they should be reimbursing our 
investors in the same way that they have been in the past. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, you were the one, when you first 
stood up, that decided that you would correct me and say that I 
didn’t understand the difference between a Principal Trust and 
the two investment corporations, Associated Investors and First 
Investors. And you have made the same mistake yourself when 
you try to compare Pioneer Trust with the situation here with 
First Investors and Associated Investors, because Pioneer Trust 
was organized under the Trust Companies Act, and these are 
companies that were regulated by The Investment Contracts 
Act. 
 
The Investment Contracts Act only had three companies listed 
under it. Your department was directly responsible for those 
companies. You’re quite right to point out that they were not 
regulated in the same way as Principal Trust, but it is called the 
Principal Trust affair because those companies operated 
fraudulently behind a façade of Principal Trust. And so the 
people that bought those investment certificates were duped 
into believing — many of them — that they were investing in 
something that was covered the Canada Deposit Insurance 
Corporation. 
 
Now another thing that you reveal, Mr. Minister, when you talk 
about comparing Pioneer Trust and the Principal Trust issue, is 
that you haven’t developed any sensitivity to who has lost their 
money in this. In Pioneer Trust there were big investors, there 
were members of the Tory party that had put their money into 
it, and the bail-out was tremendous in terms of people of 
wealth. 
 
What we’re talking about here are many small investors, Mr. 
Minister. We’re talking about people who went into a Principal 
Trust office because the interest rates were supposed to be 
slightly higher than what they were getting at the banks, and 
they had a small amount of money to invest, and they were 
hoping to make as much as they could for their old age. That’s a 
way of reacting to old age that we support in our society, that 
people should try to invest and put money aside for themselves. 
 
And the majority of these people were seniors. That’s the truth 
in Saskatchewan; it’s the truth in Alberta. They’ve had 
tremendous distress both financially and emotionally because of 
this collapse. And when you say that so far they’ve gotten, or 
will get, 50 to 56 cents on the dollar, you demonstrate to me 
that you have no awareness of how seniors have to live on 
fixed, limited pension incomes and the costs that they have to 
cover. 
 
And when you say that you’re just waiting for Alberta to come 
forward with whatever it may or may not bail out, you’re not 
addressing the concern that we raised before and we are still 
raising, that you, as the minister responsible for the department 
that was suppose to look after The Investment Contracts Act, 
have made no representations directly to the Government of 
Alberta on  

behalf of the people. And also, that you haven’t been prepared 
to trust the Government of Alberta to reimburse these people 
and so given them the money back now so that they would have 
some money to live on, so that they would continue to have 
their money for their old age. You could do that. 
 
You head up the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, and the emphasis of your department is supposed to 
help the smaller people who get caught in this kind of thing. It’s 
not supposed to help in the same way, with the same 
compassion, the people who have high risk capital to invest. 
Obviously we want to help everyone, and I’m not trying to 
suggest that we don’t. But when we have people like my 
constituent, who saved up $11,000 over 30 years of working as 
a cleaning woman, cleaning the buildings in downtown 
Saskatoon, and put it in Principal Trust and lost it — we have 
people like that — that’s the majority of people we’re talking 
about, Mr. Minister. And I want to to distinguish that reality, 
and I want you to address the issue of what you’re going to do 
to help the people in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out to the member opposite that I probably am as familiar with 
seniors as she is, and I probably know just as many seniors as 
she does. And while it’s true that there were many seniors that 
had investments with these two companies, I would also point 
out and like to correct you with regard to what happened to 
Pioneer Trust. You’re indicating that this is only the wealthy 
friends of this particular government. Well let me point out to 
you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well this is what you’d said. Credit 
unions, the Grey Nuns, the city of Regina, and several 
charitable organizations, they had money deposited with 
Pioneer Trust. So for you to stand there in your place and say 
that this was only bailing out friends of the PC Party is just 
ridiculous . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the loose jaw from 
Moose Jaw over there. 
 
Let me also indicate to you, when you say that these people 
were duped — and I think that there is all kinds of evidence to 
point out that in fact, when salesmen were around, that they 
were not being straight up with the people who were buying 
these investments. That’s clear. But I would point out to the 
member that when the certificates did come back, it was clearly 
stated on them that they weren’t covered by CDIC (Canada 
Deposit Insurance Corporation), that the protection wasn’t 
there. So there was some indication. 
 
But I certainly agree with you that there were instances, and 
there were lots of people after that indicated that some of the 
information that they had been given was clearly not the case 
and that they were misled. 
 
Now you say that we’ve done nothing as far as the province of 
Alberta is concerned. The province of Alberta then, has simply 
been handling this money, or handling the assets of these 
companies, and the money that’s been paid out to the investors 
then has come from the sale of  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1950 
 

assets of these two companies. 
 
But we have discussed this on several occasions with the 
officials in Alberta. I’ve had several discussions with the 
provincial treasurer there, who is also their representative 
responsible for financial institutions. We’ve also made written 
presentations to them. 
 
I would also point out that we were very much involved last fall 
in getting the information sharing agreement signed with the 
four western provinces, which then led to the signing of this 
agreement by all provinces right across Canada. 
 
So that now we would expect that if every province lives up to 
this agreement, that if there is any problems with companies 
that are registered or for which they have the primary 
jurisdiction for, that if there’s any problem, that this information 
will be passed on very, very quickly to all of the other 
provinces, and that’s clearly stated in the agreement. 
 
Now one wouldn’t quite think, possibly, that maybe if there’d 
been an agreement such as that — and I don’t know why your 
party didn’t bring something like that in when you were in 
power; you had 11 years to do it — maybe then something like 
this wouldn’t have happened. But that’s one of the steps that we 
have taken, plus the discussions that we have had with those 
representatives. 
 
So we have made it clear. I’ve had letters, as you’ve indicated, 
from some of the investors, but many of the ones that I have 
talked to certainly understand what the situation is. They’ve 
been kept fairly well up to date, I think, with regard to the Code 
inquiry. I’ve had several letters from them, and I’ve responded 
to all of them, indicating what our position is, and that as soon 
as the report comes down in the first part of July, that then our 
position will be made known. But until that time, we will not be 
taking any further steps than what we have done. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Very fine, Mr. Minister, that you have an 
information sharing agreement with the four western provinces, 
and very convenient of you to suggest that had that agreement 
been put into place by the New Democrat government, perhaps 
we wouldn’t have these problems, and perhaps the companies 
wouldn’t have collapsed. 
 
Mr. Minister, this problem has nothing to do whatsoever with 
information sharing among the western provinces. This problem 
has to do with your failure to regulate and to enforce your own 
legislation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
You talk, Mr. Minister, about primary jurisdiction, and that this 
notion is very important to consideration of this matter; that it’s 
a matter of jurisdictional convenience; and that we relied on 
Alberta, so that you said nothing different was being done by 
your administration that wasn’t being done by the previous 
administration. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you have in your possession the 
quarterly reports for March 31, 1985 and June 30, 1985 for both 
First Investors and Associated Investors? 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I was just looking. 
You want to ask the same questions you asked last year. If you 
give me a minute, I’ll look for the same answers I gave you 
because we could save a lot of time, I’m sure, here if you just 
wanted to just take a few minutes and read Hansard. 
 
What did I indicate to you last year? I indicated to you that 
these two particular reports were not available, and they are not 
in our files, okay? Same thing I told you last year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Okay, Mr. Minister, you’ll admit apparently 
that you didn’t have the two quarterly reports last year. You still 
don’t have them this year. I say something different was being 
done with The Investment Contracts Act here in Saskatchewan 
while your government was in power, and that difference was 
that you were not enforcing section 25 of The Investment 
Contracts Act of Saskatchewan. 
 
Three companies to regulate under that Investment Contracts 
Act of Saskatchewan and they were two too many. That was 
something that was being done that was different. 
 
Something else that was being done that was different was that 
the 1983 annual report was filed late for First Investors and 
Associated Investors. That’s something new and something 
different. So it isn’t quite accurate to say that simply because 
you were relying on Alberta as the primary regulator or the 
primary jurisdiction, nothing different was happening. There 
was a whole lot different happening here in Saskatchewan, and 
that is that your predecessors were sitting on their hands. 
 
I’ll leave that as it is. And now to get into affairs that are a little 
bit more contemporary, Mr. Minister, you indicated that there 
was no need for Mr. Brumlik to be at the Code inquiry. How 
many days was Mr. Brumlik at Code inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, the member opposite, he gets 
carried away here again talking about quarterly reports and 
primary jurisdiction and lack of responsibility and all the rest of 
it. You weren’t doing anything different when you were in 
power than what we’re doing today, so don’t give me that line 
again, the same as you did last year. We’re not doing anything 
different whatsoever. 
 
The annual licence was issued each year with the annual report 
— same way that you did. It was also issued after December 31, 
and you’re saying, well it wasn’t received until March. Well 
how do you get an annual report prepared before a few months 
period of time has passed? The same thing when you were in 
power. 
 
It seems to me last year we had that information for you as to 
when all of the reports were filed when you people were in 
power in the 1970s, and yet you issued the licence, in some 
cases, even before the end of December. So don’t give me that 
line about when we were issuing licences and what we were 
doing it for. 
 
The other thing — you’re talking about Mr. Brumlik. Mr. 
Brumlik was there; there were other representatives there as you 
well know. There were two lawyers that were  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1951 
 

appointed by the government of Alberta, I believe, to represent 
all of the investors. I’ve given you those names before. Brumlik 
was always available on call. He was available for the Queen’s 
Bench and also for the Court of Appeal. Other than that, there 
was no need for him to attend. We had an observer at the 
hearings every day that they were being offered there in 
Edmonton. So we had the information available to us all the 
time, plus the investors were well represented. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Was Mr. Brumlik in attendance at Code any 
given day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, he was not there on any 
particular given day because it was suggested he need not be 
there; there were two other representatives. And you’ve got to 
keep in mind that all of this cost money, and we had an 
observer there, as I indicated, plus two lawyers that were there 
acting on behalf of the investors. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And what retainer did you pay to Mr. 
Brumlik for his services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Brumlik was hired by the 
Department of Justice, so I would suggest that you’ll have to 
ask them the question then when they’re in estimates. We don’t 
have that figure. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Did you ever consult with Mr. Brumlik 
yourself, Mr. Minister? To your knowledge, was Mr. Brumlik 
paid anything by the Department of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, he was on a retainer and he 
represented us in the Court of Queen’s Bench and in the Court 
of Appeal. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned that you did 
have an observer at Code, and this observer was at all of the 
sessions at Code. Who was this observer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The observer was Al Higgs, who is 
the member sitting here beside me. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And who did Mr. Al Higgs work for as he 
attended the Code inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — He was an adviser to our department 
and also to Justice. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And what was Mr. Al Higgs paid for his 
services while he was at the Code inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — He’s a consultant with the 
government. He was paid his normal salary of $60,000 a year 
— that’s normal for anyone with his credentials — plus living 
expenses when he was there. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What are Mr. Al Higgs’ credentials for such a 
position, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — His credentials are former ADM 
(assistant deputy minister) for Consumer Affairs and also the 
acting superintendent of insurance. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — When was Mr. Higgs the acting 
superintendent of insurance, and when was he the ADM, 

 as you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The time that he would have served 
in those capacities would have been around 1983-84. And I 
would also point out Mr. Higgs is a permanent employee of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the sum 
total of his expenses were while he was at the Code inquiry in 
Edmonton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Some of it would have been 
included in information you already have, but we’ll find the rest 
of it for you and send it over. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You’ll send over then the sum total of the 
costs for having Mr. Al Higgs at the Code inquiry, both with 
respect to his salary and with respect to his expenses and travel. 
Will that be here for tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We’ll do our best to have it for you 
tomorrow. But I would point out that his salary . . . I’ve already 
indicated to you what his annual salary is, but the expenses, we 
will try and have that for you for tomorrow morning. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, how often did Mr. Al Higgs 
report either to yourself or to the Minister of Justice from 
Edmonton? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Generally daily, but certainly a 
minimum of two to three times a week. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, how often did Mr. Al Higgs 
report to the investment contract holders of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — He didn’t report to them at all. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And why would that be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — He was acting on behalf of the 
government. I don’t know why he would be reporting to all of 
the investors in this particular case. There was a lot of 
information certainly that was in the media every day, in so far 
as what was happening at the hearings. But other than that, I 
don’t imagine that he even had all of the addresses of all of the 
investors in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, how often then . . . I can 
understand that, perhaps — perhaps. How often then has the 
government communicated the information that it secured from 
Mr. Higgs? How often has the Government of Saskatchewan — 
your department or the Minister of Justice — communicated 
with investment contract holders in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We don’t have a full list of all of the 
names and addresses of all of the investors in Saskatchewan, 
but as I indicated earlier, anyone who has written to me or to 
my department, I have responded to. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And, Mr. Minister, that’s commendable, 
that’s wonderful that you will answer your correspondence. Did 
you share any of the information  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1952 
 

that you received from Mr. Higgs in other communiqués to 
those people who wrote you, quite independent of answering 
their original letters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, I did not, because Mr. Higgs 
was there acting on behalf of the department and the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Oh! How very interesting that you can have a 
government employee there, paid $60,000 a year plus expenses, 
to report to the government and not to report to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And to this day the people of Saskatchewan 
have not heard one word from your department or from the 
Minister of Justice, and I think that’s contemptible. That shows 
contempt for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, it was your Minister of Justice who said, on the 
day that he talked about the appointment of Mr. Brumlik in this 
Assembly on September 1, 1987, who said: 
 

With regard to the information obtained by counsel in the 
province of Alberta, obviously we would hope to have full 
disclosure. It would depend on the circumstances, whether 
it’s privileged information or not, but our hope would be to 
give as much information to the Saskatchewan depositors 
and investors as possible to help them, in any case. 
 

(2130) 
 
That was your Finance minister — I believe I said Minister of 
Justice earlier. No, it was the Finance minister who said that on 
September 1, 1987. 
 
Now how do you explain that, Mr. Minister, when the Minister 
of Finance can get up and talk about retaining legal counsel, 
Mr. Brumlik, with the expressed intention of providing full 
disclosure to the people of Saskatchewan, and you stand here 
tonight and tell us that nothing has been communicated to the 
people of Saskatchewan, deposit holders, or investors, other 
than the fact that you can answer your own letters. Any donkey 
can answer their own correspondence, but it takes a government 
that cares about people who will go one step further and share 
information with depositors who are affected by the very 
government that fails to enforce its legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the only 
comment I would have to the member opposite, that he likes to 
come out with all these wild-eyed statements. And you can call 
me whatever name you like. I might have a few for you as well, 
but they might not be acceptable in this House. 
 
Let me point out to you that the investors had two lawyers 
acting on their behalf which could send out information to 
them. There was also a committee that the investors had 
appointed which could send out information to them. There 
were media stories every day going out as long as the Code 
inquiry was going on. 
 

Don’t stand there in your place and try and tell me that the 
investors in this province didn’t have information as to what 
was happening with the Code inquiry. That’s just ridiculous. 
And that just goes along with some of the other ridiculous 
statements that you like to make. 
 
Let me point out to you and others that are in this House at this 
time, and any who might be watching on television, because 
you don’t seem to understand over there what or how complex 
this whole Code inquiry has been. Even though you visited it 
and saw what was going on there, you still haven’t got the 
message as to how complex it was, but that doesn’t surprise me. 
 
Keep in mind that Alberta, again, was the primary regulator. 
You haven’t got that message into your head yet. The hearings 
sat for 207 days — 207 days — plus many court hearings. 
There were 157 witnesses examined — 157; 637 exhibits, some 
that were over 2,000 pages in length; 38,000 pages of transcript 
— 38,000, that is. That’s a pretty big number, but I hope you 
can get it; 5.7 million words of testimony during all those 207 
days that this inquiry was going on. It began on October 14, 
1987; it finished February 21, 1989. When the report comes 
down on or about July 6, we may very well have a lot of 
answers to questions that all of us would like to know. 
 
But you like to carry on over there, making all of these 
wild-eyed statements which really don’t have a heck of a lot of 
relevance to what we’re really dealing with here. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, do you think that it may have 
been helpful for legal counsel at Code to have questioned Mrs. 
Connie Osterman when she was on the stand in September of 
last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I understand 
it, the minister that the member is referring to was 
cross-examined by somewhat in the neighbourhood of 12 other 
lawyers. Now I can’t really see any significance in her being 
cross-examined by one more. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well given your previous responses to this 
situation, it doesn’t surprise us that you can’t see any reason, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Your colleague, again the Minister of Finance, in talking about 
representation, the province of Saskatchewan’s representation at 
Code, talked to the press on August 14 of ’87 about the 
different areas, the many different areas a 
Saskatchewan-appointed lawyer would probe. These included, 
according to the press report that I have in front of me, the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of August 15, and I quote: 
 

These include finding out if Alberta fully informed the 
Saskatchewan Consumer Affairs department when it 
cancelled the licences of the companies; if the Principal 
Group companies had different rules of operation for 
offices in different provinces; and if investors in different 
provinces were dealt with differently. 
 

That was the logic for having a lawyer at Code with full  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1953 
 

legal status for representation with cross-examining privileges. 
I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, if you can tell me if the Alberta 
government fully informed the Saskatchewan Consumer Affairs 
department when it cancelled the licences of the companies. 
Was there full disclosure at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I’d point out, Mr. Chairman, 
that that’s why the Code inquiry was set up, was to find out that 
information. The only information that we had, which was the 
latter part of June in 1987, was that the province of Alberta was 
cancelling their licences, and we cancelled ours a couple of 
days later. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Now we know why Code was set up. What 
we want to know is if in fact there was full disclosure by the 
Alberta government to the Saskatchewan Consumer Affairs 
department when it cancelled the licences of the companies. 
Was there full disclosure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, we did not have full disclosure, 
as I indicated to the member. The only information we had was 
that Alberta was cancelling their licences. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well then, Mr. Minister, don’t you think it 
might have been appropriate to have had legal counsel 
representing you with rights to cross-examine Miss Osterman 
when she was on the stand in September of last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — As I understand it, the lawyer Mr. 
Brumlik indicated that there was no need for him to be there for 
cross-examination because she was already going to be 
cross-examined by about 12 other lawyers. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And to this day we don’t know — do we? — 
whether there was full disclosure to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The case I’m making, Mr. Minister, is quite 
simple, that if you had had Mr. Brumlik doing more than 
picking up a cheque on a retainer system, we might know the 
answer to that question tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us if the Principal Group of 
companies had different rules of operation for different offices 
in various provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, is the member 
opposite suggesting that the two Queen’s Counsel that were 
appointed to represent the investors were not competent, and 
that the other lawyers that were there were not competent? 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’m asking you questions here 
tonight. You aren’t questioning me. That time may come after 
the next election, but for tonight I’m questioning you and I’m 
asking you: do you think that there might not be some reason to 
have legal counsel at Code to cross-examine Miss Osterman 
with a view to finding out whether their was full disclosure to 
the Government of Saskatchewan, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs, by the Alberta government when it cancelled the 
licences of FIC (First Investors Corporation), AIC (Associated 
Investors of Canada)? 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I’d point out that the 
Code inquiry cost the province of Alberta in the neighbourhood 
20 millions of dollars, and for us to duplicate that type of thing 
here in the province of Saskatchewan would have really been a 
waste of money. 
 
Everyone that was involved with this case advised that it wasn’t 
necessary for Mr. Brumlik to be there to cross-examine Ms. 
Osterman. You indicate that he was picking up his cheque. 
Well, so he was on a retainer, but it would have cost a heck of a 
lot more had he been there on a daily basis doing what you’re 
suggesting, because there were already several lawyers there 
that were doing it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, it isn’t a matter of nobody 
suggesting that Mr. Brumlik wasn’t necessary at Code. Your 
own Minister of Finance said to this Legislative Assembly on 
September 1, ’87 and on August 14, ’87 that it was necessary to 
have legal counsel at Code with full representational powers to 
cross-examine witnesses. 
 
It was your Minister of Finance who said expressly to the press 
on August 14, in talking about this matter, that there were many 
areas that this Saskatchewan-appointed lawyer would probe, 
would need to probe, precisely because this host of other 
lawyers might not deal with Saskatchewan specific concerns. 
 
Now you talk about two lawyers representing the investors at 
Code. Mr. Minister, I was there. I wager to say I spent far more 
time at Code than you did, and I can know from firsthand 
experience there were more lawyers at Code than you could 
report. In your litany of statistics, I’m not sure whether you did 
share the precise number of lawyers who were at Code. But it 
wouldn’t have hurt to have had a lawyer representing the 
interests of the Saskatchewan depositors, rather than an 
observer representing the interests of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. But that was your choice. That was your choice 
and the choice of your Minister of Finance — to send an 
observer there to protect the hide of your government and your 
Premier; to cover up your negligence; to report whenever the 
opposition critic was there at Code; to pick up the phone and 
run out out in the hallway and to say that the opposition is here, 
you better know about that. 
 
And meanwhile, you couldn’t have the decency to protect the 
interests of Saskatchewan people, not just the depositors but the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan; to cross-examine Ms. Osterman, 
one of the key witnesses. You talk about the principal regulator 
and regulatory responsibility, the principal jurisdiction, 
jurisdictional responsibility, and when you have the opportunity 
to question that key jurisdictional representative, the person that 
was responsible for pulling the plug in Alberta, that’s too much 
for you to be bothered with. That’s too much to ask. 
 
Sure, you can have someone there protecting your own hide and 
the Minister of Finance’s hide and reporting back little political 
snippets and tales, but you can’t cross-examine key witnesses in 
defence of not just Saskatchewan investors or depositors, but in 
defence of Saskatchewan taxpayers. Why couldn’t you have 
done  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1954 
 

that — that one thing — had Brumlik go on one occasion even. 
Why was that so much to ask? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite doesn’t seem to understand that the two lawyers, one 
of which was a Queen’s Counsel, was appointed to represent all 
investors, not just the ones in Alberta but all of those in 
Saskatchewan too — two lawyers plus a whole team of other 
lawyers behind them. 
 
You’re indicating about cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
Well who do you suppose would have been bearing the cost of 
Mr. Brumlik’s fees, then, had he been there every day that you 
had suggested and there for cross-examining Miss Osterman? 
There were already a whole raft of lawyers that were there, 
including the two that were the representatives for all investors, 
and yet you’re now suggesting there should have been another 
one there. 
 
(2145) 
 
At the outset, no one ever anticipated that this inquiry was 
going to go beyond maybe two months. Nobody could have 
ever dreamt that it was going to go the length of time that it did. 
So there were some changes, certainly, from the very outset to 
what happened as time went on. 
 
But you seem to forget that the two lawyers then were 
appointed to represent all investors. There was really no need 
then for another lawyer to be there, costing the taxpayers of this 
province a little bit more money. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the Nova 
Scotia government has done with respect to the managership 
fees for Coopers & Lybrand for Nova Scotia investors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — To our knowledge the province of 
Nova Scotia and any of the other provinces where investors 
lived have not paid any money out to the investors. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’m surprised you don’t know 
that the Government of Nova Scotia has paid money toward the 
managership fees, the Coopers & Lybrand managership fees, 
for Nova Scotia residents. Are you not aware of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We’re not aware of that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you think that would 
be a good idea? Do you think that was a good thing for the 
Government of Nova Scotia to do, and do you think it might be 
a good idea for your government to consider? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 
the member opposite that we do not have any knowledge of 
whether Nova Scotia has paid out any management fee. We 
have maintained from the outset, and we still maintain that, and 
we will continue to maintain that until the 6th of July, or 
whenever the Code inquiry report comes down, that the 
province of Saskatchewan is not going to be committing any 
money to the investors until the Code report is down. 
 

Now the investors that I have corresponded with and have 
talked to understand that fully. They know then that no decision 
is going to be made until the Code inquiry comes down, so we 
haven’t changed our position from that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Not surprising, Mr. Minister, that you 
wouldn’t know what’s going on in other jurisdictions that might 
be pertinent to Saskatchewan people, because then you might 
have to answer for it. Ignorance is bliss. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the Government of Alberta 
has paid to Alberta depositors with respect to the Coopers & 
Lybrand’s managership fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, the province of Alberta has 
paid out around $4 million, and that was something that they 
announced just a short time ago. We have indicated to them that 
we’re very disappointed that they have not included all 
investors, as they have in the past. We cannot understand why 
they have chosen to discriminate against investors from other 
provinces, because up until this point in time they have been 
treating all investors equally, no matter where they lived, and 
we maintained that they should be continuing to do that. 
 
At this point in time, they have paid out an average of less than 
2 cents per dollar for the management fees. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, have you shared your concern 
over this fact with your . . . to your Alberta colleague or 
counterpart? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes I have, verbally and in writing. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could I have a copy of that letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We’ll get it for you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could I have a copy of that letter for 
tomorrow, or even tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We don’t have it here tonight, but 
I’ll certainly give it to you tomorrow morning. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, what we have here is 
another situation where it’s too much to ask you and your 
colleagues — your government — to do anything for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government of Nova Scotia can give a little over $200,000 
— I might as well share that information and enlighten you. 
This was back in November, in the fall of ’87. They could pay 
out two and a half to 3 cents per investor to help with the 
managementship fees for Coopers & Lybrand. And now, more 
recently, the Government of Alberta can pay out $4,030,280. 
 
Are you prepared to pony up some money, on behalf of 
Saskatchewan depositors, to do one constructive thing to assist 
them? And not to pay off their deposit, we know you won’t do 
that, but can you do one thing that’s right? Can you say here 
tonight that you will cover that managership fee for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1955 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I’ve indicated to the member 
opposite that we are not going to be doing anything until the 
Code inquiry report comes down. You seem so intent on the 
government doing this, and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
becoming involved in this. 
 
Let me point out, let me point out comments that the member 
from Quill Lakes made back in 1985 with regard to Pioneer 
Trust. And you’re indicating now, this is obviously a change in 
policy of your party, because the member from Quill Lakes 
indicated at that time: 
 

Most of the people of this province had nothing to do with 
Pioneer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 

Well, Mr. Chairman, the individual from Moose Jaw, the loose 
jaw from Moose Jaw, can have his opportunity to ask questions 
if he likes. 
 
This is what the member from Quill Lakes indicated: 
 

Most of the people of this province had nothing to do with 
Pioneer Trust, and they’re being called on to ante up. 
 

Now I would point out to you that if this is a change in policy of 
your party that you’re now asking the taxpayers of the province 
of Saskatchewan to ante up. And certainly many of them did 
not have any involvement with these two particular companies. 
 
Now when the Code report comes down, and if the province of 
Alberta has found that they are negligent, we would expect that 
we would hold them to the words of the Premier and the 
Minister of Finance that they would be reimbursing those 
investors for money that they have lost during this particular 
event. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And, Mr. Minister, does that include the 
Coopers & Lybrand’s managership fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We would presume that that will 
also include the management fees. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You would presume that, but will you argue 
that, Mr. Minister? Will you stand up and argue that on behalf 
of Saskatchewan depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I’ve already argued it, but I 
will continue to argue it, definitely. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What would that total be, Mr. Minister? What 
would that cost the public purse to cover those Coopers & 
Lybrand’s managership fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Based on what Alberta is doing, 
where it was just under the 2 cents on the dollar, it would 
amount to somewhere in the neighbourhood of $921,000. But I 
would point out again that we certainly maintain that Alberta 
has a responsibility for this, so we’re certainly not going to be 
putting out this amount of money now. We would expect 
Alberta to treat the Saskatchewan investors in the same way 
that they have treated all other investors in the past. 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, if you had the resolve to deal 
with matters in your own backyard, such as the Joytec venture 
capital money that’s gone — $1.125 million — that could easily 
pay out the Saskatchewan depositors’ portion of the Coopers & 
Lybrand managership fees. 
 
If you, as the Minister of Science and Technology and 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, could have given this much 
scrutiny to GigaText, you might have saved the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan $5 million. 
 
And if you had the decency to speak up against an inane Future 
Corporation birthday party bonanza at $9 million, you could 
pay the managership fees of Saskatchewan depositors nine 
times over. 
 
Why don’t you speak up for what’s right? Why don’t you get 
your priorities straight and protect Saskatchewan people when 
they need your help? You are the man in the position to give it. 
Why don’t you do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well would you like us to do 
Science and Technology estimates tonight as well, because you 
are just totally out to lunch when you start talking about the 
venture capital money with Joytec, that it’s gone. It is not gone, 
you know that. If you just take a little bit of time to check into 
it, you’d understand that that money is not gone; that money is 
not gone. They’re not required to pay it up for another two 
years, but that kind of information is all available. If you want 
to ask me that at any time I’ll be happy to give it to you. 
 
How many visits have you had to GigaText? You’re the critic 
for Science and Technology. You haven’t even been down there 
to see what they’re doing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll be there Monday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We’ll expect you to be there 
Monday, all of you. The other thing, you still obviously . . . and 
as the critic for Science and Technology, it really amazes me 
that you have not yet grasped the objectives of the Future 
Corporation. Maybe you need to go and spend a little bit of time 
there. I give you credit for the fact that you generally have taken 
a solid interest in the high-tech industry in this province. Why 
don’t you go and spend a little bit of time with the Future 
Corporation and talk to the people over there? 
 
And this idea — you talk about a birthday party. You’ll find 
that you’re totally out in left field, so why don’t you go there 
and spend a little bit of time? 
 
If you had your way here, from what I hear, you would have the 
government of the day pay out this amount of money totally. 
That’s what you’d have us do. Now yet that’s not what you felt 
back in 1985 with Pioneer Trust. We feel quite strongly that the 
government of Alberta is responsible and that they should be 
paying. 
 
And yet again, the member from Quill Lakes didn’t feel that 
that was the case in so far as Pioneer Trust was concerned; he 
felt that the Saskatchewan government  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1956 
 

should only pay out residents of Saskatchewan. This would, of 
course, support the argument then that the Province of Alberta, 
even if they are responsible, should only pay out the investors 
in the province of Alberta. We don’t agree with that. 
 
We feel that they had primary responsibility for those 
companies; they have treated them equally up until this point in 
time with any moneys that have been paid out, and they should 
continue to do that. And if they are found that they have been 
irresponsible in the regulation of these companies when the 
Code inquiry comes down, they should continue to pay out the 
investors with the sale of the assets until these people have been 
fully compensated. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, and if the Saskatchewan 
depositors aren’t paid the management fees for Coopers & 
Lybrand by the government of Alberta, as you claim they 
should be, will you then make good on that payment for 
Saskatchewan depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We’ll cross that bridge, Mr. 
Chairman, when we come to it. And when the Code inquiry has 
come down then the decisions will be made. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before the adjournment 
this evening I would seek leave of the Assembly to make a 
change on a committee of only our members here, just 
switching a couple of members back and forth — one member 
back and forth. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Substitution of Names on Committees of the Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by the 
member for Redberry, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the name of Mr. Swenson be substituted for that of 
Mr. Andrew on the list of members comprising the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 
 
 


