


















































April 6, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 6, 1989 
 

601 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself into 
the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto moved by 
Mr. Lautermilch. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me say, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s my pleasure this evening to have an opportunity 
to address the budget of this government. 
 
And I also want to point out that earlier in the day, the member 
from Arm River had stated that the opposition was not dealing 
with the budget. That statement, of course, was not true; it was 
totally false. However, I just want to point out that I will be 
dealing with the budget tonight, and I will be dealing with it in 
some detail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Particularly, Mr. Speaker, as it pertains to health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity over the last few days to examine the 
health care portion of this budget in some detail and I find it, Mr. 
Speaker, quite frankly, devoid of any vision in the area of health 
care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The government talks about an 11 per cent 
increase, but, Mr. Speaker, let us examine the truth in this matter. 
The fact of the matter is, is that if we take a look at the 
supplemental payments of 22 million that were added to last 
year’s budget, it immediately reduces the amount the government 
says it’s paying this year, over and above last year, by 22 million. 
 
If we take into consideration the property management 
corporation portion in both years, and add in the supplements, 
and then deduct the amount that would cover this year’s inflation 
— this year’s inflation only, Mr. Speaker — the real expenditure 
increase in health care is a meagre 4.8 per cent. Four point eight 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, hardly enough to make up for the harmful 
and thoughtless PC policies in the area of health care in previous 
years. 
 
And this 4.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t even deal with the 
huge sums of money that are being paid to the property 
management corporation in this budget — rental on old hospitals 
and old health care facilities. That isn’t even taken into 
consideration. And the amount that that is, is fairly substantial, 
Mr. Speaker, somewhere in the amount of $13 million. 
 
Nowhere in the budget do we see how much the retroactive pay 
for CUPE (Canadian Union of Public  

Employees) workers and nurses are, but I will be asking the 
minister that question, and I’m putting him on notice tonight, Mr. 
Speaker. Nowhere in the budget is that amount referred too. And 
I wonder how much it is of that 4.8 per cent increase, real 
expenditure increase. So when I talk about 4.8 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, we still have to deduct from that the phoney property 
management corporation payments as well as the retroactive pay 
that the government has deliberately not paid in order to try to 
pad the health care budget today. 
 
And this percentage increase is hardly enough — hardly enough, 
Mr. Speaker, to make up for the harmful and hurtful cut-backs in 
the previous seven years of the PC administration. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Certainly no dental plan with that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Exactly, no dental plan. There’s no indication 
whatsoever in the budget that the school-based children’s dental 
plan will be reinstituted in the schools across our country. The 
school-based children’s dental plan was a preventative program 
of the first degree, Mr. Speaker. It was one of the best 
preventative dental care programs in North America; I would 
venture to say the best in North America. Some 400 dental 
workers were fired as a result of this government’s cut-backs to 
the dental plan, 400 dental workers. And this government was 
counting on people not using the plan, Mr. Speaker, that’s how 
they wanted to save money. That’s their commitment to 
preventive health care — hoping that people won’t choose the 
preventive health care services that are out there. 
 
They privatized the children’s school-based dental plan, Mr. 
Speaker. They privatized it as a result of pressures from the 
private sector, when this government should have been 
expanding dental services in the province, Mr. Speaker. They 
should have been expanding them. They should have been 
providing dental services of a similar nature to seniors. They 
should have been looking at a plan and a scheme for adults for 
the entire population in this province. Instead this government 
cut back on dental services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And who was hardest hit by this? It was many 
of their constituents, Mr. Speaker — rural people, rural people, 
Mr. Speaker. They were people who on farms have to travel long 
distances to get dental health; who have to pay mileage; who 
have to pay meals in the city; who, if the farm wife is working, 
has to take time off from her work and the children have to be 
taken out of school or otherwise they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural residents have been particularly hard hit by 
the destruction of the school-based children’s dental plan — rural 
residents. And I have heard from them across this province. 
Urban residents have also been hit hard. The expenses aren’t as 
substantial for them as it is   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

602 
 

for rural residents but nevertheless they still want their dental 
plan reinstituted. 
 
We’ve heard from people across this province, from teachers and 
municipal officials. We’ve heard from people right across 
Saskatchewan asking for the school-based children’s dental plan 
to be reinstituted, but there’s not a thing in the budget — not a 
thing in the budget about doing that, Mr. Speaker. The budget 
talks in glowing terms about community involvement, but 
they’re not listening to the community, Mr. Speaker. Oh, no, 
they’re not listening to the people because the people have been 
calling for the reinstitution of the school-based children’s dental 
plan. 
 
This 4.8 per cent so-called increase, which is questionable even 
at that point, is hardly enough, Mr. Speaker, to make up for the 
harmful cut-backs in the last seven years to health care. 
 
If we look at the prescription drug plan, which was decimated by 
this government, now we find seniors are faced $125 deductible 
and 20 per cent up front . . . Or seniors, I believe, pay less than 
125, but 125 is for families. Nevertheless, there is a 75, $125 
deductible up front and 20 per cent up-front cost. I am hearing 
from low-income people and from seniors that this deductible 
and 20 per cent is too much. 
 
They’re on a fixed income. I heard from a constituent tonight 
who told me . . . She’s a university student. She had to go out and 
pay $100, $100 for a prescription drug today. Of course she 
didn’t have the money, Mr. Speaker. Now I ask you, when you 
were a student at university, could you have afforded $100 on 
prescription drugs? No, you couldn’t have, Mr. Speaker; neither 
could have I. But that’s the sort of hardship that this government 
is creating. That’s one example out of hundreds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nine million for a birthday party. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, yet they have $9 million for a birthday 
party that nobody wants. Once again they’re not listening to the 
people, Mr. Speaker. Nine million for a birthday party nobody 
wants, but what do we get? A destroyed school-based children’s 
dental plan, a prescription drug plan that still requires a 
deductible and 20 per cent up front. That’s what we get, Mr. 
Speaker, for our taxes. But what they want — what they feel that 
we should be getting — is a $9 million birthday party that nobody 
wants. 
 
And I want to talk a bit about some other cut-backs, the cut-backs 
to the public health nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. Last 
fall there was a report that was leaked with respect to public 
health nurses and twinning of regions in the province of 
Saskatchewan and cut-backs to public health nurses. What this 
government has done in the last few months — well actually it’s 
been happening over a period of years, but it came to a peak in 
the last few months — was that they destroyed the public health 
regions in the province, or reduced them substantially from, I 
believe, 10 to six, and they cut back on public health nurses. 
 
Now the government and the minister speaks in glowing 

terms about preventive health care in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
They speak in glowing terms about preventive health care. Well 
public health nurses are the front line workers in preventive 
health care. They’re the front line workers. This government says 
it supports preventive health but it cuts back on the front line 
workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me just quote from this report, in part, to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, and other members of this Assembly, exactly how the 
public health nurses feel about these particular cut-backs “We 
have not been consulted in this process and the implications for 
health care have not been fully considered.” Now that’s a key 
statement. I’ll come back to that in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
“Additional pressures on an already busy staff can lead to errors 
in judgement, which can erode credibility, as well as endanger 
the public safety.” Endanger the public safety, that’s what the 
public health nurses said. “The proposed staffing levels are 
equivalent to the staffing of the 1950s when expectations were 
much lower, and programs were less numerous and complex. 
Morale is at an all time low.” 
 
The PC government claims it is committed to preventive health 
programs, Mr. Speaker, but I say that’s a farce, and it’s not true, 
because they’re cutting back on the front line workers in 
preventive health care. 
 
Now I just want to return to the statement about, “We have not 
been consulted in this process and the implications for health care 
have not been fully considered,” because that’s a major insight to 
what’s happening in the area of health care in this province. 
 
The government talks about wanting community involvement 
and wanting consultation, and we’ve seen a number of incidents 
that have occurred in the last few months, in particular the 
massive integration of hospitals in Saskatoon, where there’s been 
no consultation with many of the people who were involved. In 
fact, in the Saskatoon integration, there was no consultation with 
the health care commission of this government, with the PC 
health care commission — absolutely no consultation. And yet 
they went ahead with a massive integration, a massive health care 
initiative, without even consulting with their own commission. 
 
And now here what we have, the public health nurses say, is that 
there was no consultation. So the ministers’ statements, the 
Minister of Health and the statements in the budget of the 
Minister of Finance, are not true. They do not believe in 
community involvement because, Mr. Speaker, actions speak 
louder than words. What we find with respect to the public health 
nurses is the fact that much of their time is being spent in 
administration as opposed to doing the sort of work that public 
health nurses want to do, and that’s dealing with patients and 
looking after clients. 
 
And let’s just take a little closer look at the study and compare 
exactly what is happening from prior to the twinning and after 
the twinning. If we look at Swift Current, for example, the square 
mileage that was being covered by the public health nurses 
coming out of Swift Current used to be 15,336; it’s now 26,578. 
And the   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

603 
 

population the staff used to cover was 48,760, and it’s now 
155,000. 
 
(1915) 
 
If we look at Weyburn-Estevan, Regina Rural, it was 22,000 
square miles approximately, and the population is now 
approximately 113,550. It used to be 9,000 and a population of 
50,000. And I’m not going to read any further, Mr. Speaker, but 
the fact of the matter is that I could go on with the inequities that 
have been created as a result of the twinning of health care 
regions — a much larger area to cover; a much larger population 
for the public health nurses to service. And this is this 
government’s policy on preventive health care. 
 
And let me say, Mr. Speaker, that there are members sitting on 
that side of the House who know I am right, and who have stated 
as much to the health care commission in statements to the effect 
that it was virtually impossible for anyone to travel so far in order 
to perform their duties as public health nurses. So even their own 
members, Mr. Speaker, recognize the inequity and the unfairness 
of that twinning policy. Even their own members know, Mr. 
Speaker, they know that this is not delivering good health care to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan — not because the 
staff are not willing and able to deliver good health care, but 
because they’ve made the task so difficult and so impossible that 
it is virtually impossible for them to service all the patients in the 
manner that they would like to. 
 
Let’s take a look at the shortage of public health inspectors, 
another preventative health care initiative that governments 
undertake and should respect, Mr. Speaker, that of inspecting 
public facilities. But the number of public inspections and 
inspectors has decreased substantially in the last few years, and 
let me just give you some comparisons. In 1984-85, the number 
of visits were 23,127 and in 1987-88 they were down to 14,199. 
The number of inspections in 1984-85 were 7,825 and the 
number in ’87-88 down to 6,024, Mr. Speaker — down to 6,024. 
Well that gives you an idea as to what has happened in the public 
inspections department, Mr. Speaker, and I’m just wondering 
whether that incident at the Extendicare in Regina, where one 
gentleman passed away, had anything to do with the fact that 
there’s been such a substantial decrease in the number of public 
health inspections in the province of Saskatchewan as a result, I 
might say, Mr. Speaker, of PC government cut-backs. And that’s 
this government’s commitment to preventive health care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Home care is another area of preventive health care, Mr. Speaker. 
Home care is another area of preventive health care that is . . . 
should be expanded substantially and that is very important in the 
whole scheme of health care and preventive health in the 
province. But what we see in this budget is a very small increase 
for home care that, as compared to the total increase in the 
budget, doesn’t put it any further ahead. 
 
Let’s take a look at speech language pathologists and 
audiologists in the province. And I’m dealing with these 
particular disciplines, Mr. Speaker, because these disciplines 
have a lot to do with the new vision of health 

care in the province — which I might say is not the PC vision — 
and that’s moving into areas of preventive health and moving into 
services and primary health care that keep people out of hospitals 
and keep people well. And this government has totally neglected 
that area of health care services, Mr. Speaker, and this minimal 
increase in the PC budget does nothing to improve upon those 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at speech language pathology and audiology services 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and I’m referring now to a 
paper that was tabled by the Saskatchewan Association of Speech 
Language Pathologists and Audiologists, presented to the health 
care commission in the province. It clearly indicates that when 
you compare Manitoba, Alberta, and Saskatchewan, including 
the Canadian . . . including the Canadian average, and when we 
look at the population per active speech pathologists or 
audiologists we have one to every 13,416 in Saskatchewan, and 
in Alberta it’s one to every 6,538 — twice as much, virtually 
twice as much, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan — twice as many 
people per each speech pathologist, audiologist in Saskatchewan 
than in Alberta. The numbers are similar in Manitoba. There’s 
one to every 6,894 in Manitoba. And the Canadian average is one 
speech pathologist, audiologist to every 9,587, but Saskatchewan 
has a whopping 13,416, Mr. Speaker. That’s this government’s 
commitment to preventative health care and the well-being of the 
people in this province. 
 
And if we take a look at early childhood psychologists, another 
very important area, another very important area, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to preventative health care and developing a sense 
of physical, mental, and social well-being for the men, women, 
and children of this province. Let’s look at early childhood 
psychologists. And let me just read from their brief and tell you 
what this discipline had to say about their services: 
 

Early identification and therapy are paramount to the 
success of this process. They are designed to work with 
families with pre-school children who are developmentally 
delayed or who are at risk for developmental delays. 
 

However they go on to state that: 
 

Recent reductions in services to pre-school children and 
their families, which have been traditionally provided by the 
Department of Health through community health services, 
are having a negative impact. This has included a loss in the 
number of early childhood psychologists and speech and 
language therapists throughout the province. 
 

The most important . . . The number of effects that these staff 
decreases has had on the quality of services to families in our area 
. . . I’m sorry, there are a number of effects. The most important 
of these is a loss in early identification of children who have 
possible delays. And earlier on, as I quoted, early identification 
is crucial. They go on to say: 
 

The last critical result in the decrease in   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

604 
 

community health personnel is a lack of available 
professional consultation. Previously our staff met on a 
monthly basis with both the speech therapist and less often 
with the psychologist in our area. This was very essential in 
establishing consistent goals and therapies for children and 
their families. This has not been possible since the recent 
changes in staffing. At present, the support from the 
community health services has become minimal and in 
many cases absent when needed. 
 

Now I think that’s very telling, Mr. Speaker. That brief is very 
telling because what it tells the people of Saskatchewan is that 
this government has no commitment to a vision of health care; it 
has no commitment to preventive health care; and this budget is 
void of any vision in the area of health care. 
 
We also notice in the province a real shortage of specialists, a 
real shortage of specialists, Mr. Speaker. In fact, cut-backs by 
this government in previous years meant an exodus of specialists 
from this province. And we in Regina only have to look at the 
exodus of specialists from the Plains hospital as a result of 
government cut-backs to the university which resulted in 
cut-backs to the Plains hospital. And we lost a number of 
specialists, some of whom we will never get back, Mr. Speaker, 
some of whom we will never get back. And this budget does not 
address that problem. 
 
And I have a list of them here, but one endocrinologist, for 
example, one rheumatologist, one cardiologist, one infectious 
disease specialist — was the only one in this part of the province. 
And there were others as well, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going to list 
them all off. But the fact of the matter is there was an exodus of 
specialists in this province as a result of this government’s 
harmful cut-backs in the area of health care. And the list goes on 
and on. And I could go on for ever just listing them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m doing this to make the point that this small increase of 
the PC government does nothing to rectify those problems. It 
does nothing, Mr. Speaker. And there is no vision and no real 
commitment in the health care budget this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s this government’s record in health care — destruction of 
the school-based children’s dental plan, a decimation of the 
prescription drug plan, which is still causing seniors problems 
and low-income people problems, students difficulty; long 
hospital waiting lists, unprecedented in the history of this 
province; specialists fleeing the province; patients who couldn’t 
get cancer treatment, and we saw many situations of that in the 
last few months; lack of primary health care in rural 
communities; cuts in preventative medicine such as public health 
nurses, public inspectors, community health workers in northern 
Saskatchewan, which is another issue again that I haven’t gone 
into in detail. 
 
But that’s their health record, Mr. Speaker. That’s their health 
record, and I say it’s a national disgrace. And the PC budget does 
not correct those wrongs, does not correct the crisis that has been 
caused by its ineptitude in government management generally, 
but specifically, its 

ineptitude in the health care area. It does not correct the crisis that 
has resulted as a result of their lack of commitment to health care; 
as a result of the fact that they have no long-term strategic plan 
in health care, no vision whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, none at all. 
And this budget does not reflect any commitment nor any vision. 
 
In fact, I think the most glaring aspect of this health care budget, 
Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there’s a total lack of any indication 
of a long-term strategic plan in health care — a total lack of any 
indication. None of the problems that I was talking about have 
been seriously addressed in this budget. This budget, the health 
care budget, is at best a partial catch-up, a partial catch-up to 
correct some of the horrendous policies of the last seven years. 
 
But there’s no long-term strategy in this budget, no long-term 
strategy with respect to delivering primary health care to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. And a key component, 
Mr. Speaker, of any long-term strategy would be a heavy 
emphasis on prevention. 
 
But what we have seen are cut-backs to preventive health care, 
Mr. Speaker, and substantial cut-backs. Oh, sure, the government 
has its Everyone Wins program. But let me tell you that the 
people of this province see through that program and they see it 
as an advertising gimmick on the part of the PC government. It 
is not a real preventative health care program that puts workers 
in the front lines, Mr. Speaker, and that’s where you’ll make 
substantial improvements in terms of preventative health and 
delivering primary health care services to rural residents and 
urban residents in Saskatchewan. 
 
Cut-backs with respect to the dental plan, cut-backs with respect 
to the prescription drug plan and community health workers and 
public health workers have not been addressed by this 
government. There’s been no real increase to these health care 
services, and there’s no real commitment by this government to 
health care and a vision of health care in this province. 
 
(1930) 
 
However, we do see a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, a lot of money 
in the budget under two votes in particular, two votes that have 
to do with public relations: 32 per cent, I believe, in one vote; and 
62 — a whopping 60 or 62 per cent in another. 
 
And my guess is, Mr. Speaker, that that money is going to be 
used largely for more self-serving PC advertising, more 
self-serving PC advertising. That’s this government’s 
commitment to preventive health. They will call it preventive 
health care, but what it will be is self-serving PC advertising with 
the minister’s picture on many of these pamphlets, I would 
venture to guess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government obviously perceives its problem in health as a 
public relations problem, and it therefore believes that through 
advertising and $9 million birthday parties — although that’s not 
the subvote I’m talking about — $9 million birthday parties, 
fancy kick-offs for Everyone Wins programs that cost the 
taxpayers thousands of dollars, the government sees that as the 
way   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

605 
 

to rectify the harm and the hurt and the suffering it’s created as a 
result of its cut-backs in the last seven years. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province see 
through that and the people of this province see through that and 
the people of this province won’t buy it. The people of this 
province have repeatedly said, repeatedly said to the government 
through its PC commission on health, that it wants front line 
workers. It wants public health nurses, it wants community health 
workers, it wants dental therapists, and it wants a prescription 
drug plan that does not preclude anyone from obtaining drugs in 
this province. That’s what the people want but this government 
has not delivered. 
 
A long-term strategic plan in health care, Mr. Speaker, would 
look at ways to improve overall health, ways to keep people out 
of hospitals. If we can keep people out of hospitals, Mr. Speaker, 
we save costs. It’s a simple, very simple, concept. Even the hon. 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, shouldn’t have difficulty 
understanding that one. If we take a look at the hospitals in . . . I 
believe, the Regina General as an example. There are a number 
of beds right now in the Regina General Hospital that are being 
used . . . acute care beds that are being used for long-term care. 
And this budget shows no creativity whatsoever in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. There should be money to assist these people to obtain 
accommodation outside of the hospital while they’re waiting for 
their long-term care bed, thereby opening up beds here in Regina 
and across the province where this is occurring — other places 
— opening up beds for acute care patients and emergency cases. 
 
We still have emergency cases in some areas, emergency cases 
like someone breaking a hip, who have to wait a day or two — 
and I have been told even three — to get into a hospital because 
there are no beds. Yet we have long-term care patients taking up 
acute care beds because the government has shown no initiative 
in subsidizing these patients while they wait in a private home or 
wherever possible for their long-term care bed. 
 
That’s this government’s commitment to revamping the health 
care system so we get the biggest bang for our dollar, Mr. 
Speaker. They know nothing about . . . They know nothing about 
trying to save money for the purposes of providing better health 
care to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many things that could be implemented for the 
purpose, Mr. Speaker, of trying to improve health care. We could 
look at diabetic clinics across the province. The evidence 
indicates, Mr. Speaker, that if diabetic patients can go to a clinic 
outside of a hospital and be properly monitored, they’re far more 
likely to be kept out of the hospital than if these clinics are not 
available, and thereby save acute care beds for emergency cases. 
 
But this takes some leadership, Mr. Speaker, it takes leadership 
and it takes some initiative, and this government is totally lacking 
in those two areas — totally lacking, Mr. Speaker. We could have 
well adult clinics in the province. Is there anything in the budget 
about well adult clinics or clinics out in rural Saskatchewan that 
would perform a number of primary health care services? 

Is there anything in this budget for that, Mr. Speaker? Nothing, 
nothing. But that would be a true commitment to prevention and 
that would be a true commitment to community involvement, and 
this budget is completely void of any such initiatives. No 
creativity in this budget, Mr. Speaker, no vision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — I just want to talk a bit about community 
involvement, because the government did speak in glowing terms 
about the need for community involvement and its desire to 
involve the community in the health care of this province. But 
when they destroyed the school-based children’s dental plan 
there was no community involvement. When they decimated the 
prescription drug plan there was no community involvement. 
When they integrated the hospitals in Saskatoon, no consultation 
with their commission, no community involvement. And the 
commission was going to be in Saskatoon. I think it was 10 days 
after they announced this initiative, 10 days and they couldn’t 
wait. Well I think that’s an indication of how seriously the PC 
government takes its own commission. And I venture to say, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s been very little if no consultation, with respect 
to the priorities of this budget, and what the government should 
be making a priority. I venture to say there’s been literally no 
consultation in that regard. 
 
But instead this government acts on its own, totally out of touch 
with the people, dictating to them in their arrogant fashion what 
sort of services they will have, even though the people have been 
talking now for some eight or nine months to their health care 
commission. They’ve ignored many, many of the things that have 
been said by the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s their 
commitment to health care and community involvement — no 
commitment whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s look at the issue of deterrent fees. Oh yes, we see the 
Minister of Health in the paper again yesterday, saying, no 
deterrent fees, no deterrent fees. My colleague here from Regina 
Rosemont says, no sales tax, no gas tax either. Quite right, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we heard in the House yesterday, oh, no, we’re not going to 
privatize SPC, but what do we see? Privatization of SPC. What 
do we see? A gas tax. The Premier said, never again in the history 
of Saskatchewan will there be a gas tax, if there is a PC 
government. What do we see? A gas tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is that deterrent fees create 
a two-tiered system of health, a two-tiered system of health, 
where there’s one level of health care for rich people, and a lesser 
level of health care for lower income and poor people. And the 
government says, oh, no; but we see their own officials speak out 
to the media and to the health care commission, suggesting there 
should be user fees — their own officials, Mr. Speaker. But the 
government says, oh, no, we’re not going to implement deterrent 
fees. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe them, not one 
bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

606 
 

Ms. Simard: — And neither do the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. What this government says and what it does are 
two different things. It will say, no privatization of the SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) and we see privatization of 
SPC; no gas tax, we see a gas tax; no sales tax, we see an 
increased sales tax; no deterrent fees, and I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
the end of that story is that if we are ever so unlucky — and I 
don’t think that will happen — but if we should be so unlucky in 
this province as to get another PC government, you can bet there 
will be deterrent fees in the province of Saskatchewan, and you 
can bet there will be privatization of health care as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government will say, oh, no, don’t worry about 
privatization. But they’ve already done it in the dental plan, 
they’ve already done it. And they’ve already removed a lot of the 
burden on to the shoulder of individuals in the prescription drug 
plan, Mr. Speaker. And they’re consulting constantly with 
Margaret Thatcher and Oliver Letwin and people from out of the 
country to get their advice with respect to how one privatizes 
health care and other services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You can be sure that they have discussed the privatization of 
health care with Oliver Letwin. And anyone who would suggest 
that they haven’t and they haven’t given it consideration is being 
very naive, Mr. Speaker. And you can be sure that if we are ever 
so unlucky as to get a PC government yet another time, which 
I’m sure is not going to happen, but if we should, you can be sure 
we’ll have deterrent fees and privatization of health care. 
 
And let’s take a look at the lottery tax. Well I say this crew of 
bandits across the way, Mr. Speaker, have been gambling with 
people’s lives now for several years, so I’m not surprised they’re 
gambling with health care. Taxing charities who are trying to 
raise money for their charitable services is the most ludicrous 
thing that I’ve ever heard. It’s stupid, that’s what it is, Mr. 
Speaker; including hospitals who are trying to raise money for 
their own hospital, they’ll now have to pay a tax to the 
government for . . . in an attempt to raise this money. 
 
The other thing about bingo taxes, for example, Mr. Speaker, is 
the fact that many low-income people play bingo because that is 
really their only form of entertainment. It’s difficult for them to 
afford any form of entertainment and that one is one that they can 
afford. And so it’s taxing, in many cases, low-income people and 
poor people. It’s a tax on these people to pay for our health 
services in the province of Saskatchewan; a tax on low-income 
people, a tax on charities. Well I say that’s ludicrous, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s no vision in that. That’s not a vision, that’s just 
ridiculous. 
 
And the Family Services Bureau stated to the health care 
commission that forcing hospitals to go to the public with 
lotteries and bingos to raise money has cut into their source of 
funding in the province. It’s cut into it. And I think the members 
opposite should listen to this carefully because what they stated 
was that their source of funding was being reduced. Their source 
of funding was being reduced such that they were unable to 
provide many of 

the services that they formerly provided. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It doesn’t matter how you say it, Louise, 
Taylor won’t understand you. 
 
Ms. Simard: — The . . . Yes, I realize that many of them don’t 
understand this, this is just . . . The member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley especially just simply doesn’t understand the 
plight of people who are struggling in this province to survive, 
and the plight of many non-governmental organizations who are 
struggling to provide the services that are needed in the 
community. 
 
And what they stated to the health care commission was the fact 
that their source of funding was being reduced because hospitals 
were going to the community for the same kind of funding, 
because this government didn’t have the commitment nor the 
vision to properly fund hospitals. 
 
And what the Family Services Bureau does, Mr. Speaker, is 
counselling with families and children and men and women. It 
provides some home care services and a variety of very valuable 
services to the community, but it’s getting squeezed by the PC 
government, and it’s getting squeezed once again with this new 
ridiculous lottery tax. 
 
I find this policy very unfair, but it’s indicative of the fact this 
government has no real commitment to health care, and no real 
vision of health care. 
 
And let’s just talk a little bit about poverty, because poverty and 
health are not exclusive, Mr. Speaker. We must, when we talk 
about health care in the province, also look at poverty. So let’s 
talk about family and child poverty in this province because I 
think these figures are very telling. And any vision of health care 
necessarily has to include a consideration of poor people and 
low-income people, Mr. Speaker, otherwise it’s not a real vision. 
And this government, instead of helping these people, have 
constantly cut back their services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1945) 
 
Between 1981 and ’86 the number of Saskatchewan families 
living in poverty rose by 15.3 per cent, from 36,900 to 42,600. 
This represented 16.4 per cent of all Saskatchewan families. In 
1986, one in four Saskatchewan families with children under 16 
years had income of less than 20,000. In Saskatchewan, in 1986, 
64,560 children were growing up in poverty — one child in four. 
Only Newfoundland had a higher rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, only 
Newfoundland. 
 
In Saskatchewan, in March 1988, there were 60,292 men, 
women, and children receiving social assistance. This is the great 
government that’s creating jobs, Mr. Speaker, and is getting 
people off the public welfare rolls. This shows a 5.8 per cent 
reduction from the ’85 figure, but it remains 24 per cent higher 
than the 1982 figure of 48,396. And in addition to that, in 1987, 
there were some 19,500 status Indians also receiving social 
assistance from the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

607 
 

On a yearly basis, food bank usage has risen. Children comprise 
approximately 45 per cent of those who make use of the 
Saskatchewan food banks. Forty per cent of those who are on 
social assistance in the province are children under 16. And what 
explains this high and increasing use of Saskatchewan food 
banks at a time when there is . . . at this time, would appear to be 
the cut-backs in benefits introduced under welfare reform in ’84 
and ’88. That’s PC welfare reform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In other words, we have an increasing problem in this province 
of hungry children, and children living in poverty. We have an 
increasing problem of high unemployment and men and women 
in this province living in poverty. We have social assistance rates 
— the number of people on social assistance — extremely high 
in this province and much higher than 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And any vision of health care has to include a vision that gets 
people out of the poverty cycle, that puts good, nutritious food 
on the table, because if children don’t eat properly they won’t 
have good health in later years. If men and women don’t have a 
balanced diet, their health also will not be good in years to come, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to feed people. We have to feed people in order to 
improve the health of the citizens of Saskatchewan. Any vision 
of health care must include a vision of a society where children 
go to bed at night, and go to school in the morning well fed; 
where people have sewer and water, which many northern 
communities don’t have, Mr. Deputy Speaker; where people 
have adequate housing; where things like racism and sexism are 
eliminated. 
 
It’s only in this way that people can live productive lives and live 
healthy lives. So health care is not simply hospitals and nurses 
and doctors and this sort of thing. That’s a large portion of it and 
an extremely important portion, but that’s not all that it is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s good nutrition, it’s clean living. It’s adequate housing. It’s 
food on the table and education opportunities. So social and 
economic policies have to be fully integrated, fully integrated, 
Mr. Speaker, in any vision of health care. And that’s lacking in 
this budget, it’s sadly lacking. There’s no vision; no commitment. 
 
Now historically, poverty has been treated as an individual issue 
and the PC government tends to blame the poor people for their 
problems. They label them as lazy or they label them as unwilling 
to work, or whatever, playing too much bingo. And I say that’s a 
Neanderthal mentality, Mr. Speaker; it’s a Neanderthal 
mentality. 
 
We cannot afford poverty in this province. It creates health 
problems; we lose productivity; it creates social problems; and it 
will increase health expenditures in future years. We must realize 
society is only as rich as its poorest member, Mr. Speaker. 
Society is only as rich as its poorest member, and a vision of 
health care must necessarily incorporate a vision of healthy living 
and an adequate standard of living for all. A vision of health care 
needs to be a broad concept of health care, but this government 
has no vision whatsoever, Mr. Speaker.

The social assistance levels in this province are appalling. The 
treatment of lower income people and poor people is appalling. 
The cut-backs in preventative health care and the lack of any 
remedy to these cut-backs is appalling. 
 
This government’s going nowhere with respect to health care 
and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I might add, they have no credibility 
in the area of health care. 
 
But New Democrats do have a vision in health care, and our 
vision is a vision where all men and women and children in 
Saskatchewan have good food on their table and a bed to sleep in 
at night, adequate housing, employment. Nothing, no job 
creation programs in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they have exported them. We 
have people leaving this province at unprecedented numbers — 
some 6,000 in February alone; 20,000 over the last 12 months, I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But there’s nothing in this budget 
to address that problem. But the New Democratic vision is a 
vision of full employment in this province; a vision of good 
health care; a vision of food on the table for every man, woman, 
and child in this province, such that every man, woman, and child 
can achieve a complete state of physical, mental, and social 
well-being. Because that has to be the future, Mr. Speaker, that 
has to be the future and that has to be the direction in which health 
care proceeds. 
 
The fundamental conditions and resources for this direction, Mr. 
Speaker, would be education, food, income, a stable 
environment, a healthy environment, resources that are 
sustainable and developed for the people, Mr. Speaker — not for 
multinational corporations, not for the Tory friends, but for the 
people of Saskatchewan so we can pay for their health care and 
their education. And it necessarily involves social justice and 
equity. If we wish to create a society where people attain 
complete physical, mental, and social well-being, it must include 
social justice and equity. 
 
Improvement in health requires, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a secure 
foundation in those areas, a secure foundation. And that’s the 
New Democratic vision, but that’s a vision that the PC 
government does not share. That’s a vision the PC government 
doesn’t share. What has this government done instead? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well what is your vision? 
 
Ms. Simard: — It talks about nuclear reactors. The member from 
Weyburn says, well what is your vision. Obviously he was 
sleeping when I just went through it in the last five or 10 minutes. 
He’s obviously sleeping. But now that he’s woken up, perhaps 
he would like to get into the debate when I’m finished. 
 
But let’s look at what this government has done. It’s proposing 
the implementation of nuclear reactors in this province. I hardly 
say, Mr. Speaker, that that isn’t a stable . . . wouldn’t create a 
stable environment. 
 
There has been gross underfunding of education — and I’m 
addressing the member from Weyburn now, the Minister of 
Education, Mr. Speaker, who’s chattering away at the top of his 
lungs trying to get into this debate.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

608 
 

There has been gross underfunding of education. If we cannot 
educate our children in this province because of your 
underfunding and give them proper quality education, how on 
earth do you expect them to live productive lives in the 21st 
century, Mr. Minister? I ask you how you expect our children to 
live productive lives if you’re cutting back and trying to pay for 
your privatization and PC hand-outs to your PC buddies with our 
education money, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — There have been cut-backs to poor people. We 
have children going hungry in this province; we have 
unprecedented poverty. We have unemployment. We have no 
commitment whatsoever to a stable ecosystem. 
 
Look at the Shand, Rafferty project for example, the political 
boondoggle in the Premier’s riding. And they’re giving our 
resources away instead of using them to pay for social programs 
and social services. The multi-million dollar give-away to 
out-of-province oil corporations is appalling, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The lack of commitment to reforestation of our forests and the 
sweetheart deal with Weyerhaeuser is an example of this 
government’s commitment to using our resources to pay for 
health and education for the children and the men and women in 
this province. 
 
This government has no commitment to this society, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It only has a commitment to itself and its PC friends and 
its large, big-business corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And let’s look at what they’re doing in the area 
of social justice and equity. Well for the first time we see a human 
rights coalition in this province that have sprung up as a result of 
the lack of social justice and equity in this province. It has sprung 
up from a number of groups who feel that this government 
engages in intimidation of the public and it fires people on an ad 
hoc basis without proper consultation or without supporting them 
such that they can find other employment. 
 
I mean it’s created a situation in this province that’s completely 
horrendous — cruel and horrendous. And then we get studies 
from the government saying there’s an increase in the use of 
health care services. Well I wonder why, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
think the short answer to that is, Tory governments make people 
sick. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New Democrats, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have a 
vision of a much more caring society where all men, women, and 
children in this province have access to a good standard of living, 
where health is not simply — and I’m repeating this again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for the benefit of the member from Weyburn, 
because he was sleeping when I said this originally — where 
health is not simply the treatment and prevention of disease, but 
is much broader; and it’s not simply the responsibility of the 
 

health sector, but goes beyond to complete physical, mental, and 
social well-being, so that we all live productive, happy, and 
healthy lives — all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why primary health care has to be brought to the people, 
and I’m talking specifically about rural Saskatchewan. What this 
government would like to do is bring the people to health care — 
not health care to the people. And that’s why what we have to do 
in rural Saskatchewan is implement a strategy, a long-term 
strategy for the provision of primary health care services for the 
provision of physiotherapy, occupational health, dental health, 
mental health services, speech and language pathology, adequate 
public inspections. And that is by no means a complete list, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But health care must be brought to the people; it must be brought 
to our rural residents and our urban residents in this province. 
That’s important, because it will improve the well-being and 
productiveness of Saskatchewan people. But this budget, does it 
have any vision in that regard? No, not at all. Does it show any 
real commitment to health care being brought to the people in 
rural Saskatchewan, to preventative health care, to getting people 
off the poverty lists, to getting people off of welfare, so they can 
live productive lives and improve their health care? No, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there’s no vision. There’s no commitment from 
this government. 
 
(2000) 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a vision and it’s the 
New Democratic vision and I’ve spoken about it at some length 
tonight. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I listened with reservation, I guess, if you will, 
to the member from Regina Lakeview as she was speaking, and 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that before I begin 
I want to bring to your attention and to the Assembly’s attention 
and indeed to the people in the province of Saskatchewan’s 
attention, an understanding of why the NDP themselves cannot 
understand themselves, if that makes sense to you. 
 
And I want to quote to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from members 
that are now sitting in the NDP opposition, and this goes back . . . 
And it’s in their own paper, The Commonwealth. It goes back to 
the 1986 election and it’s while the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland was trying to, I guess, make some sort of remarks into 
explaining to his people why they might not have won the 1986 
election and became government. But this I want to read into the 
record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because for what this says from the 
lips of the member from Saskatoon, the NDP member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, will explain to you that the words that 
were coming out of the lips of the little lady from Regina 
Lakeview could also be taken in that same context. 
 
When you talk about the truth being spoken in this legislature 
while, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from . . . the NDP 
member, he’s the MLA from Saskatoon   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

609 
 

Sutherland, says this: 
 

 In spite of our relative electoral success in October of 
1986 provincial election, Saskatchewan New Democrats are 
still searching for a bullet-proof vest every time they 
advance public policy or comment. Give us health care as 
an issue, and because of our history we feel relatively safe; 
give us almost any other issue and we’d rather retreat to 
health care. 
 

And I want to go on a little further. It also says: 
 

 I believe that we, as Saskatchewan New Democrats, have 
a fundamental responsibility to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what we believe and what we would do if 
elected their government. I also believe that we have been 
afraid to share this. 
 

Afraid to share the truth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they know 
if they were telling the truth as to what they believed in there 
would not be one member even elected on that side of the House 
let alone any. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I listened I could not 
believe — I could not believe that the member from Regina 
Lakeview could not accept the Minister of Finance’s budget that 
has been brought into this Assembly and that we’re debating 
today. I could understand very well that if there were cut-backs, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I would be joining with her — with her 
in condemning the budget. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 
tell you that as she stood in this Assembly condemning this 
government for cut-backs in health care I want to assure the 
people of Saskatchewan that if they want to come into this 
legislature and into my office at any given time I will point out 
to them where the increases have been. And I want to give you 
this as an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because when they were 
government, when the NDP were government, their Health 
budget totalled about $700 million in this province. We have now 
doubled that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are sitting at about $1.4 
billion — that’s $160,000 an hour — in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And if you want to compare it to what their 
expenditure was per hour, it would have been about $60,000, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I want to indicate to them that as they go around 
the province I invite them, I invite them to go into my riding and 
tell my people in my riding that there’s been a cut-back in health 
care. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’ve put 125, a 
brand-swanking new 125-bed hospital facility in the community 
of Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we put a brand-new swanking 25-bedroom 
hospital in Maidstone, Saskatchewan. And I want to tell you that 
we put a brand-new 12-bedroom facility hospital in Cut Knife, 
Saskatchewan.

An Hon. Member: — Twelve bedroom? Where’s that at? Built 
a 12-bedroom hospital. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And I want to tell you. . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .Yes they’re bedrooms, beautiful ones too. 
 
I want to tell you that when it comes to the delivery of health 
care, and I agreed with the member from Lakeview when she 
made the statement that it’s just a portion; the buildings are just 
a portion. And I want to get into that a little further, but I want to 
tell you that when it is a little portion . . . I want to indicate to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that under the NDP administration, 
under three elections, they’ve promised Lloydminster, they 
promised Maidstone, and they promised Cut Knife, under three 
elections that they would build those hospitals and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to assure you and the people in the province, that 
they never did deliver those hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to thank my Finance ministers, I want 
to thank my Health ministers, because they had the heart and they 
had the determination, to deliver those hospitals to my people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate . . . Deputy Speaker, I want to 
indicate to you also, that who were the people that put the 
moratoriums on these hospitals. It was the NDP that put the 
moratoriums on hospitals. And I want to indicate to you, I want 
to indicate to you that it was the member from Riversdale that 
was one of the greatest believers that hospitals should be 
centralized in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the member from Lakeview brought that to the attention of 
the people who are watching here tonight, in this Assembly, that 
this is her remark: health care should be taken to the people, not 
the people taken to health care. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
agree with that remark. But that same member, that same member 
can’t back it up under their type of programs that they had when 
they were government. And they do not believe in it today. 
 
I will tell you something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the 
member from Saskatoon South, he was the minister of Health, he 
was the minister of Health, and his idea was to centralize the 
health care in this province. He was the one that had our seniors 
drive many miles to hospital facilities. 
 
And I want to give you an example in my own home town of 
Lashburn, where under their administration that hospital in the 
Lashburn community was shut down by the member of 
Riversdale. And he is now the Leader of the NDP. He says, you 
people can drive elsewhere, you can go down the road and get 
your health care. 
 
But I want to say to you that the member from Saskatoon South 
also agreed that health care to the NDP was not a proper health 
care system unless there was major, major line-ups for surgery, 
major waiting lists. And I want to indicate to you now that they’re 
standing in opposition there, standing in opposition there they 
argue that there is these humungous waiting lists.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

610 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nine thousand. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Yes, the member opposite said 9,000. Well, I 
want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that those numbers didn’t 
begin under this administration. The backlog didn’t begin under 
this administration. This administration has been spending 
money and spending money diligently to get those lists down. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, is that over the years 
there wasn’t the technology in this province that there is today in 
health care. There aren’t — or I should say, there weren’t — 
certain types of surgeries taking place in this province that there 
are today. People can stay home; people can get their operations 
here now. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the point of 
talking about supplying equipment and everything else into the 
hospital facilities today, I want to indicate to you that this 
government has worked hard — hard — to put CAT scans into 
the hospital facilities in this province. Yes, and the member from 
Lakeview, she can’t stand this rebuttal, because she knows — she 
knows that it’s correct and she is embarrassed. She is 
embarrassed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well I want to tell you, when you talk about 
having a vision, we’re having . . . You know, when you talk about 
vision, you’re talking about families; you’re talking about the 
well-being of families and the health of . . . and the help of having 
a government care for people. But we’re not looking, we’re not 
looking at it on the same view of the NDP. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when this government 
had taken the initiatives to start expanding in health care, when 
we had decided that enough was enough, I want to indicate to 
you, as I had indicated earlier, that from $600 million expenditure 
of budget under the NDP, and now we, at 1.4 million under a 
Progressive Conservative government. Then I want to also throw 
in some thanks here. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that it was not only 
hospitals that were built, but we came out with one package that 
the NDP opposition never, ever thought about, and that too was 
our senior citizens — our senior citizens that have brought this 
province along in its unique situation where we are sitting here 
today. For those seniors this administration, this government, had 
taken the initiative to build nursing homes throughout the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat here and listened about 
cut-backs. I’ve sat here and listened about all these innuendos 
flung at this government. I want to indicate to you that . . . It must 
bother members opposite, it must bother you . . . But I want to 
indicate to you, and on behalf of my constituents, I want to thank 
the Minister of Finance, and my Health minister. I want to thank 
them for supplying us with the new senior citizen complex at 

Jubilee Home, 50-bed unit, in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. I 
want to thank them for that and so do my seniors, and so do the 
council people and the people that sat on those boards and had 
pleaded and asked the NDP opposition when they were in 
government, to build that facility. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
will tell you something . . . or Mr. Speaker, I will tell you 
something. It was three elections that they were promised a 
facility; it wasn’t delivered. So now that made two facilities in 
the community of Lloydminster, the hospital and the nursing 
home — three elections promised, not delivered. This 
Progressive Conservative government delivered. 
 
(2015) 
 
Cut Knife, Saskatchewan, in 1985 . . . In the fall of 1985 we had 
a sod turning for a nursing home to attach to the hospital. Mr. 
Speaker, while the election was on it was then, Allan Blakeney 
— when he was leader of the NDP opposition — he and the 
candidate, Bob Long, had gone into the community of Cut Knife. 
I was in the community. I could not believe what I heard at 
another meeting. Somebody came running across the street to tell 
us. Here was Bob Long and Allan Blakeney in the senior citizens’ 
centre telling them that they would never get a nursing home built 
in this community under a Progressive Conservative 
government, and the thing was under construction — it was 
under construction! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And I want to tell you that the credibility of 
Allan Blakeney had just gone down the tubes. I’m serious, Mr. 
Speaker, this is an actual happening — the NDP leader, Allan 
Blakeney, at that time, going in there. If they’d have turned right 
instead of going straight down Main Street to the senior centre, 
they’d have seen the building under construction. But what do 
they do? No, they walk right over, right away, and tell the seniors 
they’ll never get it again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Repeat that. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well my members want me to repeat it, but I 
think the people out there in TV land understand what I said. 
 
And I want to indicate to them that that is the same types of truths 
we are hearing here in this legislature — the same types of truths. 
They’ll go in and tell the complete opposite of the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. And this was a good example during the election of 
1986 by the then, the Hon. Allan Blakeney. 
 
When we look at health care, I want to indicate to you that I want 
to thank my Health ministers of past for taking health care back 
to rural Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — For bringing new facilities into the province, 
new equipment, high-tech equipment, vision for health care. 
They have the vision for health care, and we still have the vision 
for health care, and we’re looking forward and into the future for 
new high-tech equipment to put into those centres.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

611 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I want to indicate to you about vision, we 
have the vision, and it showed up again — it showed again when 
we were in a by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. What 
happened? We’re going into Assiniboia-Gravelbourg as two 
different parties, the Progressive Conservative Party and the 
NDP Party. What happened? And I want to congratulate my 
colleague and member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg once again 
for beating his . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — . . . His opponent, because basically, Mr. 
Speaker, when I talk to you about the various different visions 
we have for health care, I’ll tell you, it’s not for closing hospitals, 
it’s not for closing nursing homes. 
 
But I want to indicate to you and to the people in Saskatchewan 
that the members, the NDP opposition, they went into that riding, 
and they went into the riding and told the constituents, I guess, 
seniors, young people, young families, they scared everyone in 
trying to tell them we were going to shut down all the hospitals 
in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I believe there’s about five 
hospitals. So we were going to go in there and shut down five 
hospitals. 
 
Now you tell me that the member from Regina Lakeview can 
stand here in her righteous . . . in a righteous way and say she 
cares for families. She can’t speak the truth to those families, let 
alone care for them. She has the incapability of speaking the truth 
to those families. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to warn 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan that if for any strange 
reason at all, if people like her or anyone else across the way were 
ever elected, I would hate to see what would happen to the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. I would hate to see what would 
happen to our seniors and our young children. 
 
And I want to say that she talks about the kind of motherhood 
issues, if she will, she tries to come across as a real caring, young 
woman in Regina Lakeview. Well I want to indicate to you, I 
want to indicate to you that if she did care, if she did care, she 
would lay out, she would lay out truthfully the NDP health cares 
policy, the NDP health cares policy. Without any question, lay 
out the NDP health care policy. And I will say, I will say . . . I 
will say, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have, they don’t have it. 
 
I want to indicate to you that every time the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, is asked a question in 
regards to agriculture, in regards to education, in regards to health 
care, in regards to any major issue that affects this province, I 
want to indicate to you that he avoids it directly and runs because 
he as a leader says, it’s not I that should make the decisions for 
the NDP Party. It’s not him. I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, I will 
tell you that he says it is the NDP convention, the people, the 
delegates that will run this NDP administration. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what happens there. I’ll tell you what happens 
there. If that ever happened, we’d be going back into the 19 . . . 
well we’d be just be going backwards, Mr. 

Speaker. They have not come out with any new resolutions. And 
I want to indicate to you that when it comes to the members 
opposite in programs, they said they’re going to take us back to 
the dental program, they’re going to reinstate the school dental 
program. 
 
Well I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 
you that this government has brought dental . . . or dentists to 
literally every individual in this province now, have brought 
dentists to within 50 miles of any place where anybody lives. 
 
And I want to indicate to you . . . She talks about all the 
employment with these dental nurses that we had travelling the 
school. Well I want to indicate to you that if they are having 
problems getting employment, that they should contact the 
dentists’ association, because I was just told the other day by Dr. 
Art Plunz from North Battleford . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right, he’s a friend. And he had indicated at that time, Mr. 
Speaker, and it was last Saturday night, he said there’s a definite 
shortage of help within a lot of dentists’ office across the 
province. But nobody is sending these people to them. 
 
So I am making an announcement right now that if there are 
people that are looking for positions in dental offices, get hold of 
me. I’ll put them on to Dr. Art Plunz and we will help them get a 
position, or get them trained so they have a position. But their 
association hasn’t been helping them, apparently. So I want to 
indicate to you that this is a commitment, and we will work in 
that regards. 
 
I want to say that the member opposite had touched briefly on the 
drug plan, and I want to say, number one, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
drug plan has never been at the type of a size that it’s been at 
today. There has been I don’t know how many more prescription 
drugs been put onto the plan, and doctors sit on that board to keep 
putting more and more new drugs on the plan. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that there was a 
certain amount of clean-up that had to be done. There was a lot 
of misuse out there. And I want to commend, I want to commend, 
I want to commend the Minister of Health and the PC Progressive 
Conservative government for the health card. That health card, 
Mr. Speaker, has brought in more efficiencies to the drug plan 
system than any other system in North America, or indeed the 
world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Members opposite don’t like to hear about it. 
Members opposite . . . Members of the NDP don’t like anything 
new. They don’t like anything new, anything innovative because 
they can’t seem to understand it. But I want to indicate to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that health card is being now looked upon by all 
parts of the country. And I want to indicate to you, and I want to 
indicate to the member from Saskatoon Nutana, that if she would 
care to get into the debate and debate me on it, I would be more 
than willing to debate you. But you can mouth off there if you 
like. 
 
Anyway, I would like to say — and you never hear them talk 
about the new plastic health card that helps people obtain their 
drugs without having to wait for a rebate in   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

612 
 

the province; you never hear the members opposite tell anyone, 
tell anyone that is below a certain income or can’t afford drugs; 
or that are unfortunate enough to have to be on social welfare, 
that they don’t have to pay for their drugs. You never hear them 
say that, but you hear the lady from Regina Lakeview, you hear 
her spout off and say that this government is making poor people 
pay for their drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t any poor people having to pay for their 
drugs. If there is, then bring their names . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, I think the 
members opposite got the message. I think that if anything, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is more sensitive to the more 
unfortunate than any other government that’s ever hit this 
province in the past. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that we as a government are 
prepared to work along with these people and get them off the 
welfare roll and off the unemployment roll in a very sincere way. 
We want to help them advance; we want to help them get 
advanced in training and education. And I want to just basically 
indicate to you that the member from Lakeview’s points that she 
was trying to draw tears on just didn’t break any ice. 
 
I want to indicate to you also, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
talked . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. We’re having a little trouble hearing the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t bother me 
if the NDP opposition want to holler and chirp from their seats 
or make a lot of name calling, etc. Let them continue. I want to 
indicate to you though, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . And I think the 
people can hear through this mike anyway, even if it’s not you, 
if you can’t hear it, but I’m sure the audio will pick it up. 
 
(2030) 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to 
the enhancement and the quality of life in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we want to talk about education, and we want 
to talk about advancement, and we want to talk about science and 
technology, and we want to talk about a vision, and we want to 
talk about Saskatchewan in the world — I want to indicate to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that when the member from Lakeview took a swipe 
and said that we’re having a $9 million birthday party, I would 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that anyone in this province that 
would think anything alike those socialists think across the way, 
would maybe think that it was a $9 million birthday party. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, it is not that at all. I 
want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that this is a quality 
program; that this is a quality program which will bring us in . . . 
for our young people . . . for bringing us into the vision and 
bringing us into the 20th century. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty-first.

Mr. Hopfner: — Right. Thank you very much, as my colleague 
says to me. But anyway I want to indicate to you, science and 
technology is not from the past. It’s the future and it’s going into 
the future. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that the young people in this 
province don’t have to have a government hand feeding and 
having to lead them down any type of little road. I want to 
indicate to you that these young people are prepared to stand on 
their own two feet. They are prepared to show what they’re all 
about. And I want to tell you that they are prepared to stand up 
and they are prepared to tell everyone and show everyone in this 
province just exactly what science and technology and their 
education and the world is about. They aren’t afraid. They aren’t 
afraid to look into the future. It’s the NDP opposition that’s afraid 
to look into the future, Mr. Speaker. And I want to indicate to you 
that I have all the faith in our young people, in our education 
system, that we’re going to have one of the best, the best shows 
in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, as we head into the 21st century, 
we must be prepared for an ever-changing world economy. We 
must be at the forefront of social, domestic, and international 
economic conditions. The budget presented in this Assembly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. It was interesting, but I 
believe the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd might have a . . . 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I wish the public, the people of Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 
member really is being interrupted a bit too frequently, and I ask 
for your co-operation. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I wish the people and the public out there in 
TV land or in Saskatchewan could actually see the carrying-on 
of the member of the NDP opposition. They’re worse than . . . 
well I won’t even use the word because children are more 
obedient than they are. They do not give you the respect in the 
Chair. And I guess what I’ll do, Mr. Speaker, is apologize on their 
behalf for the way they act to you, because I believe that your 
Chair should be respected. But anyway, we’re not discussing 
their behaviour any further. 
 
I want to get into the budget. The budget that was presented in 
this Assembly sets out exciting economic policies and programs 
that will continue to ensure that as we head into the 1990s and 
the next century, that this province is a model to the rest of 
Canada because of our health, education, agriculture and 
environmental policies. 
 
I want to indicate that this budget is an innovative budget. It is 
one of fiscal responsibility, economic common sense, and most 
important, it is in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. I will not — I will not for one moment — be the 
least bit upset with the fact of having to . . And I’ll   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

613 
 

apologize to no one for this type of a budget. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to touch on it 
just briefly, but on another issue with transportation. Roadways 
in this province is very important. It’s a very important way of us 
selling and bringing in various commodities in to the province, 
quality roadways for our tourists to travel, and quality roadways 
and safe roadways for all of us. I want to indicate to you, and I 
want to thank the Minister of Highways, it is over the past five 
years — and I’m not going to go into each one of my projects 
because, I have again more highway construction going on in my 
riding this year. But for six consecutive years we’ve had highway 
— major highway improvements, roadway improvements — 
safe roadway improvements for six consecutive years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, and to all members here, and to the 
people in Saskatchewan, that in those six consecutive years there 
has been now a total of about approximately $27 million spent in 
the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. And I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that if you look at that and break it 
down, that would be approximately, well, anywhere from 4.5 to 
$5 million a year spent in the constituency of Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. That’s not to be taken lightly, Mr. Speaker, 
because there is a lot of roadways in this province, and there are 
a lot of demands on our Minister of Highways. 
 
But I want to thank him for that commitment to my riding. And 
I know, as I’ve been listening to all other members in this 
Assembly talking about their constituencies, they also had that 
same courtesy paid on them from the Minister of Highways, as 
they’ve been talking about their various road projects. And I want 
to say that the people in my riding have been very content; that 
we know, and they know, that there is a lot more to be done, but 
they know that by chipping away at it year after year after year 
the job will finally be done. 
 
I want to indicate to you that as we . . . Before I move off of the 
transportation and health issue I want to indicate to you also, as I 
stood in this Assembly I’ve listened to all my colleagues thanking 
our Minister of Health for their projects and hospitals and nursing 
homes — the expansion in staffs, bringing in new equipment, and 
bringing in new personnel and specialists into various parts of the 
province. I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we 
talk about, when we talk about the budget, we don’t take anything 
lightly. We realize there should be more money for health. There 
should be more money for transportation, roadways, road 
networks. There should be more money for education. But, Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve listened to the members opposite, the members 
opposite talk about cut-backs, and here’s how I want to bring into 
some type of a summation here. They talk about cut-backs. Well 
if the people in the province of Saskatchewan believe that $600 
million under their administration to our $1.4 billion is a 
cut-back, well then I guess maybe I should say that they either 
throw their calculator away or come to reality and not believe the 
members, the NDP opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they talk about, when they talk about 
cut-backs in the transportation and road networks, etc., 

well if I can say from 80 million to some now 125 or 100, I just 
forget what the budget was, maybe it’s even quite a bit more — 
but under 80 million under the NDP’s administration, and now 
well into the hundreds of millions of dollars, that that too is not a 
cut-back. 
 
Education, Mr. Speaker. Education here in this province has 
doubled, has more than doubled. I want to indicate to you, and I 
want to indicate as other members have about their areas of new 
school facilities, new additions, new renovations. I want to 
indicate to you about my particular riding. I want to indicate to 
you that in the last six years, not only this year but in the last six 
years, there has been many, many, many new schools, additions 
and renovations done to our education facilities in the 
constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. We were probably, if 
any area in this province, about 20 years behind in facilities in 
our constituency, especially in the division of the Battle River 
School Division. And I want to thank, and I want to thank the 
Minister of Education, the present and the past, for helping me 
and my division boards out of the dilemmas that they faced up in 
the Cut Knife-Lloydminster constituency. 
 
For years the NDP again, as they did with hospitals and nursing 
homes, had promised new schools, had promised renovations, 
had promised, had promised, had promised. But, Mr. Speaker, 
they didn’t deliver. They did not deliver because they didn’t 
believe rural Saskatchewan was a place to expand in education, 
in education facilities. To them rural Saskatchewan was dying, 
dying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will tell you why, Mr. Speaker, they thought that way. 
They thought that way because they would not put industry into 
rural Saskatchewan. They would not help the smaller 
communities survive. They did not believe in the word 
diversification. They did not believe in keeping in supplying jobs 
to young people in rural Saskatchewan once they had graduated 
from their high schools or had gone on through universities to 
come back home to maybe take up a job with a firm in farm pipe 
part time, or something of that nature, where I know people are 
doing it today in my riding. 
 
And I want to say this, that when it comes to education and the 
facilities, my constituency has maybe more than . . . had more 
than its share, than it really actually should have gotten, by the 
way I have talked to other members in my caucus. Their needs 
are great but my needs were great and then greater because of the 
impact of the oil industry up in my particular area along with 
agriculture. We did not have, Mr. Speaker, the problems other 
people have had in other parts of this province with drought, and 
floods, and major hail wipe-outs, and grasshoppers. Mr. Speaker, 
our people were fortunate. 
 
(2045) 
 
We’ve had decent crops. I mean, we’ve had better, but we’ve had 
decent crops — where there was agricultural survival. When the 
commodity prices were low, at least we had something to sell. 
 
We have oil. We have oil-related jobs that brought in young 
families, young people that needed education facilities.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

614 
 

And we have expanded. And we are looking at expanding further. 
We are not yet caught up, and that was in six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that if the NDP opposition, when 
they were government, if they would have helped the people at 
that time, we might have been caught up. And as my colleague, 
my seat mate from Yorkton said, when the NDP were in the good 
times, when the revenues were flowing in, where they could have 
spent it, they wouldn’t. 
 
They could have built them, but what did they do? They went out 
to buy such things as pulp mills that cost this province 91,000 — 
the taxpayers — $91,000 a day, plus. They bought potash mines, 
they bought uranium mines. They didn’t invest in our young 
people. They didn’t create any more new jobs. They didn’t have 
to do that, Mr. Speaker. They could have expanded and helped 
private enterprise develop in this province, diversify; they could 
have created those jobs for our young people. 
 
But, no. No, they wouldn’t do it. It was beyond them, because 
they felt they would not be able to keep control on the people of 
the province if they did not have them in some sort of a 
bureaucratic type of a big ball that they could toss from hand to 
hand or juggle around or have a control. They wanted a control 
on these people. 
 
Well today, today, Mr. Speaker, our young people are enjoying 
the freedoms. They’re enjoying the freedoms of going to their 
schools in their home communities, not having to travel miles by 
school bus or more than average miles, anyway. They’re able to 
spend now more years of their life at home by taking in also the 
expansion of university courses throughout the province. 
 
And that is another thing that I would like to thank my Minister 
of Health and Minister of Finance for allowing this type of a 
system to develop. I know that in my area that there have been a 
lot of the grade 12 students had been taking their first year and 
now are going to be able to take their second year of arts and 
sciences in their community centres that offer the courses. 
Lloydminster is one of those centres, and North Battleford are 
one of those . . . are a couple of those centres that offer those 
courses. It’s very handy, and the students can commute back and 
forth, live at home with their parents, and it’s not such a burden 
on the parents’ pocket-book or the child or the child’s . . . not the 
child’s, the young men or ladies. 
 
I want to indicate to you that it gives them the opportunity to stay 
close to their friends, not to set them into a strange atmosphere 
as soon as they get out of the K to 12 system. And they do seem 
to be able to grow quite well and handsomely with the fact of 
being able to be able to live in their homes and get that extra year 
or two of experience, you know, by that type of a system. And 
not all do that, but then there are others that choose differently, 
and that option is for them also. So I want to just say to the 
Minister of Education that I think he’s doing one heck of a 
tremendous job, and I want to thank him on behalf of the school 
boards and teachers and parents in our area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things that could be said, but I think 
I’m going to narrow it down to maybe a couple 

more subjects here. And one thing I want to do is I want to relate 
to you about public participation. I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this has been one of the greatest, greatest things that 
have hit Saskatchewan for years. I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that when public participation . . . And I guess probably 
it’s not a new idea; members of the NDP had been talking about 
it once, but did not have the courage to carry it through. 
Basically, Mr. Speaker, because the fact is that they would have 
had a hard time going back to an NDP convention to explain 
public participation in an NDP government, in a socialistic type 
environment. It just wasn’t going to work. And the member from 
Riversdale, I guess, put his tail between his legs and hid on that 
one also. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that if they would have been smart, 
if the members opposite would have been smart when they were 
in government and would not have put the tail between their legs 
and ran with it, that people here in the province of Saskatchewan 
would have accepted it. And I’m going to tell them why: because 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan don’t basically see 
public participation as a political thing, as some political animal. 
Public participation is a non-political viewpoint. Socialists all 
over the world now are into public participation — all countries, 
Russia. Russia, for instance. And I want to tell the members 
opposite that they’re still — they’re still lost, and they’re still in 
yesterday land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that Sweden, a socialistic 
country . . . government, Australia, New Zealand, Portugal, 
Finland, Tanzania, even China, and I did mention the Soviet 
Union, are selling state-owned enterprises. And why? Why, Mr. 
Speaker? And I’m going to tell you why. I’m going to tell you 
because they know it’s the only fundamental right thing for them 
to do to encourage the expansion, and the labour, and the success 
of those particular types of businesses. 
 
And members opposite, in 1979 the member from Riversdale was 
going to do the same thing. He didn’t have the courage. He didn’t 
have the courage to do the right thing then, and now they talk like 
the people of Saskatchewan should believe him, and believe that 
he’d have the courage to do the right thing today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you about some of the, 
or a couple — I don’t want to take up too much of your time — 
but just a couple of the things that we’ve done in the province 
here under public participation. 
 
This was Weyerhaeuser. The NDP opposition, I can remember 
the debate in this session, the give-away, the sell-out to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and everything they could throw at 
us, throw at this government prior to 1986 in the election. They 
were really trying to put a total demise on the decision made by 
this government, and they thought that this would be the probably 
the issue that would take this government down in the next 
election. Well, in 1986 they found out differently. 
 
And now the true story has surfaced, Mr. Speaker. The true story 
has finally surfaced and they don’t even want to talk about 
Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert any longer. The NDP opposition 
are totally embarrassed about the remarks that they made about 
this government having the   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

615 
 

courage to move ahead and allow the pulp mill in Prince Albert 
to go into the private sector so that we could have a paper mill 
that profited, that paid royalty to returns to the province of 
Saskatchewan, to the Government of Saskatchewan, instead of 
costing the taxpayer — the person that pays to their taxes to this 
government — $91,000 plus, a day. 
 
This is some of the example that has just been recently 
announced. A $20.8 million expansion was announced for the 
Weyerhaeuser pulp mill in Prince Albert. Okay? The company is 
going to build the plant to turn its rolls of paper into sheets of 
paper before export. It is expected to create 34 permanent jobs 
and about 100 man-years of construction employment. 
 
Weyerhaeuser said the expansion is in direct response to the free 
trade deal with the United States, where most of the mill’s fine 
paper has been exported. The company has waited until now 
because duties on exporting sheeted papers to the United States 
were higher than the duties on the shipping rolls of paper. 
Weyerhaeuser expects construction to begin this spring, and 
completion in the summer of 1990. 
 
Overall — get this — Weyerhaeuser now, since its take-over, 
employs about 1,000 people in Saskatchewan, including about 
100 in a saw mill in Big River, another 100 at a chemical plant 
in Saskatoon, and the rest working out of the pulp and paper mills 
in Prince Albert. 
 
Now I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, the same people, the 
NDP opposition who were against this were trying to deprive 
almost 1,000 people out of jobs, out of markets. Because they 
should have known that there is no business, there is no business 
in this country that can continue on and survive at $91,000-plus 
a day loss. If they can tell me which business that they feel might 
be able to survive, I would certainly like to know where that 
magic comes from, because maybe I can get into the same kind 
of lending system or the same pot of gold. But I want to indicate 
that this is basically one particular type of industry that they so 
opposed. 
 
Then they get into the upgrader. You know, Mr. Speaker, the 
biggest objection that the people of Saskatchewan have right now 
is they can’t agree to accept what the NDP are any longer saying. 
In fact, to tell you the truth, it is very, very unlikely that there has 
been any of them in my riding, in the Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
riding, in the last little while. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that they are afraid to come into my 
riding. They are afraid because, Mr. Speaker, they were against 
the upgrader going to Lloydminster. They’re against the Husky 
oil upgrader. They’re against Husky oil. They’re against all the 
independent oil companies out in my particular riding. The 
member from Regina Lakeview had mentioned that about oil 
companies again tonight, the sly, sleazy remarks they make about 
oil companies. And I want to indicate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d just like to make this remark, and 
this will be an opportune time to make it. The word “sleaze,” 
“sleazy,” that sort of thing, I know has been used in the House 
before, and it has not been deemed as 

unparliamentary, and therefore I am not going to do it at this 
moment. But I am going to bring it to the attention of members 
that in future I’m going to rule that unparliamentary. But I won’t 
do it now, because it has been allowed in the past. 
 
(2100) 
 
Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I rise on a question of personal privilege. 
 
The Speaker: —- State your point of personal privilege. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to listen 
to the member opposite tonight describe the member from 
Regina Lakeview as the little women from Regina Lakeview, the 
little lady from Regina Lakeview. And as a woman member of 
the legislature, I personally find this language disrespectful to not 
only the Regina Lakeview but to all women in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like you to rule on rule 26 which states that: 
 

No member should use offensive words against the 
Assembly or against any member thereof. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster refer to my colleague, the member of Regina 
Lakeview, as the little lady from Regina Lakeview and the little 
woman from Regina Lakeview. I find that, and members on this 
side of the House, we find that as offensive and disrespectful 
language, and I’d ask you to rule on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to speak to the point. 
I don’t know whether you’ve decided what your position is on 
this, but as a woman member of the legislature, I want to also 
make a point of personal privilege and join my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana in objecting to this as offensive language. 
 
And I would just like to point out to you, sir, that there is no male 
equivalent terms in which a male member of the legislature could 
be addressed in that kind of derogatory way. So that’s what 
makes it offensive to us as women members. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — To help you out, Mr. Speaker, what I will do if 
I have offended, which I wouldn’t have said in offence to a 
woman or to a man, if I refer to them as “a little lady,” it’s 
because I don’t think she’s a big lady or a small lady or anything 
like that. But I want to indicate to you that it’s just a form of 
speech; it wasn’t meant in derogatory fashion at all, as a sexist 
remark or anything else. I would have . . . I use that in my 
everyday discussion as I talk to the members opposite on the 
male side then, as a little man or a big man, or whatever. I 
apologize to you if you’re taking it any other way. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member accept that?  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

616 
 

An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Well, I have given this matter consideration, 
and perhaps I should just take it under advisement and come back 
to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize I’ve been on 
the NDP opposition’s nerves. They’re very touchy all evening 
since I’ve been bringing some of the truths back into this 
legislature. And I will not use that word again, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate your ruling on removing some of the words that are 
used in this. I guess, probably, because I use it, I’ve heard 
members of the opposition use that on numerous occasions, and 
it’s . . . I guess is apparently becoming one of my particular 
words. So I apologize to you, because I’m not one to use foul 
language. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do mean to the members opposite, that when 
. . . like, as I said earlier, that I don’t refer to anybody in a 
derogatory fashion, and I suppose you will find, as you read 
through the speech tomorrow, you will find that I did not say it 
derogatorily. I want to indicate . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, you were generous enough 
to say that you would bring in a ruling on the question that was 
raised about personal privilege here. I think it’s unnecessary and 
unappropriate for the member to continue to discuss that which 
is not the topic that’s before us. The topic before us is the budget 
speech and the amendment thereto, and I think the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster should direct his remarks to that. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order, and while I appreciate what the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster’s trying to do at the same time, I agree with 
the hon. member’s point of order as well. It’s well taken. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Okay thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 
members opposite couldn’t accept an apology if it slapped them 
in the face. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when I was talking 
earlier I was talking about the Husky Oil upgrader, and members 
opposite have tried to challenge me one other time, and I think 
they put their tail between their leg and left. I would indicate to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Riversdale and the NDP 
opposition, when they were in government, were opposed to 
putting the Lloydminster — the Husky Oil upgrader in the 
constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and least of all near the 
city of Lloydminster where it actually should have gone in the 
first place. They were opposed — they were opposed to that 
project, and I never found that out until after I was elected in 
1982. 
 
The members of the NDP opposition were opposed to the Husky 
Oil upgrader in Lloydminster. And I am going to indicate to you 
how this all came about. Prior to the 1982 election, the NDP 
opposition, in throwing out little teasers to the province, to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, what they did is they 
put together a kind of a five-point area meeting right throughout 
to the 

province. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that through these meetings 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan, I had to travel as a 
representative on behalf of the mayors of all the communities in 
which I represented. I had to attend every one of these meetings 
at different regions of this province, to stand up in front of those 
people and indicate to them as to how they could believe that the 
NDP opposition, or the NDP government of that day, could even 
make any economic sense in putting the Husky Oil upgrader 
anywhere else but where it’s put today. 
 
They were in Kindersley . . . I’ll give you a couple of examples. 
They were in Moose Jaw, they were here in Regina, they were 
indicating they were going to put it into areas where it just 
absolutely didn’t make any sense and would have had to have 
major, major, major pipelines running both ways, two-way 
pipelines running both ways to send the heavy crude down and 
dilute back. And it was ridiculous. The costs that they were trying 
to put to the people of Saskatchewan are the same costs today 
that it’s costing Husky Oil and the three governments to build on 
this project up where the project belonged in the first place. But 
they were trying to use those same dollar figures to convince the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan that they could have built 
that same upgrader in Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, or anywhere 
else. You know, it was just ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, for them to 
even think that people would believe that the costs wouldn’t be 
astronomically higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the election was over I did find that out. I 
found out that it was just an exact that, a tease. They had no, no 
desire to enter into any kind of a relationship with Husky Oil, or 
the Alberta government, or the Canadian government, to get this 
project off the ground. They had no want of a relationship at all 
with creating the type of an industry that is going to be created 
up in the Cut Knife-Lloydminster region and the spin-offs to 
benefit all of Saskatchewan, and indeed all of Canada. 
 
I want to indicate to you that when I found this out I was 
disappointed that people could mislead the people in this 
province like that. I couldn’t understand for a moment why they 
would come to our particular community and get everybody up 
in arms about not being able to have the upgrader and near their 
communities where the heavy oil actually is. 
 
But I found out the reason. I found out the reason. They wanted 
everyone to believe that it was a possibility. They wanted to 
excite everybody about the possibility of being able to have a 
megaproject in their particular area. They wanted to excite them 
around an election time because, Mr. Speaker, that was one of 
the only projects in this province that an oil company had been 
talking about for 15-, 20-odd years, that they thought they could 
pick up on, and through some sort of a consortium create the 
excitement that this could come to our particular area and that 
they would get the votes of those people. Because if they didn’t 
get elected and they didn’t have an NDP member, they would not 
have an upgrader in their area. 
 
Well I condemned, I condemned the NDP government of that day 
for thinking that way, and I condemn them today   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

617 
 

for being against the project. Their national leader, Ed Broadbent, 
had indicated that he was in favour, and yet there is division here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. They have these innuendoes 
flinging from their seats about the fact that there’s been major 
dollars given to oil companies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members to justify their 
accusations. And I want to ask the members to stand in this 
House and get on to the topic of how much money this 
government has given oil companies. Because, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to indicate to you and to all the people in this province and 
to everyone in this legislature, that this government does not give 
money to oil companies. It does not give a dollar to oil 
companies. It gives to oil companies incentives to come to 
Saskatchewan to drill for oil, to explore for oil, to drill for gas, to 
explore for gas. It gives the oil companies the opportunity to 
come in here and develop and create jobs. It gives the oil 
companies the right to make profit and expand. It gives rights to 
the oil companies to do all of this, so that this government can 
obtain royalties from these oil companies — pay-backs to the 
taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan — pay-backs! 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can remember we had a slight boom in 1981 and 
it hit part of Saskatchewan so hard that the NDP didn’t see what 
hit them. Before they knew what hit them, they woke up and they 
said, we can’t have this. We can’t have this. And they sided with 
Alberta . . . Not Alberta, I’m sorry, I’m going to back up. They 
sided with the federal government, the Liberal government. Then 
they ganged up on Alberta, and they ganged up on western 
Canada, and they drove the oil industry out of western Canada 
and out of Canada. They brought in the national energy program, 
and everybody knows about that. Everyone knows about the 
national energy program. 
 
And western Canadians will not forget the Liberals or the NDP. 
And the member from Riversdale, as Leader of the Opposition as 
he was then, a minister, and one of the top ministers in their 
administration, now a leader, they will not trust him. They will 
not trust him again. 
 
They drove the oil and service companies out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. People had literally invested livelihoods, 
livelihoods into small businesses, into all sorts of little 
investments, because they wanted to reap some of the benefits of 
this little bit of an excitement in the oil field. But no, the NDP 
said this is uncontrollable, we can’t have this happen here in 
Saskatchewan because we won’t be able to control anybody, we 
won’t be able to have a thumbs on people. They’re going to be 
free thinkers. And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that they 
succeeded. They brought the national energy program in along 
with Pierre Elliott Trudeau. And western Canada suffered. 
Western Canada suffered twofold — twofold — because then the 
OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) 
countries also agreed that there shouldn’t be an industry, along 
with the NDP here in Saskatchewan and the Liberal government 
in Ottawa. And they agreed that there shouldn’t be an industry 
here and they pushed the prices down. So we had a double 
whammy, we got the whammy from the NDP in 

Saskatchewan, and the Liberal in Ottawa, and we got the other 
from the OPEC countries. 
 
Well we’re working to turn it around. Prices are going to come 
back, they always do. We’re going to manage, and we’ve 
managed. Some have gone down because of what the NDP 
allowed to happen. But I will tell you, and I will promise you, 
our communities will survive and they will grow; and this 
government will survive and this government will grow; and this 
province will survive and this province will grow, because we 
have a vision, a vision, as I had said before, to take part in public 
participation, to take part in allowing industry to grow, to 
flourish, allowing industry to come into this province, not drive 
it out. We love the fact that people have had that chance to come 
home. And I want to indicate to you . . . As I’ve listened tonight, 
where I’ve heard the members opposite talk about the people 
leaving the province, well I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, 
you name a time in past history, other than this administration, 
where the province of Saskatchewan has ever had over a million 
people in population. 
 
I ask you to go back in history and tell me if I’m wrong. And I 
will stand in this legislature and indicate to you . . . I’ll indicate 
now that I will apologize publicly to you. But I guarantee you, as 
you look back in history, you will find Saskatchewan’s never had 
over a million in population in its entire history until the 
Progressive government had come to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And I want to indicate to you and clear up some 
of this stuff about the people that have been heading into Alberta, 
and heading into Ontario from Saskatchewan, because I do agree, 
some people have left the province. Some people . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, okay. I don’t care if the NDPs are hollering 
out numbers, Mr. Speaker. Their arithmetic’s been off. I don’t 
really know the exact counts, but I will say 20,000, then. Is that 
enough? Is 20,000 enough? Well I’ll tell you, if there’s 20,000 I 
will tell you when those people left — if they would care to — 
and why they left. It was because they were lured here back in 
1981 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, my area. 
 
In my city of Lloydminster . . . If you want a history lesson, my 
friend, I will give it to you. In 1981 you couldn’t get an 
apartment, you couldn’t rent a house, you could hardly get a hotel 
room or a motel room, because things were busy until you people 
— the NDP — brought in, along with the Liberals, the NEP 
program, the national energy program. That was the start of the 
demise. That was the start of the demise of people leaving this 
province because they tried to hang on for four and five years 
into what they were doing. They tried. They tried. 
 
And when they found out that things were happening a little bit 
better in Ontario, now that . . . as we all know, the activity has 
been in Ontario, and that’s why the interest rates have been 
sky-rocketing and everything in western Canada. I will tell you, 
that’s where those people went back to. They came from Ontario, 
they came from the East to settle here in western Canada, but you 
people wouldn’t allow them through your policies back then.   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

618 
 

You drove them, and you drove a lot of people into bankruptcy. 
The NDP drove hundreds of people into bankruptcy. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that when that national energy 
program came into being, that was just about the time . . . in fact 
it was the time that the interest rates went to 22, 24 per cent 
interest rates. And I want to say to you, that was another thing 
that drove the people into a dilemma that eventually they could 
no longer hold onto. Because, like I said, the OPEC countries 
came in after the NDP and you know what they did to the oil 
prices then. Along with the NDP and Liberal high interest rate 
regime of twenty-four and a half per cent — and I remember 
paying that in my business, and so does a lot of other people out 
there — and then home mortgages sky-rocketed and the whole 
thing, people were losing their homes. 
 
What government, I ask you . . . I ask you, Mr. Speaker . . . you 
know, I kind of feel ashamed because I’m jumping all over the 
place, but the members opposite had asked why people were 
leaving. It’s only a few years since they’ve been in government, 
and when the major hit came was when they could have done 
something about it and they didn’t. They got hit, people lost 
hundreds and thousands of dollars and they could not, because of 
what happened with the world economy and everything else, they 
could not recover enough, they couldn’t recover enough. That’s 
what happened. 
 
If the NDP of that day would have brought in, would have 
brought in to this province a mortgage interest protection as this 
Progressive Conservative government did, people would have 
been able to hang on. It would have helped them. They turned 
their backs on the young families. We, and the first time in North 
America, have introduced nine and three-quarter per cent interest 
rates on homes. All over this province people will have nine and 
three-quarter per cent interest rates on their homes. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that that is a first in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I want to also indicate to you that when interest 
rates rose to twenty-four and a half per cent they turned their 
backs on the farm families. And I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, as you well know, as so the economy goes in 
agriculture, so the economy goes in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that when agriculture took the hit 
in interest rates and the other hit in low commodity prices, where 
were they? The NDP, the people that now want to come out and 
try and look like a farmer’s saviour, where were they? They 
weren’t there. They turned their backs on the farm families. 
 
And I want to indicate also to you, Mr. Speaker, that farm 
families weren’t silly when it came 1986. As those members 
were travelling around trying to get votes in rural Saskatchewan, 
they knew, the people out there in rural Saskatchewan knew, we 
can’t trust them. You can’t trust them. Now they went around the 
cities and caught a few seats in the cities, but I’ll tell you 
something, they weren’t telling the truth at the doors. 
 
I had many, many, many people come to tell me, as I’d 

indicated to you earlier, that I’d wished I would have known then 
what I know now, what your government has done since it has 
come back into office in 1986, I wouldn’t have voted for them. 
 
I was in North Battleford the other Saturday night and I was 
talking to a councillor, and a councillor told me that they don’t 
see their member. They invite him, invite him out to various 
different organizations and functions and stuff like that; he’s too 
busy to pay attention. They’re disappointed. And I’ll guarantee 
you, I’ll guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, The Battleford’s are back 
in the Tory’s hands come the next general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to say that when it comes to sincerity 
and honesty, and integrity and envision, I want to say that we 
have one of the most impressive premiers in the province. I want 
to say that he is probably about the only Premier in this province 
that I’ve ever met that is a grass root individual. He is 
approachable; he is liked by everyone from young to old; you can 
take him at his word. And I want to say, above all, that he falls 
into the category of as an approachable Premier, but also worthy. 
As I’d indicated to you, where the farming industry means so 
much to Saskatchewan, he’s got the full understanding on the 
farm, what makes it tick. And he’s probably would have been one 
of the most creative — creative — Agricultural ministers in this 
province. 
 
We, through our Premier, this government, in a commitment to 
the farmers, have been able to pull a lot of farmers out of some 
very severe, severe problems. And I want to apologize to maybe 
some of the farmers that we were too late for, but I apologize 
because I know the NDP won’t. 
 
(2130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
going to talk on my allocated 20 minutes on a subject that is new, 
Mr. Speaker, and a subject that is strange to the opposition, and 
that’s called the budget that I brought down last week, Mr. 
Speaker, because we didn’t hear anything from the opposition for 
the last five days about the budget. We had a very . . . We had an 
interesting dissertation from the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview about the free trade debate and the free trade position, 
but he forgot about the budget, with all respect to the hon. 
member. And so it’s a rather interesting topic that I would like to 
discuss tonight, Mr. Speaker, and as I say, a rather new one and 
a strange one for the opposition. 
 
But let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the opposition want to 
vote against. They want to vote against everything; I think we’ve 
seen that often enough. But I can remember a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, where the Leader of the Opposition stood up in this 
House and said that the government does not have a plan for rural 
Saskatchewan, for the small communities. And this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, lays out a plan for the small communities of rural 
Saskatchewan, to help them survive, to help them remain   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

619 
 

viable, and where possible, Mr. Speaker, to help them to 
diversify. 
 
And we’ve announced changes to the venture capital program to 
allow rural development corporations to participate, to help the 
small communities help themselves, Mr. Speaker. This budget 
brings in the new concept of business associations in our smaller 
communities to allow small business to begin to plan and 
organize, to get new businesses into those small towns, Mr. 
Speaker, to again help ensure their stability and their viability, 
again to help the small communities help themselves. 
 
We’ve announced, Mr. Speaker, a new recreational facilities 
grant program and a new municipal capital financing program, 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in our province’s history to include 
rural municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And as well, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
responsible for Trade and Investment announced the 
Saskatchewan government growth fund, which in its first year, 
Mr. Speaker, should have $35 million in additional financing to 
primarily rural Saskatchewan, to ensure its viability, its stability, 
and its ability to diversify, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has laid out a five-point plan to try and protect 
and help rural Saskatchewan and small-town Saskatchewan and 
our smaller cities. And what do the NDP say? They say no to a 
plan to help rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And this budget, Mr. Speaker, lays out some 
new initiatives and a plan for our farmers. And for the first time, 
we’re going to see initiatives to help with farm debt restructuring, 
Mr. Speaker, to deal with that crippling debt. We’re going to see 
home quarter financing, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to remove the 
restrictions on off-farm income to help our farmers maintain the 
family farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making changes to allow young people to 
begin to start farming. We’re going to increase the loan limits of 
the agricultural credit corporation. And Mr. Speaker, to assist in 
that intergenerational transfer, we are going to have vendor 
financing guarantees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — A five-point plan, Mr. Speaker, for our 
farmers to deal with farm debt and to begin to allow our young 
people to begin to have confidence again in agriculture and to 
begin to look again at agriculture as a great career and an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That plan — and what do the NDP say about that plan, Mr. 
Speaker? They say no. The people of this province will watch the 
vote tonight, Mr. Speaker, and I suspect — although they didn’t 
talk about the budget for the last week — I suspect that they are 
going to vote against a plan 

for rural Saskatchewan, a plan for our smaller communities, our 
smaller cities. And I suspect that the NDP are going to carry on 
their traditional practice of voting, not for, but against the farmer, 
Mr. Speaker, and I predict that’s what we will see tonight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else did we see over the course of this budget 
debate? The minister responsible for small business announces a 
new rendering plant in the city of Saskatoon, in the riding, Mr. 
Speaker, of the Leader of the Opposition, Saskatoon Riversdale, 
and what did the NDP do? They laughed. They laughed, Mr. 
Speaker. Jobs being created. 
 
I must say, with the greatest respect to the opposition and its 
leader, that perhaps the NDP laughing at new businesses and new 
jobs is an improvement. At least they didn’t say no, Mr. Speaker. 
At least they didn’t stand up and oppose and say that we don’t 
want that business, we don’t want those jobs, we don’t want that 
opportunity. They just laughed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have opposed consistently through this budget debate and 
through this session and since, with the greatest respect, the 
Leader of the Opposition was elected. They have been consistent, 
Mr. Speaker, in their opposition to every single economic 
diversification initiative brought forward by this government. 
They have been consistent in opposing every single new 
business, Mr. Speaker. They have been consistent, the NDP have 
been consistent in opposing every single new job, new industry, 
new resource development since that individual became leader of 
that party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else will we see? Did anybody hear the NDP 
talk about $10 million for small business? No, Mr. Speaker. We 
know what they will do when they have their chance to vote on 
it, Mr. Speaker. They will say no to the small business 
community of this province. Mr. Speaker, they will say no to the 
concept of business loans association programs. They will say no 
to a small business enterprise program. They will say no. The 
NDP will say no to a working capital loans program for our small 
businesses. And they will say no, as the NDP consistently does, 
they will say no to a new participating loans program for the 
Saskatchewan small-business community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What else, Mr. Speaker? I didn’t hear, I didn’t hear over the last 
week an NDP member of the legislature say that they agreed with 
this government in doubling the number of day-care spaces by 
1995 — not one, not one, Mr. Speaker — not one of their 
feminists that were always complaining that there wasn’t enough 
done. Not one word did they talk about doubling the day-care 
spaces. Mr. Speaker, not one word from the NDP about the 
efforts of this government to increase the number of day-care 
spaces in rural Saskatchewan by some 2,000. Not one NDP 
member dared touch that, Mr. Speaker, they never mentioned it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn’t mention the increase in funding for 
foster-parents. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have not said one 
word in this legislature in favour of a program to begin the 
screening for breast cancer in this province, Mr. Speaker, an 
initiative that I suspect that   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

620 
 

virtually every female in this province believes is long overdue 
and has welcomed it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And what do the NDP say, and what do the 
NDP say? They will say no to screening for breast cancer for the 
women of this province, Mr. Speaker, and I say that’s a shameful 
day in the history of the New Democratic Party in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And, Mr. Speaker, when this government 
tries to help single families by tightening-up measures and 
bringing in more money to enforce the automatic enforcement of 
maintenance orders so those that have a legal and, I say, a legal 
and a moral obligation to pay maintenance and support, what do 
the NDP say? They say no to more money for the automatic 
enforcement of maintenance orders, Mr. Speaker. Again, again a 
shameful day in the history of the New Democratic Party. 
 
So they will say no to new hospitals, Mr. Speaker. They will say 
no. But this is consistent because they have said it since 1976. 
The New Democratic Party will say no to new nursing homes, 
Mr. Speaker. And we know why they will say no to new 
hospitals, because the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 
New Democratic Party has said that the province of 
Saskatchewan should not build any more new hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. And that message, that message is being well 
communicated to the people of this province. 
 
And they will say no the New Democratic Party will say no to 
successful efforts to reduce the waiting lists in Saskatoon by 25 
per cent. The New Democratic Party will say no to new efforts to 
increase the number of surgeries in Saskatchewan — in 
Saskatoon — by nearly 20,000 since the government took office, 
Mr. Speaker. They say no to more money for health research. 
They say no to more money for home care. 
 
And they say no to doubling the amount of money on education 
since this government took office. The NDP said no. And they 
say no to educational television. And they say no to a new 
educational institute fund, Mr. Speaker, to improve the access to 
education for the students of all ages in this great province. So 
the NDP say no to $22 million for environmental activities, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s different. Our answers to protecting the 
environment is not to cover it up with 10 feet of cement as was 
their answer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our answer to protecting the environment is 
not to shred and hide documents so that the public doesn’t know 
about the biggest PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) spill in the 
history of Canada, under a New Democratic government, of 
which the Leader of the Opposition was deputy premier and 
intimately involved in that decision to cover up that spill and to 
cover up, Mr. Speaker, the information from the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP caucus, the elected members of the 

New Democratic Party have said no to every new initiative, every 
new proposal and, Mr. Speaker, they’ve said no to the 
environment, no to health care, no to education, no to small 
business, no to farmers, and no to rural Saskatchewan when they 
vote against this budget. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, a two-year-old can say no, Mr. Speaker. A 
one-year-old can say no, but a responsible political party has to 
say yes when the right things are being done, and the responsible 
political party . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And a responsible political party cannot hide 
behind a shield and say, it’s not our job to have policies. Every 
New Democratic member in this province, Mr. Speaker, knows 
that the people of this province are saying to the New Democratic 
Party, where are your policies? And they are saying it, and they 
are saying it to New Democratic members, and they are saying it 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. You know, the NDP now 
stands in many parts of this province for “no darn policies.” That 
what it means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But, Mr. Speaker, “no darn policies” as a 
name for a party is not good enough for the people of 
Saskatchewan. You had a chance for the last three weeks of this 
legislature to put forward one positive policy, even one, Mr. 
Speaker. And what did we get? Not one new policy from the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP caucus says no, but what do some of the 
public say about the budget? The Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation president, Susan Bates: that it’s fair and reasonable; 
that most farm leaders like government spending plans. 
 
“It seems the government is moving in the right direction,” says 
Leroy Larsen, second vice-president of the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool. 
 
Harvey McEwen, president of the Western Canadian Wheat 
Growers said, “Over long terms, the programs will be very 
positive.” 
 
The Canadian Cancer Society in a letter to myself, Mr. Speaker, 
from Mr. George O. Thomas, executive director, said: 
 

I wish to thank you for a most reasonable and realistic 
budget for our province. The Saskatchewan Division of the 
Canadian Cancer Society supports the one cent per cigarette 
increase in the tobacco tax. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Canadian Cancer Society wrote to me 
and said, “Another initiative we endorse is the establishment of 
a breast cancer screening pilot project for women in high risk age 
groups.” That’s what the Canadian Cancer Society said. “And 
another major   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

621 
 

initiative we support,” says the Canadian Cancer Society, “is the 
additional funding for our hospitals in this province.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And they say it is their privilege to have 
worked closely with the Minister of Health in the very innovative 
and progressive health promotion program, Everyone Wins. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — “This is an excellent example,” and I quote, 
“of a co-operative venture between government and community 
agencies in working together to improve the health of all the 
people in the province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have made it clear in their budget debate 
that they have a crisis in leadership, Mr. Speaker, because they 
don’t have any, Mr. Speaker. And it’s come true — no leadership 
and policies, Mr. Speaker. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
initiatives of some of the NDP members of that caucus to have a 
leadership review, particularly those in Regina and the secret 
meetings that have been going on, Mr. Speaker, indicate to all of 
the people of this province that within the New Democratic Party 
itself they know they have a crisis in leadership. Two years — 
two years without a policy under the new leader, Mr. Speaker. 
The crisis of leadership is becoming evident not only to those 
within the party, not only to those within the New Democratic 
Party caucus, but they are becoming increasingly evident to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. Let me tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg were right, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And it’s one of the few times, Mr. Speaker, 
in a by-election, that the judgement was cast, not on a 
government, Mr. Speaker, but on an opposition and it’s 
leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — So here we have, in a province like 
Saskatchewan, in opposition, a New Democratic Party that is 
against diversification; a new Democratic Party that is against 
new business; a New Democratic Party that is against farmers, 
and agriculture, and rural Saskatchewan, and our rural way of 
life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing has come through now in two debates, the 
throne speech and the budget debate, that the NDP have not had 
a new idea since potash nationalization. I urge all members to 
join with the people of this province in supporting this budget 
here this evening. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 9:53 p.m. until 9:55 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 22 
 

Romanow Solomon 
Rolfes Atkinson 
Shillington Anguish 
Lingenfelter Goulet 
Tchorzewski Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Brockelbank Calvert 
Mitchell Lautermilch 
Upshall Trew 
Simard Smart 
Kowalsky Van Mulligen 

 
Nays — 34 

 
Devine Martin 
Muller Toth 
Duncan Sauder 
McLeod Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Lane Hopfner 
Taylor Petersen 
Smith Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Muirhead Baker 
Schmidt Wolfe 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 

 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 34 
 

Devine Martin 
Muller Toth 
Duncan Sauder 
McLeod Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Lane Hopfner 
Taylor Petersen 
Smith Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Muirhead Baker 
Schmidt Wolfe 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 

 
 

Nays — 22 
 

Romanow Solomon 
Rolfes Atkinson 
Shillington Anguish 
Lingenfelter Goulet 

 
  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

622 
 

Tchorzewski Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Brockelbank Calvert 
Mitchell Lautermilch 
Upshall Trew 
Simard Smart 
Kowalsky Van Mulligen 

 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 
 


