


















































April 11, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 11, 1989 
 

725 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 1 — Support for the Agricultural 
Community (continued) 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon my 
colleague from Humboldt, constituency of Humboldt, moved a 
resolution that this Assembly condemns the government for its 
failure to protect farm families and rural communities which are 
suffering from short-sighted and inadequate federal and 
provincial agricultural policies, and from the combined effects 
of drought, low commodity prices, and high debt loads. 
 
I spoke in respect to this motion, indeed I second that motion, 
and I want to re-emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very 
important motion, because as I indicate the problem is great and 
the solution has to be immediate or will have catastrophic effect 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I indicated, and I only want to in summary indicate the 
magnitude of the problem, I don’t go to any source of research 
on our own, or from our caucus, but merely to use the statistics 
that were brought forward by a committee, the Farm Finance 
for the Future, an MLA committee made up exclusively of Tory 
cabinet ministers and back-benchers, paid for by the taxpayers, 
my colleague says. 
 
And the problem . . . this report was done in 1987, Mr. Speaker, 
and since then we have had a drought. As I indicated, the like of 
which we have never had in the living memory of, I suspect, all 
people in this legislature. Out in Saskatchewan today, as 
indicated by the Angus Reid poll, a quarter of the farmers are 
indicating that in three years time, that they’re not likely to be 
farming. 
 
And now we’ve had the drought, and I say to the members 
opposite, the members of the government, I hope that you will 
realize the magnitude of the problem that exists there. 
 
Not only do we have a massive debt load of $6.5 billion on the 
backs of Saskatchewan farmers, we have in conjunction with 
that, high interest rates which drives that debt up even higher. 
We’ve had the drought, and now the financial institutions are 
laying on the backs of the farmer yet another problem, and that 
is cutting off operating loans. 
 
I’m informed that in Laird, Saskatchewan, this coming week 
there’s a meeting been organized in that constituency, in that 
town, by farmers and business men. They’re bringing in the 
representatives of the financial institutions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What town? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Laird, Saskatchewan . . . representatives of 
political parties. The situation is that desperate. They’re 
pleading for some consideration of the problem that is facing 
them. And there is no doubt, there is absolutely no doubt that 
the farmers in Saskatchewan feel deceived.  

They fully expected to receive the drought payment in entirety 
in the first part of the year, which would provide revenue for 
helping them to put in the crop. 
 
This was confirmed during the federal election. And as I 
indicate, the farmers have been deceived. Some of them are 
getting $12 an acre, some are getting $7, and some are getting 
nothing at this time. And I’ll tell you, my friends across the 
way, there is something more important than privatization, this 
phoney excuse at pretending that there’s economic development 
going on in this province. The truth of the matter is that you’ve 
run this province into the massiveness of debt that you have 
become inactive. Your hands are tied. Your waste and 
mismanagement have led us to a deficit that’s unmanageable. 
 
And as the Minister of Finance said last year in his budget, he 
said, our treasury can no longer afford to provide support 
programs to agriculture. Just imagine, after the Premier, the 
Minister of Agriculture, pledged to the farmers of this province 
that he would place the treasury behind them in their difficulty. 
The Premier of this province, the Minister of Agriculture, in 
conjunction with the federal government, indicated that they 
would bring in a long-term agricultural policy. That was 
initiated, stated in 1985, and not one single movement has been 
made in order to protect the farmers from the vagaries of the 
market-place and of the weather. 
 
I want to say, the members opposite were yelling this afternoon 
at my colleague and at myself, where is the agricultural policy? 
Well I’ll tell you, there was an agricultural policy during the 
last federal election enunciated by the New Democratic federal 
leader, Ed Broadbent. And out of that policy came 10 out of the 
14 seats in Saskatchewan — 10 out of 14 seats in 
Saskatchewan, because there was a long-term policy. And I’ll 
tell you, you can go ahead and introduce the federal New 
Democratic and provincial party’s agricultural program. 
 
We indicated that first of all, because of the seriousness of 
drought, the New Democratic Party promised to the people, the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, not $400 million as coming out of 
Ottawa, if we get it; the New Democratic Party said that we 
would have a deficiency payment or a drought payment of $800 
million for Saskatchewan alone. And that is exactly the amount 
that was called for by the wheat pool, $800 million to take them 
out of the crisis. 
 
And what do we get? What do we get? Well maybe we get $12 
an acre, maybe we get $7, maybe we get nothing, that’s the first 
thing. The drought was so severe, and we said to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, we’ll help you — $800 million, and we gave the 
formula. Not 80 per cent of the crop insurance; it was over 100 
. . . it was 100 per cent payment on crop insurance formula, and 
it would amount to $800 million distributed to Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
The second thing we said is that on the first 8,000 bushels, on 
the first 8,000 bushels of production — base it on wheat — we 
said that we would guarantee to every farmer, for the first 8,000 
bushels, $5.27 a bushel, which  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

726 
 

would give them the U.S. price on the 8,000 bushels. And not 
only that, we indicated that in the event of a disaster this 
program, the 8,000 at the guaranteed fixed price U.S., would 
click in and farmers would be guaranteed that in the case of a 
disaster. 
 
Secondly . . . thirdly, rather, what we indicated is that because 
of the massiveness of the debt, the Farm Credit Corporation had 
to be restructured and there had to be a major restructuring of 
the debt of the farmers across Saskatchewan, indeed across 
Canada. 
 
And what we indicated there — and we put this out and we 
tested it, my colleague and I and our agricultural critic from 
Ottawa, Vic Althouse. We went around; we talked to young 
farmers. They helped us enunciate a program of handling debt, 
and they said, well we don’t want you to forgive it. People went 
forward and created debt; farmers want to be able to pay it, but 
we need assistance under this crisis. 
 
And what we came up in respect to debt restructuring is that 
first $125,000 would be . . . The first $125,000 of debt would be 
restructured, and a low interest rate would be applied, 
somewhere around 7 or 8 per cent, so that it was manageable 
and that the farmer wouldn’t be ruined by high interest rate. The 
next $125,000 worth of debt would be set aside, that the farmer 
would have options: he could liquidate some of his assets and 
pay that off, or he could pay off the first $125,000 and then start 
attacking the other $125,000. 
 
That’s what we offered to the people of Saskatchewan, to the 
agricultural community of western Canada. And I’ll you, the 
farmers responded. They responded by electing 10 New 
Democrats out of 14 ridings here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I guess I have a lot of respect for the legislature 
and the process, the democratic process, the debating and 
formulating as we do here in the House. But I’ve never been so 
disappointed with a Premier, and the Minister of Agriculture, 
who will have the audacity to outline that he has new creative 
programs in his budget. And it’s now day 23, and they 
absolutely have not brought in any single bill to address the 
crisis that is upon us. 
 
Do you know what we have as Bill 1? We have privatization. 
Do you think SaskPower is going to run away if we don’t deal 
with it right away? Or do you think potash corporations are 
going to run out of the province if we don’t deal with them right 
away? The problem that we should be dealing with, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know everyone over there agrees with me, we 
should be dealing with agriculture. 
 
And I’ll tell you, we’ll sit here; we’ll sit here. We’ll put other 
business aside if you want to deal with agriculture, because you 
say you have a policy. But the fact is, they don’t have a policy; 
they don’t have a policy. They have more rhetoric; that’s what 
they have enunciated in their budget. 
 

The only concrete program that they’re going to put into place, 
and this is part of their overall goal, is to change the whole map 
of Saskatchewan, or as the Minister of Justice said, we have to 
change the whole sociological thinking of Saskatchewan. We 
can’t have these little family farms out there. We’ve got to go 
with the world class. We’ve got to have corporate farms. 
 
And what are they going to do? They’re going to set up equity 
financing. And I’ll tell you, once equity financing is set up 
there’ll be no looking back. Because who is going to get the 
benefits? This is privatization of Saskatchewan farm land, that’s 
what it is, Mr. Speaker. Because they’re going to get together 
with some of their major friends, they’re going to give them tax 
concessions to invest, and they’re going to bring in outside 
investors from Hong Kong, where the Premier was recently, 
and they’re going to take over the farm land from the families 
who have worked and built and cleared that land. And that’s the 
crisis that we have. 
 
And I’ve indicated, in the budget address, I’ve asked the 
members opposite to take it upon themselves to encourage the 
Premier either to give up the portfolio or either come forward to 
deal with the crisis. 
 
(1915) 
 
I have said before that the crisis is not just one that I’m talking 
about, but as I said, the Roman Catholic bishops of 
Saskatchewan, in Muenster in 1987, in November, they put 
forward an agricultural statement, “Farming: A vanishing way 
of life.” 
 
And they saw what is happening, or the threat of what could 
happen, and they set up a committee during the past year and 
some of the things that the committee were to look at, and I just 
want to refer to a couple. 
 
They were to go out, this committee. What follows is the 
committee’s report to the bishops of Saskatchewan, and it’s 
divided into three sections of this committee from all the 
dioceses across Saskatchewan, what was said. And this 
represents, you know, sort of the common threads of what 
people were saying as the study groups went around. What’s 
missing, they were looking for, and they were looking for 
recommendations to give back to the bishops. 
 
And on stewardship in respect to the family farm, and I want 
just to read a part from page 5. And this is the Report and 
Recommendations to the Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 
Bishops from the Agriculture Coordinating Committee, 
December, 1988, and it says in part: 
 

Agriculture policies and farming practises that encourage 
increased yields and efficient production, at the expense of 
care for the land and concern for people, are encouraged by 
government, business and research. The concept of 
“efficiency” supports the transition from small and 
moderate sized farms to large, capital intensive forms of 
production. 
 

That’s what the study groups reported back to the bishops. 
What they see as the government’s policy here in  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

727 
 

Saskatchewan, and that’s what they were talking about, is 
heading towards large intensive operations and away from the 
family farm, which is a tremendous way of life. 
 
I remember talking to a farmer, Mr. Speaker, not long ago, who 
had serious financial problems with debt. And this man had 
come over here and built up a farm, and the only crime that he 
had committed is that he tried to establish his sons in farming as 
well. And they expanded from six quarters to 11 or 14, I forget 
the exact number. And then the consequences — bought it at a 
fairly high price, but then got caught into the low commodity 
prices and high interest rates. 
 
He says the only crime I did is to help try to get my sons on that 
land. And he bought that land, and when he talked to us about 
his concern about the possibility of losing it, he said farming to 
me is not just a business — it is a business I know, because 
today you need to have a lot of cash flow as opposed to 
previously when my father was farming with horses and smaller 
equipment. The cash flow is much bigger, so it is a business. 
 
But in Saskatchewan it’s more than a business to the farmers. I 
remember him saying he couldn’t conceive losing that land; 
how he went out there, and he said, I watched it grow; I 
manicured that summer fallow. It’s a way of life. And he said, 
we cannot lose that; we must not. And he asked us to come 
back here, and farmers across this province, to talk to the 
government, to put politics aside, to try to save a way of life 
that is invaluable to this province, has made it unique. Where 
better can you raise your family, it has been said, than on the 
family farm? Where better to raise your family than in small, 
rural Saskatchewan? And out of rural Saskatchewan have come 
some outstanding people in various walks of life. 
 
But that’s what’s at stake, a way of life known to 
Saskatchewan, cherished in Saskatchewan. And all that the 
Tories will bring forward is a privatization effort in respect to 
farm land equity financing. That’s what it is. It’s going to be 
large, corporate farmers, foreign-owned, and our people are 
going to be working it, dictated by foreigners rather than 
themselves. 
 
We’ve got two extremes — we’ve got two extremes in the 
world. We’ve got unbridled capitalism that would turn family 
farms into the exploitation of the money men, or we have the 
state-owned farms of communist states of Russia, or we have 
what we had in Saskatchewan over the 40-some years that the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP 
were a very important part in developing, and that is the family 
farm and the very, very efficient family farm. 
 
That — that is at stake. And I’ll tell you, all that we can do is 
put forward the crisis that exists. 
 
What we have here today and we’ve been going through it on 
question period, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t want to repeat it over 
and over, but in 1988, over 600 actions were taken against 
farmers by the Agricultural (Credit) Corporation of 
Saskatchewan headed by the Premier. Two thousand more 
actions are turned over to the lawyers to take actions against the 
farmers. Drought payment, there’s been a breach of promise; 
long-term  

agricultural policy, none on the horizon, and here we sit in this 
legislature, the 23rd day, and not one Bill to introduce some 
aspect to save the farmer. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the committee that came 
forward representing the bishops is called, as I said, the 
Christian Farm Crisis Action Committee, and they met with our 
caucus and they met with the government caucus. And what 
they have asked for is for a one-year moratorium, that’s what 
they have asked for, for a minimum one year . . . 
 

That the federal and provincial government immediately 
impose for a minimum one-year moratorium on all farm 
foreclosures and accruing interest to allow time to develop 
a satisfactory debt mediation policy or a land tenure system 
that will protect farmers from losing their farms. 
 

That’s what they’ve asked . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now 
the Roman Catholic bishops and all those that look for a 
solution are communists, that’s what he’s saying, the member 
from Weyburn. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s against the Catholics, just like the 
Ku Klux Klan . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Right. That’s what they’ve asked for. That’s 
one suggestion that came forward. I understand they didn’t get 
much of a hearing. But I’ll tell you, in 1986, going into the 
provincial election to help out the Premier, the Farm Credit 
Corporation put on the moratorium in 1986, for the election 
period, and foreclosures dropped. It’s in their report. So why 
couldn’t they do it? Why don’t we take a run at the banks and 
the financial institutions and not at the farmers? That’s the 
question that the farmers are asking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel strongly about this area. We have put 
forward our resolution, and with such disgust that, this being 
private members’ day, we could move resolutions to address 
this very major problem, and we were informed that the 
opposition . . . what the government members wanted to talk 
about is whether or not we should be in NATO — whether or 
not we should be in NATO, as the farmers are leaving the farm. 
That’s what they want to talk about. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in closing, that we certainly are 
supporting the agriculture community. We enunciated an 
agricultural policy in the federal election. We’re talking to 
farmers each day, and I’ll tell you that we’re going to continue 
to raise the issue of the farm crisis until action is taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you for the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to enter the 
debate here today on an issue that I feel is very important. I 
notice, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution here talks about that this 
Assembly condemns the government for its failure to protect 
farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

728 
 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I want to outline some of the 
things, just some of the things that those people opposite have 
voted against, in the time that I have been here, that those 
people have voted against. And I’ll outline some of them for 
you, and as I go through what I have to say, I’m sure that you 
will understand that in our programs that we have involved 
ourselves with in agriculture, we have outlined a number of 
them to protect the family farm, to deal with a safety net for 
these farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, they voted against them; 
consistently and continually, they have voted against them. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that when we come in with our debt 
refinancing package in this session of the legislature, I would 
hazard a guess that they might even vote against that. They 
voted against the budget, and that’s where the money is in to 
have the financing for agriculture in Saskatchewan. And 
chances are, Mr. Speaker, they’ll vote against that too. 
 
And I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan that that is 
consistently what they have done. All through the period of 
time that I have been in this legislature speaking about 
agriculture concerns and the dynamic of agriculture, those 
people have consistently voted against it. 
 
I recall one time when they voted in favour, Mr. Speaker. They 
voted in favour of the home protection program that we put into 
place at thirteen and a quarter. I remember them standing up 
and voting for that. But consistently, in agriculture, they have 
voted against the kinds of policies that can save the family 
farm. And then they have the audacity to come here and tell us 
that we don’t know what’s going on there, we don’t understand 
what’s happening. They come here . . . You know, on my ranch 
— I ranch with my brother and my brother-in-law, and if my 
brother-in-law had to sit here and listen to this, he would say, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re sucking slough water. And that, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m going to have to ask the hon. 
member to withdraw that remark; it’s not parliamentary. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark. 
 
I will say to the members opposite that they have consistently 
voted against all of the policies that have been addressed by this 
government — they have consistently voted against them. And 
I’ll say this too, Mr. Speaker, that they will consistently vote 
against projects that we bring forward in any way to help the 
communities. 
 
It says here: . . . and rural communities which are impacted by 
drought, low commodity prices, and other things. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, they will vote against that, consistently. You watch, in 
this budget, they will vote against that. 
 
And I want to point out some things that they have voted 
against, Mr. Speaker, things that have directly impacted on the 
member from Elphinstone, who used to be the  

member of Shaunavon; the member from Humboldt who is 
supposedly a farmer; and any of the other people on that side of 
the House who have been farmers, or have farm land. And the 
member from Saskatoon South is one of those. And they have 
consistently — consistently, Mr. Speaker — voted against those 
policies. I want to outline some of them. 
 
The issue here, Mr. Speaker, is: who has assisted agriculture in 
Saskatchewan? I want to outline one very important feature. In 
1988, net farm cash receipts were up 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
they were up 2 per cent in 1988 and 3 per cent over the five 
year average previous to that. And do you know where that 
money came from, Mr. Speaker? That came from this 
government and from the federal government. 
 
The farmers in Saskatchewan didn’t have to turn one wheel to 
get that money. They didn’t have to invest one dollar in putting 
that combine out for any extra. In my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, where there was no crop in a lot of the places; they 
didn’t have to take their combine out. We paid $480 million in 
crop insurance, and those farmers received that all across 
Saskatchewan. And that consistently has given us the 
opportunity, as producers, to pay our bills. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they are saying to us that we have no 
agriculture policy. I want to outline some of them for you. 
 
There is a program that we have outlined here in rural 
development, Mr. Speaker. It’s called the rural service network. 
It’s a part of placing into dynamic the opportunity that farmers 
have to monitor their crops, the crops they have to sell. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to put money into the hands of farmers, as 
a tool for marketing their commodities. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
is one of the programs that we have put into place. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That was an exciting one. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Second one — and the member from 
Elphinstone, who used to be from Shaunavon, is saying that 
was an exciting one. Well he should go to Leader, 
Saskatchewan, where those farmers are today putting into place 
some of the opportunities that we have put into place on the 
technological side of agriculture. 
 
You go to Wolseley and you’ll find another one. You go to the 
member from Humboldt’s seat in Watrous, you’ll find another 
one. And by the time we get done, Mr. Speaker, this year we’ll 
have another 49 of them located throughout the province, 
delivering a service that has been asked for for years by the 
farmers. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, these people are going to vote 
against the rat program. You watch. They’re going to vote 
against it. Seventeen million dollars over five years, and they’re 
going to vote against it. You watch it. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

729 
 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, that program is going to, 
together with the Alberta government, eliminate the rats in this 
province. And that, Mr. Speaker . . . That, Mr. Speaker, has cost 
on an annual basis, that, Mr. Speaker, costs over $8 million for 
the consumption of grain that the rats eat. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, they carry disease, they carry all kinds 
of infestation from place to place, and that, Mr. Speaker, is what 
we are going to do to help the farmers of Saskatchewan. And 
chances are, Mr. Speaker, they are going to vote against it. 
Chances are very strong that they’re going to vote against it. 
 
We have negotiated, Mr. Speaker, together with the federal 
government, an opportunity for a soil and water report. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, we have dealt with two programs in Saskatchewan 
over the past three years: one is Save Our Soils, the other one is 
Conservation Districts. They, Mr. Speaker, together with the 
PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and 
extension services, are going to provide the backdrop for a new 
soil and water agreement that we have with the federal 
government for $27 million provided by this government over 
the next three years, and 27 million provided by the federal 
government. Chances are, Mr. Speaker, that that money is going 
to be voted against by those members opposite. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I want to point out today over 
the course of my speech. They’re going to vote against it — a 
good program. Farmers are asking for that. In my constituency 
they’re asking for it, and I know that in Shaunavon 
constituency, where the member from Elphinstone used to be, 
they still do. And the member from Saskatoon South, who has a 
farm up at Humboldt some place, he’s going to be looking for 
that too. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what they’re going to 
vote against, every one of them. 
 
Now development and diversification. We have taken and put 
into place, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for municipalities to 
develop and diversify. We have asked them through the past 
year to put into place the kinds of ideas and opportunities that 
have been put together by the Saskatchewan Research Council, 
the opportunities to diversify and invest. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what they’re going to vote 
against. They are going to vote against that, and I want the 
people of Saskatchewan to understand — they are going to vote 
against it, you watch. 
 
Are they in favour of diversification? Aha, yes they are. They 
buy family . . . they buy land bank land; they go and invest in 
Canada . . . Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon; they go and 
invest in PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) in P.A.; they 
go and invest in the potash mines. But do they invest any 
money in new development? You know what? Chances are, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re going to be against Canada Packers’ 
expansion; they’re going to be against expansion in 
Intercontinental Packers. 
 
And the other day when the minister responsible for 
development in Saskatchewan made the announcement  

about the plant opening up in Saskatoon, they had the audacity 
to laugh at that, Mr. Speaker. They don’t understand agriculture 
and they vote against it. They laugh at it and continually deride 
the kinds of things that we put into place. And, Mr. Speaker, 
agriculture in Saskatchewan understands that we know what 
we’re talking about and they believe in what we’re doing. 
 
Do they believe in expanding feedlots? No. Do they believe in 
irrigation? No. I’ll just tell you, Mr. Speaker, this, this is a very 
important feature in the south-west part of Saskatchewan. The 
people who have used irrigation over the past 40 years out of 
the Swift Current creek, and through the PFRA have irrigated 
land through that area, would have a very very serious problem 
finding out exactly what kind of opinion they had about 
irrigation. 
 
But I want to describe some of that to you. They would vote 
against it, and they’re going to vote against it — you watch. 
They’re going to vote against the budget for development of 
irrigation at Riverhurst. They’re going to vote against, they’re 
going to vote against the irrigation development at Luck Lake. 
They’re going to vote against irrigation development anywhere 
else in the province. You know what, Mr. Speaker? The farmers 
this past year put in wells, they put in dug-outs. And you know, 
those people over there voted against that. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why we have $10 million in 
that program. For the member from Elphinstone, there’s $10 
million in that program, and that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be 
paid out this year so that those people can take it and build 
dug-outs, they can dig wells. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why our 
Minister of Environment extended it until the end of 1989 to 
have those projects completed. That, Mr. Speaker, is a step 
forward, and I believe they’re going to vote against it, Mr. 
Speaker; they’re going to vote against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — They’re going to vote against it for the towns 
and villages that got water, too. They’re going to vote against it, 
you just watch and see. You’re against water every time . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And you, sir, were the person that 
talked about the mud hole down at Estevan. Mr. Speaker, the 
mud hole down at Estevan is going to turn around to haunt you 
because you call it that, and I was appalled that you would call 
the people and the kinds of conditions down there a mud hole. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The hole you’re digging there might be a 
mud hole. 
 
Mr. Martens: — No, Mr. Speaker, he exactly said that, and 
when he comes to see what he said in Hansard tomorrow, he 
will find out that he called that place a mud hole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t have the . . . if I had done that, I 
wouldn’t even have the courage to go down there and show my 
face in that place. And he is supposed to be the House Leader of 
that crew over there, and he calls that a mud hole. If he called 
my place a mud hole . . . His farm is just outside of my 
constituency, and, Mr. Speaker, if that’s a mud hole, then his 
farm is a mud hole. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

730 
 

An Hon. Member: — It’s in your constituency. It’s in your 
riding. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, now he says it’s in my constituency; 
he’s very fortunate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, these people are going to vote 
against the wild rice development in northern Saskatchewan, 
you just watch them. They’re going to vote against the budget, 
and in that budget is development for northern Saskatchewan, 
and they’re going to vote against it. Not a single one of them is 
going to have the courage to support the kind of programs that 
we’re putting in place in farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud of the way our Finance minister 
handled the budget on dealing with the kinds of things that 
we’re going to be doing in agriculture as it relates to farm 
financing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opportunity that we are going to place before 
the people of Saskatchewan in the next three months somewhat 
fits with what the member from Quill Lakes was talking about 
just earlier — hardly. And, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the 
member from Quill Lakes; when we come to this decision 
making process in this Assembly, will he have the courage to 
vote in favour of it? I bet you he won’t. 
 
The Minister of Finance outlined five different programs in 
agriculture for financing that I believe that the member from . . . 
members opposite will vote against. And they, Mr. Speaker, are 
saying we don’t have an agriculture policy, when they have 
continually, Mr. Speaker, voted against it. We will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is having a little 
difficulty, I believe . . . (inaudible) . . . It’s accepted that the odd 
barb is allowed when a man is speaking; however, constant, 
continuous barbs disrupt proceedings, and I would ask the hon. 
members to refrain. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Farm financing 
legislation will be expanding the mandate of the ag credit 
corporation. Okay? Are they going to vote in favour of that? 
Chances are, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not. They’re going to be 
against the farmers again. They’re going to enhance the 
opportunity for young, beginning farmers starting out, for the 
home quarter, to buy the home quarter. Chances are they’re 
going to vote against that. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the problem with those people 
opposite; they do not have the sensitivity to recognize the 
opportunity as it exists in rural Saskatchewan. They don’t 
understand it. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why they vote against 
it. They have a convoluted opinion of what it is in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to outline one . . . I just remembered, Mr. Speaker, that I 
wanted to say one thing more about irrigation. This afternoon 
we had a question period here that was related to the discussion 
on Rafferty. And, Mr. Speaker, the development of that facility 
there on the Souris River  

would provide roughly 11,000 acre feet of water on a mean 
average over the last 50 years — that’s what’s . . . that’s what it 
would have provided. 
 
They, Mr. Speaker, call that a mud hole, number one, that 
opportunity to irrigate 12,000 acres down there, giving all kinds 
of opportunity for the small community. That, Mr. Speaker, is a 
way we avoid the drought that they talk about in their 
resolution. That is how you do it. You don’t do it any other 
way, Mr. Speaker. You save the snow and the rainfall in heavy 
periods of time to give yourself an advantage over the time 
when you can’t. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is something they don’t understand. And 
in the southern part of the province from Outlook south, you 
have to do that. And, Mr. Speaker, just adjacent to the farm 
where the member from Elphinstone farms near Shaunavon, is a 
dam that’s called the Duncairn dam. And that, Mr. Speaker, was 
built in 1942. And that, Mr. Speaker, is giving thousands and 
thousands of acres of opportunity for farmers to raise their own 
feed and development. Why can’t that be done down in the 
Souris River? I’m asking you that. They don’t understand it, 
and that’s why they’re against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if today you would say to those people opposite 
that you were going to pull the plug on Diefenbaker Lake and 
let all the water go and let it go continually, for ever, they 
would be against that, and so would I. But when that dam was 
being built by the prime minister, Mr. Diefenbaker, and the 
premier of the province, Mr. Douglas, were there people against 
it? Yes, there were. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly opposite to what they are 
about today — exactly opposite. They’re not builders, they’re 
tearer-downers. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why they will 
vote against the things that we have in our budget on 
refinancing. You mark my word, they will vote against it. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why they are on that side and we are 
on this side. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that’s absolutely 
accurate. They don’t care about those families down there who 
want to have an opportunity. 
 
Over there in Coronach — I recall this very distinctly, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve been in politics quite a while, both rural, 
municipal, and provincial. 
 
(1945) 
 
And I had a meeting down at a little place called Bateman, 
Saskatchewan, where we met in the basement of one of the 
municipal councillors down there. There were three 
municipalities joined together to come and ask me to speak to 
them to find out what was going on with the kind of coal 
development that they were going to use to stop the water 
running into the Old Wives Lake. They were going to do that, 
set up a dam on that creek there, and then use that water to cool 
the coal-burning fire. That’s what they were going to do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re opposed to that now. 
 
Mr. Martens: — No, they were going to do that. They  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

731 
 

were going to do that, Mr. Speaker, but the farmers there said 
no. 
 
Those people today say that we’re not delivering water to Old 
Wives Lake. Well if they would have been there, they’d have 
less water than there is today, and they would’ve been in a drier 
condition than it is today. 
 
They are, Mr. Speaker, talking out of both sides of their mouth 
and not making sense with either one. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
exactly very likely what he would have done, the member from 
Elphinstone. Mr. Speaker, that is almost exactly what the 
member from Elphinstone would’ve done with the project that 
he was proposing down in Shaunavon, a coal electrical plant 
down there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Air-cooled. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Air-cooled, he says. Yes, sir. Mr. Speaker, he 
probably would have taken the water out of the Duncairn dam 
that I just spoke about to use that for the cooling, and nobody 
else would have got to use it. He would have taken the water 
away from all those people, just like he wants to take the water 
away from the people at Rafferty and Alameda. 
 
Mr. Speaker — going back to the financing part, Mr. Speaker, 
we have had to have a definite placement of farm debt in a very 
precarious position through the last eight years. And Mr. 
Speaker, that has been brought about mainly by the kinds of 
policies that were followed from 1978 to ’82. 
 
I want to outline for them, Mr. Speaker, because they don’t 
understand a lot of this. In 1973-74, the grain prices were going 
up, cattle prices were going down; 1975, Mr. Speaker, the worst 
prices in the history of the livestock industry. They talk about 
the good times. That, Mr. Speaker, was not what happened. In 
1975 probably the lowest prices and the highest costs were in 
existence at that period of time. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why, when it came to 1978 to ’82, 
with high interest rates that drove those people to capitalize 
their interest from that period of time. And that’s what they did, 
Mr. Speaker, they took their interest and put it against their 
mortgage to mortgage more land. That’s what a lot of them did, 
and that’s why they’re in trouble today because they’re paying 
interest on their interest. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what has 
driven them into this kind of a problem. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is now the time to come to the . . . or the 
time to come to the place where we do something about it. And 
we will, Mr. Speaker. In the next three months — watch it. And 
do you know what’s going to happen? They’re going to vote 
against it. 
 
One of the things that we’re going to be doing, Mr. Speaker, on 
this, and I believe that we need to clearly identify, that one of 
the things that we need to do is have financing come from 
many, many different sectors. We need to have it come, Mr. 
Speaker, from the banks, the credit unions. We need to have it 
— financing — come from individual farmers who are prepared 
to finance other farmers. 
 

And what is stopping this from happening, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that farmers were feeling a little insecure about allowing 
their neighbour, or of financing their neighbour. So what we’re 
going to do, Mr. Speaker, is venture finance that for them so 
they will be able to leave their money in Ag Credit Corporation, 
and they’ll be able to finance their neighbours just like they 
would have done before. And this time, Mr. Speaker, they will 
have the security of knowing that the government is going to 
guarantee that. That’s going to be a very important feature for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on one thing that I talked about, a 
little bit about in my budget speech, the ag development fund. 
These people over here say we have no plan; we don’t know 
where we’re going. Four years ago we decided to put in the 
agriculture development fund, and we’re still in the process of 
using that fund. 
 
This year it’s anticipated $29 million is going to go into that 
fund. And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to provide funding for the 
college of agriculture, funding for development projects 
throughout Saskatchewan, funding projects for innovative 
farming, funding projects for new kinds of crops — cereal 
crops, grasses, and all those kinds of things. That, Mr. Speaker, 
is going to provide dollars into the hands of farmers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they vote against it. Each time they vote against it. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why they are where they are. 
 
We had a safety net for farmers, Mr. Speaker, a safety net for 
farmers who were having trouble, and we recognize that they’re 
having trouble. That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of thing that we 
go out and try and help people. There’s a program that’s called 
“Counselling and assistance for farmers” that takes three other 
farmers — and you have your pick — three farmers that come 
and help you and talk to you about the kinds of problems you 
have: how do I resolve the position I’m in; how do I come to a 
conclusion of the things that I have that aren’t paid for; how do 
I handle the bank; how do I handle the credit union; how do I 
handle Farm Credit Corporation, all of these agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people go there and visit with them, farmer 
to farmer, in a very respective way. And that, Mr. Speaker, is an 
excellent opportunity for farmers to put together the kinds of 
policies that they need to have, the kind of background they 
need to have to go to talk to their financial institutions. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is what we are doing. We know what’s out there, 
and we care for what’s out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what? They haven’t voted for 
that yet, and that, Mr. Speaker, is why I think they are where 
they are, and where we are where we are. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker . . . they talk to us about the 
negative of the production loan program. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
1986, when we put that into place, there probably isn’t one 
program that got more compliments than that. Do you know 
what they complimented us on? No red tape. The second thing 
they complimented us, the speed at which they could get their 
cheques delivered. The third thing they commented on was the 
fact that it  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

732 
 

was universal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over and over and over again I talk to people who 
like to have that there. And do you know what? They vote 
against it, Mr. Speaker. They vote against the rebate on interest 
on that program. Every one of them, they vote against it. 
 
Now let’s talk about another one. That dealt with the grain side, 
now let’s deal with the livestock side. $200 million at zero per 
cent interest is being provided to the livestock producers — the 
cows, the sheep, the hogs in this province, and, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re going to vote against the interest rebate on that program. 
On that side of the House they vote against it. And I want 
everyone in this province to understand they’re going to vote 
against it in this budget again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Humboldt just 
before supper, and he said that we were taking out the farm 
purchase program. Well Mr. Speaker, I was checking the 
budget over and there’s between $12 and $15 million in that 
program. I don’t think we’re cutting it out. Those farmers are 
still using it, and they’re taking advantage of that. And you 
know, Mr. Speaker, they voted against that, too. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is the kind of things that they’re always talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion says this: that this Assembly condemns 
the Government of Saskatchewan for it’s failure to protect farm 
families. That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly as little as they know 
about what goes on in farm family. 
 
The second thing it says: they condemn the province for the 
kinds of policies we’ve had against rural communities. Mr. 
Speaker, the well program that we put into place — the kind of 
infrastructure program — the Minister of Urban Affairs dealt 
with this at length. And he is going to put in a program that 
deals with the infrastructure in communities. That, Mr. Speaker, 
is exactly what those communities want, and that’s what they 
need. 
 
Short-sighted, inadequate federal and provincial funding, Mr. 
Speaker — they are really, seriously out of touch with what’s 
going on out there. 
 
And then I want to just conclude by saying that from . . . It goes 
on to say that the drought, low commodity prices, and high 
debts have contributed to this. Well nowhere, Mr. Speaker, have 
we ever said that those things didn’t cause a problem. And I 
want to go back, Mr. Speaker, to where I started. 
 
In 1988, agriculture income is going to be 2 per cent higher than 
it was in ’87 — 2 per cent higher; Mr. Speaker, 3 per cent 
higher than the five-year average previous to that. And do you 
know what that means, Mr. Speaker? That many, many, many 
people in this province have had the opportunity to gain 
valuable assistance from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole lot more I’m going to say on 
this when this debate continues. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
ask you now to adjourn debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 15 — Opportunities for Development in 
Rural Communities 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For a few moments 
there it looked like we were never going to get to this resolution 
which will be dealing in general terms, Mr. Speaker, with our 
regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to 
provide adequate and effective support and opportunity for 
economic development and job creation in rural communities. 
 
That is the crux of what this motion is about. 
 
I want to start by outlining some of the problems, just so that 
members opposite might have a little better idea just how 
serious their lack of job creation and lack of economic 
diversification and economic initiatives — just how serious it 
really is for the people, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve got the figures of net migration for Saskatchewan for the 
year 1987, listed off by month, and as well I have it for 1988 
and for the month of January 1989. In 1987 the net loss of 
Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker, was 10,050 - 
_ 10,050 more Saskatchewan people gave up on the members 
opposite, gave up because they were desperate, they couldn’t 
find jobs, they couldn’t find a means to support themselves and 
their family. So in 1987, 10,050 Saskatchewan people fled the 
province. In 1988, did they turn it around? Not likely. It got 
worse, Mr. Speaker: 12,626 more Saskatchewan people fled the 
province than came in. 
 
To give you some perspective now, because I’ve only got 
January’s figures for 1989 where we had a net loss, but I want 
to read into the record, the January 1988 net loss was a mere 
908 people in one month — 908 people net loss, January 1988. 
That pales in comparison to the 1989 loss of 1,552 
Saskatchewan people that have given up because of this 
government. There is no hope and there is no chance of that 
turning around until after the next election when the member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale will become premier and we will get 
this province going again. 
 
(2000) 
 
Members opposite may think, well, so what; it’s just the cities 
that’s losing the population, but it’s just not so. And I want to 
refer — the member for Morse may be somewhat interested in 
this, as he was just speaking. Rush Lake, Rush Lake, what do 
we have happen in Rush Lake? In 1982 the village of Rush 
Lake had 107 inhabitants — 107 for a population. What has 
happened in Rush Lake now? It has 83 — 83. 
 
The member asks what’s happened in Waldeck, which is very 
close to Swift Current and something of a bedroom community. 
Well let’s have a look at it. He holds Waldeck up as a great, 
great boom town, you have us believe. In 1981 the village of 
Waldeck had 333 people residing in it. By 1988 that had 
blossomed up a whole two people, to 335. And that’s the 
success story; that’s the  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

733 
 

success story the member from Morse has got to talk about. 
Meanwhile Rush Lake goes from 107 all the way down to 83 
people. A tragic loss for that town. 
 
What’s happened in Hodgeville? Mr. Speaker, 1981 Hodgeville 
had 347 people residing in it; down to 288 in 1988. And what’s 
happened to your own . . . the town for which your constituency 
is named after, that of Morse? In 1981 we had 418 residents, 
418; down now to 359 — 359. 
 
The question is, where are they going? That’s not what I’m 
dealing with here tonight, Mr. Speaker. What I’m dealing with 
is why are they going. Why is it that all of the best of 
Saskatchewan that we have to offer has to flee? Why is it the 
young people will complete their education to the best of their 
ability and then find no opportunity, no hope, no choice but to 
flee our province. And that’s a tragedy, and it’s a tragedy that 
we can ill afford. As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
has dropped below the 1,000,000 person mark for the first time 
since, I believe it was 1982, it had just peaked over a million 
people. 
 
We’ve had a net loss of citizens now for a number of years. It 
simply cannot continue or else we’ll have to ask the last person 
to leave to turn out the lights, and not very many years from 
now. 
 
What else are we dealing with in this province of lost hope, 
particularly in, as I’m speaking tonight to this motion, Mr. 
Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan? What’s the situation? We have 
got a province now that has the second highest poverty rate in 
all of Canada. 
 
As I was growing up on the farm, and we had a kind of a nice 
operation, I and my four other brothers and my parents lived in 
a two-bedroom basement, because as was the custom for some 
people in those days, they built the basement first, and then 
when the money became . . . when the farm became able to 
support it, they built the upstairs in the house. 
 
So there was five boys and mom and dad in the two-bedroom 
basement. I wondered how the poor people lived, and I say that 
sincerely. I know, particularly younger people who may take an 
interest in the proceedings here will find that hard to believe. 
But you don’t need to be a genius to look at me and realize that 
I’ve always had three square meals a day. We always had a 
vehicle that would get us to town; we were always able to 
participate in whatever sporting events and so on that there 
were. 
 
As I was growing up, Mr. Speaker, I would see reports on the 
national news dealing with Newfoundland having a 20 per cent 
unemployment rate, and I was thinking: how terrible, how 
awful that a province could be so devoid of hope, where one in 
five is without work. I still feel that way. We haven’t yet 
slipped to that depth of despair. 
 
But for the one in 11 Saskatchewan people in the working force 
that . . . or that wish they were in the working force, but do not 
have a job, it’s that bad. You can’t convince the one in 11 
people who is unemployed and willing, able, and looking for 
work — you can’t convince them that they’re one iota better off 
being unemployed in  

Saskatchewan than they would be if they were unemployed in 
Newfoundland. 
 
The second worst level of poverty in all of Canada. It is a 
disgrace, Mr. Speaker. That is what prompts this resolution. 
That’s why we’re dealing with it here tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And what can we do in a positive manner? I 
know I’ve heard government members saying well, you know, 
those horrible socialists just don’t have a decent idea. 
 
Well there are a few ideas, Mr. Speaker. We have got a 
highway system that is so sadly neglected that you daren’t 
speed any more. I suspect the number of speeding tickets has 
gone sharply in decline since the government opposite took 
office in 1982, and for a simple reason: the highways are so 
incredibly rough, you just daren’t speed. In fact, you hope you 
can get to the posted speed limit without jarring your bones 
right free from the flesh. 
 
Good roads and good highways are absolutely essential and 
vital to economic development. They’re essential to allow our 
Saskatchewan citizens to live in rural Saskatchewan, knowing 
full well that in an emergency they have a highway system that 
can take them to the core hospitals if their local hospital is 
unable to cope with whatever — perhaps major surgery is 
required. You’d need a good highway system for that. 
 
You need a good highway system to visit the sons and 
daughters of many of the people that live in rural Saskatchewan. 
The sons and daughters who, like me, fled the farm, fled the 
farm because there wasn’t the economic opportunity. Fled the 
farm for the city, not because in those days I had some visions 
of grandeur or some great desire to live in Saskatoon or Regina 
or any other city, but rather I fled, Mr. Speaker, simply because 
there was nothing, nothing in the local community for me. 
 
I want to deal with, I mentioned, highways. Using 1981 
constant dollars — just so that we have taken out the effects of 
inflation, Mr. Speaker. In 1981-82 the total Highways budget 
would have totalled $191,474,000. The 1989-90 total Highways 
budget, which is $245 million, but expressed in 1981 dollars is 
a mere $153,668,025, or a shortfall of nearly $40 million in 
constant dollars. 
 
So we hear the member from Melfort espousing grandiose 
plans, talking about Highways projects when in fact we’re 
nearly $40 million less in constant dollars being spent now than 
before. 
 
That 40 million, Mr. Speaker, could be used to employ a goodly 
number of people from rural Saskatchewan where the roads 
need to be built. Indeed it might go a fair ways to re-employing 
the 400 people that the previous minister of Highways so-called 
transferred to the private sector. 
 
Now many of those people who were transferred to the private 
sector by the government opposite, many of those people have 
never found employment in the road building industry, never 
found it. Some of them have not  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

734 
 

found employment at all. Indeed, as my colleague for Regina 
Elphinstone points out, now under the privatization schemes 
some of them are cutting the grass in the ditches. 
 
What do we see, Mr. Speaker, in this list of Highways projects 
that was tabled in this House a few short days ago. We see 11 
road grading projects that are nothing more than 
reannouncements of projects announced last year — 
reannounced. 
 
Two of the projects have not just been reannounced from last 
year, but they are now running in their third year of 
reannouncement — third year of reannouncements for 
Highways projects. 
 
I stood in the legislature last year, had a similar tale, similar 
tale. It is so close you could almost take my speech on the 
Highways projects and it would be as correct today as it was a 
year ago. Eleven reannouncements, two reannounced three 
years in a row, 12 servicing projects that are reannounced from 
last year. And it does not help rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They need the highway system, and more importantly, or as 
importantly, they need the jobs that are created in building and 
maintaining an effective highway system. 
 
One of the other things that is hurting economic development 
and job creation in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the 
issue of high interest rates. And it’s interesting that twice now, 
we in the opposition have brought forward a motion, as is the 
requirement in this Legislative Assembly, we brought it to the 
floor, asked for all-party agreement to it so that we could send a 
simple motion to the federal government saying, abandon your 
high interest rate policy. 
 
We’re not arguing that you may need something to cool the 
overheated Ontario economy, or we’re not even arguing that 
maybe even B.C. is a little overheated. But, Mr. Speaker, any- 
and everybody in Saskatchewan knows that our economy is not 
overheated. We don’t have to have high interest rates to cool 
our economy; indeed, in Saskatchewan we could make an 
argument for 5 per cent interest rates just so we could get 
something going — some hope, some jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — So not only has the government opposite refused 
us on two separate occasions to introduce a motion to the 
federal government, but twice now they have promised to 
introduce their own — twice they’ve promised to introduce 
their own — and yet, when push came to shove they didn’t have 
the guts to introduce it here in the legislature. They didn’t have 
the courage to follow through in what they had promised they 
would be doing, so we have no motion. 
 
And we see farmers paying higher and higher and higher 
interest rates. We see potential businesses saying, well you 
know, maybe I could make a go of it at 9 per cent; I might even 
make a go of it at 10 per cent, but while interest rates are on the 
way up, now is clearly not the time for me to go out and borrow 
any significant amount of money to start up a new business. 
 

So economic growth is come to a standstill, if indeed there was 
any. One could argue it has come to a screeching halt because 
of the high interest rate policies of the Brian Mulroney 
government condoned by the PC government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was preparing for this motion I wanted to 
research, reasonably broadly, what was going on, and I came 
upon something of a startling statistic to me, and it deals with 
rural women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find in my research that in 1981 there was a total 
of 53 per cent of the farm women reported working either off 
the farm or directly working on the farm, contributing in a 
regular daily basis. Fifty-three per cent in 1981 found it 
necessary to have off-farm employment or on-farm 
employment, and yet by 1988 that 53 per cent had jumped to 79 
per cent; 79 per cent of the farm women have now had to resort 
to working off job to try and maintain the farm and . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I’ve just had a member opposite say, what would I do, have 
them barefoot and pregnant in the kitchen? — the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, to be even a little more precise. And that 
may be your answer. But I don’t think that having no hope, 
having . . . this is another thing I found out, Mr. Member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. For every job that is available for farm 
women, there are three women lined up, ready, willing, and 
able, and qualified in most cases to handle that job. Now you 
know that that just falls into your Premier’s and your 
government’s policy of cheap labour — cheap land and cheap 
labour. 
 
(2015) 
 
We’ve seen land drop 40 per cent in value in the last six years 
and we have seen real wages do nothing but plummet under 
your government — cheap land and cheap labour. Of course I 
don’t advocate what you were suggesting. We advocate choice 
and real meaningful jobs. And you are doing well to pay a little 
bit of attention to it now. Shocking — from 53 to 79 per cent of 
the women now forced to take off-farm employment just to 
keep the farm going. 
 
I mentioned already, Mr. Speaker, that farm land has dropped 
by 40 per cent in value in the last four years. That’s a 10 per 
cent higher drop in farm value, farm land value than anywhere 
else in Canada — 10 per cent higher drop here than anywhere 
else. I don’t know how the government members, where they 
get off with saying, oh, we’re the guys and gals that are looking 
out for farmers. Everything, everything, all the economic 
indicators point that that is not happening. 
 
I talked about the out-migration. I used some examples of 
villages — if you like I’ll go back to that list and pick some 
other villages I didn’t talk about before. I suspect I could find 
the same thing in the member for Kelvington-Wadena’s 
constituency and virtually every other rural constituency in 
Canada. 
 
We have, in addition to seeing farm land decrease by 40 per 
cent in value in the last four years, we have witnessed 1,000 
farmers a year, 1,000 family farms a year  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

735 
 

disappearing since 1982 under this PC government. A thousand 
family farms a year, Mr. Speaker. That is why we are standing 
here saying, it is time to get on with job creation; time to get on 
with meaningful economic opportunities for rural 
Saskatchewan; time to give the people of Saskatchewan an 
opportunity. 
 
If you’re devoid of ideas, get over; get out of the way; call an 
election. Make the member for Riversdale the Premier, and then 
you’re going to see three engines of growth: you’re going to see 
the private sector growing; the co-operative sector, which the 
members opposite have hugely ignored; and we’re going to see 
public enterprise used as the third engine of growth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we’re not ashamed of putting Saskatchewan people to 
work when private enterprise or the co-operative enterprise is 
unable or unwilling. We’re not prepared to sit back and let an 
economic opportunity slip away. We’re not prepared to sit back 
and see 9, 10, 11 per cent unemployment. We’re not going to 
allow that. We’re going to put people to work to meaningful 
jobs, building up our province and building up our future for us 
and our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I was talking about farmers disappearing, family 
farms disappearing. I want to deal with pure farm bankruptcies 
because of the thousand family farms that disappear a year. A 
few are because the farmer simply reached retirement age, sold 
the farm, and obviously by the out-migration figures, they’ve 
left Saskatchewan, or many of them have. 
 
But I want to deal with farm bankruptcies for just a minute. In 
1988, Mr. Speaker, there was six times the number of 
bankruptcies that there was in 1981 — six times the number of 
farm bankruptcies. I remind the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena, in 1981 Al Blakeney and the New 
Democrats were in office that complete year. In 1988 six times 
the number of family farms have declared bankruptcy, and you 
have the audacity to say, we’re the people for the farmer; we’re 
protecting the farmers. Tell that to the six times the number of 
bankruptcies . . . of family farms that went bankrupt in 1988. 
You tell that to those families. You tell that to their friends and 
their relatives. You tell that in the communities all across 
Saskatchewan, and I wish you luck, because you’re going to 
need more than just a little bit of luck to try and fool the people 
on this one. You can fool all of the people some of the time, but 
you sure can’t fool all of the people all of the time, and they are 
getting wise to you cats. 
 
The member for Weyburn was talking a little bit earlier this 
evening, Mr. Speaker, about . . . he said, well let’s talk about 
land bank; let’s talk about land bank, he says. Well, let’s talk 
about bank land; let’s talk about bank land for a minute. 
 
Royal Bank owns 120,000 acres of land — 120,000 acres. Farm 
Credit has 420,000 acres of land. In fact, to put it in another 
way, in the last five years, Mr. Speaker, two and a half million 
Saskatchewan acres, farm land acres, two and a half million 
have gone from ownership  

basis to a rented basis. Previously owned by the farmers, two 
and a half million acres more now are being rented. And yet 
they say, we’re the government that supports the farmers. Trust 
us; we’ll look after the farmers. Well farmers have had it; 
they’ve given up hope too. A thousand family farms a year — 
gone. 
 
Rhetoric does not pay the bills. Rhetoric does not produce a 
single job. Open for business or hoping for business, whatever 
you want to call it, simply does not work. The people of the 
province know it. In urban Saskatchewan they know it and 
they’ve shown it. I think quite well they’ve shown it in the last 
general election. 
 
And just call an election. If you don’t believe me, call an 
election, and we’ll see what happens in Morse, and we’ll see 
what happens in the various rural . . . in Saltcoats and the 
various other rural seats. Call the election. Watch the member 
for Riversdale turn this province right side up; watch the 
unemployment level plummet; watch the money start to flow; 
watch people spend; and watch the small businesses of 
Saskatchewan prosper. Watch it. If you don’t believe me, call 
the election; let’s find out. Obviously your tired, worn-out 
solutions are simply not working. 
 
There’s one other thing while I’m talking about economic 
development and job creation in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and I just learned this earlier today. Last year, in 1988, 
24 hotels in rural Saskatchewan either closed or went bankrupt. 
Closed their doors for the final time or went bankrupt — either 
closed them . . . well if they closed their doors, obviously there 
was no buyer and there was no hope. Twenty-four hotels which, 
if you figure out the population in the small towns, if you were 
to translate that into some meaningful measure, it would be 
something the equivalent of the city of Saskatoon or the city of 
Regina losing 2,700 jobs, like that! — 2,700 jobs. That’s the 
equivalent. 
 
Government members opposite have claimed repeatedly that 
they support rural Saskatchewan. Then I have this question for 
them: why is it that while 404 miles of railway branch lines 
were abandoned throughout this province, we did not hear one 
peep? We didn’t hear any objection — 404 miles abandoned. 
We see freight rates going up every year. We’ve seen the 
closure of 36 rural post offices — 36 rural post offices. And 
what do we have from the members opposite? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Herky-jerky government and lots of hot 
air. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Herky-jerky government and lots of hot air . . . 
Well, that’s . . . I don’t know if you’ll get the quote of the week 
or not for that one but . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course we have to smile occasionally in this 
place or we’d go insane because . . . I think of a fellow I’m 
going to refer to as Bob. Bob is on the other end of the 
migration scale, but I had the opportunity of talking with Bob 
earlier today. 
 
Bob has moved in from Ontario and brought all his worldly 
possessions with him; thought he had a job lined up. His friend 
assured him, yes, I got you a job. Well after  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

736 
 

Bob got here, that job had disappeared — not because of the 
friends having done anything wrong, but the company had 
ended that job. Nobody had that job. So Bob was here, spent 
virtually all of his money to come here from Ontario because he 
thought Saskatchewan was a land of opportunity. 
 
Well now he’s got the line on another job, but the problem is, 
he’s got to wait for one of the eight people who work there to 
quit. So he’s into a waiting game. He’s also got a part-time 
janitorial job in the meantime. 
 
But Bob was forced for the first time in his life to apply for 
social services, and Social Services just as flat turned him 
down. They said no, you can’t come here like that and expect to 
collect social services. We don’t care that you have less than 
$100; we don’t care that you have no job, because when he first 
applied he didn’t even have his part-time job; we don’t care 
about all of that. The fact is, you should have, from your last 
pay cheque, you should still have some money. 
 
Now I don’t whether he was supposed to twitch his nose and 
get to Saskatchewan, or what. But we hear government 
members opposite talking about bringing the young people 
home, and if I hear it one more time I think I’m going to 
become physically ill. Here we have a young person trying to 
come home and getting nothing for help. 
 
I talked with Bob this morning. Bob had gone to the food bank. 
Bob had gone to the food bank, Mr. Speaker, in desperation. 
And he was asking me, how can I get social services to turn 
their decision around? He says, my friend has been helping me 
but the cupboard’s now bare. I need some social services, need 
a little bit of help to tide me over until I can land this job. Not 
asking for the world — just so he doesn’t hear his ribs when he 
runs his hand up and down. 
 
But that’s sort of the legacy. And I see the member opposite 
laughing. In fact, there’s a number of them laughing about it. 
They think that hunger is a joke. They think that unemployment 
is a joke. They think . . . I don’t know, Alice-in-Wonderland. 
They think if you see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil, there 
is no evil. And nothing could be farther from the truth. The 
people know that, and that’s why they want this tired 
government to move, get out of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I have talked at some length about 
some of the problems in rural Saskatchewan. There is more that 
I would like to say, but in the interests of allowing my 
colleague, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, to join this, I 
will be moving the resolution, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
The motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has failed to provide adequate and effective 
support and opportunity for economic development and job 
creation in rural communities. 
 

(2030) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the first 
thing that I’d like to say this evening in relation to this motion 
that regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to 
provide adequate and effective support and opportunity for rural 
people, is that there’s scarcely a person in Saskatchewan 
nowadays who doesn’t have some relationship to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Most of us were either born and raised on a farm in rural 
Saskatchewan or in a small town; or even if we were born and 
raised in the city, we have friends and relatives who live in rural 
Saskatchewan. We have friends who live there, and it hurts us, 
then, to see what’s happening to our province, and our relatives 
and our friends in the rural parts of the province, for the lack of 
economic activity going on there. And it really effects all of us, 
urban and rural alike. That’s the first point that I’d like to make 
tonight. 
 
One of the myths that the Premier of this province has 
perpetrated the last number of years is that there is a real 
difference between rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan. No one really believes that at heart, and it’s 
heartening to note that people don’t buy that line from the 
Premier. 
 
But still he would have us believe that they are really two 
different worlds out there — the world of the city and the world 
of the country. I think that Saskatchewan people realize that 
there’s really a lot that ties them together beyond their 
attachments to the rural farm or rural communities, rural 
families. This government really ties them together in the 
problems that they face. 
 
I think, for example, of the way that the Shand-Rafferty project 
affects not only people in rural Saskatchewan but people in 
urban Saskatchewan as well. When we have a Premier, and a 
Minister of Agriculture, who will put a billion dollars into his 
own riding to ensure his own re-election at the expense of the 
public welfare, then that billion dollars taken away from 
education and health and highways begins to affect all 
Saskatchewan people, rural and urban alike. 
 
And it begins to erode the quality of life here in Saskatchewan 
and robs Saskatchewan people of a decent future. A billion 
dollar development in the Premier’s own constituency at 
Shand-Rafferty does nothing to provide real economic benefits 
across the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s for precisely this 
reason, Mr. Speaker, that we condemn this government for the 
lack of economic activity and opportunity in rural 
Saskatchewan. Sure there are megaprojects like Shand-Rafferty, 
but that’s a boom and a bust cycle and really represent false 
economies. 
 
I think it’s important for many of the urban people who are 
watching these debates tonight to realize that the kinds of 
broken promises that they’ve experienced are also experienced 
by rural people. 
 
And I think of the promises made for the drought payments to 
farmers in the last federal election. What do farmers have now? 
Not the $40 an acre that were  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

737 
 

promised by the Premier — and this is important to understand 
that $40 was promised. Some of them have $12 an acre, some 
of them $7 an acre, and some have none. And this really begins 
to affect the whole ability of the rural community to go out and 
engage in their farming operation. Operating loans are not 
easily come by in rural Saskatchewan these days. Farmers are 
cut off by the lending institutions; they can’t get their crops in 
the ground if they don’t have operating loans. 
 
And this begins to affect fertilizer dealers and bulk dealers. I 
was out in the community of Laird in the last several weeks, 
and over lunch in a farmhouse the farm couple was telling me 
that the bulk fertilizer dealer is going to have to tighten his line 
of credit to long-time customers because he just can’t be 
assured of their ability to pay. And so he will have to deprive 
many of his valued, long-term customers of credit this spring, 
because he can’t afford the risk of making a bad investment in 
lending them credit. 
 
And the same goes for all sorts of businesses across rural 
Saskatchewan. And it’s problems like this, in terms of 
financing, money for farming operations, that begin to affect the 
business community and begin to result in people leaving the 
province of Saskatchewan. Because not only can’t they find 
operating capital to put their crop in the ground, they can’t find 
jobs to earn a decent livelihood. 
 
Saskatchewan is now a net exporter, not of potash or of wheat 
or of coal or petroleum alone, but also of people. And it’s 
important for the people of Saskatchewan who are left here to 
understand that in the first two months of this year alone, some 
8,000 people have left the province of Saskatchewan. In the 
month of February alone, Mr. Speaker, there were 6,261 people 
who left Saskatchewan — a net loss of 6,261 people who left 
Saskatchewan for other provinces. 
 
You can translate this into 250 people a day, or another way of 
looking at it is that every six minutes, Saskatchewan 
experiences the net loss of one person. In the last 14 months 
alone, there were 21,000 people who left the province of 
Saskatchewan. And this is from a Premier who likes to talk 
about “keep on building Saskatchewan.” But you can’t build a 
province when you have people leaving it. You can’t build a 
province when you have the brightest and best of 
Saskatchewan’s young people leaving it because they can’t find 
employment, when you have farm families leaving the farm 
because they can’t get operating loans. 
 
And I think it’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 
realize that in this most recent budget that the spending 
allocations for the Department of Agriculture, which I have in 
front of me here tonight, are actually less for this year than they 
were last year. 
 
This year the government projects or estimates that it will spend 
$107 million on the Department of Agriculture. And would you 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is $32 million less than they 
estimated they would spend last year — $32 million less spent 
on the backbone of this province’s economy at a time when the 
need has never been greater. From the Premier and the Minister 
of  

Agriculture, it is really quite unbelievable. 
 
And people might expect that it was just some kind of anomaly 
were it not for the fact that if we go to the Department of Rural 
Development, in these same budgetary estimates, we find that 
spending, again, for rural Saskatchewan is down over the 
spending estimates or projections of last year — almost $10 
million less for the Department of Rural Development this year 
than last year, or a total of about $42 million less for the 
Departments of Agriculture and Rural Development in this 
year’s provincial budget. And that’s a tragedy, not just for rural 
people but for urban people as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the community of Laird, and 
the fact that people there are experiencing trouble getting 
operating loans. I happened to serve a congregation — a 
Lutheran congregation in that community, and I have some 
familiarity with the problems that this community has 
experienced over the past in keeping their rail line to the 
community. Laird, for those people who don’t know about it, is 
located north of Waldheim, a little bit west of Rosthern. It’s 
basically at the end of the blacktop and it’s at the end of the 
railroad. The blacktop stops in Laird. You go north of town, it 
isn’t there, it’s gravel. The railroad stops in Laird at the 
elevator. The line continues. You can see bush where it used to 
be, but it is no more. 
 
And we have in the province of Saskatchewan, in the last five 
years, lost 404 miles of railway branch lines. And what has this 
government done but sit on its hands and allow this to happen. 
Now what this means for the farmers of Laird, if their rail line 
goes, the Carlton line, is that they will have to truck their grain 
from Laird to Rosthern or to the 13-mile corner, which is north 
of Saskatoon, where there is a new Pool elevator. 
 
And this means for them, at a time when they can’t get 
operating loans and when they can’t get proper drought 
payments from their government and when the Department of 
Agriculture is cutting back on its spending plans and the 
Department of Rural Development is spending back . . . cutting 
back on its spending plans and the Department of Highways is 
putting less real money into the highway system than was put in 
six years ago, that they will have to drive the highways and haul 
their grain to Rosthern or to north of Saskatoon. This hardly 
does anything to help the rural economy of these people in 
Laird. 
 
This government ought to be standing up for rural people and 
fighting to maintain rural branch lines, the lifeline to rural 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And the people of Laird have consistently 
stood up for themselves — stood up alone, in large measure — 
to plead their case, because they know that the end of the 
branch line means, in all practical purposes, the end of their 
business community, the end of their school, the end of their 
churches, the end of the community itself. 
 
And then this isn’t just an isolated example. If we look at  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

738 
 

what’s happened with the closure of rural post offices, 
perpetrated by the Mulroney government federally, the 
provincial government here in Saskatchewan has done nothing 
to stand up to Mr. Mulroney and to protest the closure of rural 
post offices. 
 
Thirty-six rural post offices have closed here in Saskatchewan 
in the last year, and this government has said not a word about 
these closures; another 22 rural post offices have been 
downgraded to the status of franchises, something like 
McDonald’s or Kentucky Fried Chicken — a wonderful kind of 
venture for rural people to have retail postal outlets that are 
franchised — and this government doesn’t care, it does nothing. 
And another 46 rural post offices are presently being reviewed, 
are under review with a view to closing them. And what does 
this Premier and this government have to say about the situation 
— not a word. Not one word. 
 
Now for the people of Laird — to come back to them again — 
it means that they really are at the mercy of people, friends and 
neighbours in the community, if their post office in Laird 
closes, who are willing to drive to Waldheim to pick up the mail 
for them, or the neighbour family who might have a kid going 
to school in Waldheim that during the school year could pick up 
the mail for them. 
 
But other than that, if that post office closes it’s going to pose a 
lot of problems, especially for the elderly. And it isn’t just for 
communities like Laird. There are communities like Hoey that 
are also facing the closure of their rural post office. And the 
postmaster there pointed out to me recently, in the last year or 
so, that the R.M. office alone generates enough mail to keep 
that rural post office in Hoey a viable operation. And yet the 
federal government would want to close it. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently a group of rural Saskatchewan people 
have gotten together to try to do something about this crisis 
facing rural Saskatchewan. A group of people called the 
Christian Farm (Crisis) Action Committee that have come 
together in the area around Humboldt and the Muenster abbacy 
under the auspices of the Roman Catholic Church, and now 
involving other churches such as the United and Lutheran 
churches, are beginning to try to address some of these 
problems faced by the rural community, and have submitted a 
brief to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, and the PC 
Government caucus, on the subject of a moratorium for farm 
foreclosures. And as part of this submission they include a 
study they did on the effects on a small Saskatchewan 
community of 15 families, 15 farm families leaving that 
community. 
 
And they point out, and I won’t go into all of the details of this 
study, but they point out that if 15 families were to leave a 
community there would be very definite effects felt throughout 
that rural community. Our off-farm income from wages earned 
outside the community, they calculate, would have amounted to 
$172,000. And they point out that if these people left the 
community, it’s very unlikely that this $172,000 would find its 
way back into the community for purchases in community 
stores. 
 

They also go on to point out the effect that something such as 
spousal earnings, even family allowances, would have on a 
community. Another $72,000; $15,000 worth of family 
allowances in this case would be pulled out of that rural 
community, out of the rural economy, and in all likelihood 
would go into an urban area or out of province altogether. 
 
Another thing to consider are the crop expenses that these 15 
farms would have — expenses for items such as cars and 
trucks, insurance, accounting, buildings, equipment 
maintenance and the like. All of these bills paid to local 
businesses would no longer be paid. Projected cost of farm 
buildings and machinery replacement would also be gone. The 
amount of interest paid to local institutions would be gone. 
None of these funds would be available to local businesses. 
 
And so what we see, and the point that they make in this 
submission, is that there are very serious spin-off effects, or 
ripple effects throughout the rural economy if the livelihood of 
the farm community is threatened or eroded if people pull out of 
the rural economy. 
 
It has spin-off effects in the school system, where they estimate 
some 32 children of school age would leave the school. And 
that would mean a loss of payroll, of course, to the local school 
— some $60,000, basically two teachers. That’s $60,000 worth 
of purchasing power gone from the community. 
 
They talk about it being safe to say that these 15 families 
leaving the community likely would never retire there, not if 
they’ve left it, and that would have ripple effects as well. 
Pension revenue of somewhere down the line would eventually 
be lost to the community. It would mean that there would likely 
be nine to 15 different empty houses in the community. There 
would be a loss of potential tax base if that happened. There 
would be a lack of demand for hospital or nursing home 
services. There would be a corresponding lack of demand for 
local recreational services. Support for local churches, 
financially and otherwise, would go down the drain. And I even 
point out that you wouldn’t have people coming into the 
community, relatives who come home at Christmas and Easter, 
Thanksgiving, and do some spending there. 
 
So it really begins to be a very serious matter when we have 
people leaving rural Saskatchewan; when we have a 
government that isn’t doing anything to diversify and 
strengthen the rural economy, but only puts a billion dollars into 
a project like Shand-Rafferty. 
 
The farmers are forced off the land. It doesn’t matter whether 
you have a Shand-Rafferty project or not; small town 
Saskatchewan’s demise is assured. If the farmers aren’t there, 
rural Saskatchewan won’t be there in the future. And what we 
have, if farmers are leaving the land and leaving for B.C. or 
Ontario or other places where there’s work opportunity, we also 
have some who are leaving for the city. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you about an episode I had 
this Monday morning, just yesterday morning, prior  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

739 
 

to coming down here to Regina. I dropped a box of food from 
the Lutheran church in Laird off at the food bank in Saskatoon. 
It wasn’t very much, it was one box of food, sixteen kilograms, 
from a handful of five or six of the ladies in the local 
congregation who had donated it to the food bank. But I was 
appalled when the director of the Saskatoon Food Bank shared 
some statistics with me about the need there in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you believe that in the city of Saskatoon 
last month there were 2,830 families who used the Saskatoon 
Food Bank, an all-time record high? Mr. Speaker, this is hard to 
understand if we don’t have this figure in some kind of 
perspective — 2,830 families last month using the Saskatoon 
Food Bank compares for the average in all of 1988 of 2,007. 
That’s an 823 family increase over 1988’s average. And if you 
go back to 1987, Mr. Speaker, the figure is 1,502 families. 
That’s the average number of families per month using the 
Saskatoon food bank — 1,502. That’s an increase this last 
month in Saskatoon of 1,328, almost a doubling in the number 
of families using the Saskatoon Food Bank. 
 
And why is that? It’s because of this government’s failure to 
address the problems of rural Saskatchewan and the rural 
economy. And this is at a time, Mr. Speaker, sad to say, when 
the average allocation of food made by the Saskatoon food bank 
is dropping down to an all-time low of 3.9 kilograms of food 
per family from a high of 6.1 kilograms as recently as 1987. 
And again, almost twice the number of people using the food 
bank, and because of those numbers and the amount of food 
available, almost half the amount of food available. 
 
And what’s even more appalling, Mr. Speaker, is at a time 
when the need is all the greater, when the need is all the greater, 
what do the food bank people experience but a diminishing of 
the number of volunteers who come in to help and package the 
food — 751 volunteer hours last month at the Saskatoon food 
bank when they had record use. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is symptomatic, I say — and I point this 
out — this is symptomatic of the problems facing this province 
right here and right now. And these are problems that impinge 
on both rural and urban Saskatchewan people. And they 
impinge on both rural and urban because Saskatchewan has the 
second-highest rate of family poverty in this country of Canada, 
second only to Newfoundland. Forty-three thousand 
Saskatchewan families now live in poverty, according to the 
National Council of Welfare — 43,000 Saskatchewan families. 
And so it shouldn’t surprise us when welfare rates haven’t been 
increased in the last eight years, and when there’s record 
numbers of people coming to the Saskatoon food bank, that the 
poverty rate in Saskatchewan is the second-highest in the 
country. 
 
Here, in the bread-basket of the world, food banks are a 
booming business. And they’re supported by the goodness of 
Saskatchewan people. And I say it’s time for Saskatchewan to 
have a government that’s as good as its people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koenker: — A government that is as good as the six or 
seven Lutheran ladies out in the community of Laird who give 
food to the food bank; a government that is good as the Shop 
Rite store owner in the community of Laird, Don Regier, who 
brings bones, soup bones into the Saskatoon food bank at his 
own expense because he realizes that there are people who are 
hungry right here in the bread-basket of the world. It’s time that 
we had a government that was as good as Don Regier. 
 
Rural people are doing their part. Urban people are doing their 
part to address some of these problems, but the government is 
doing nothing. This government . . . well I shouldn’t say it’s 
doing nothing; its doing the wrong thing. It’s got the wrong 
priorities, and that’s the problem with the government’s strategy 
for economic development. It’s doing the wrong thing. 
 
At a time when there’s record need, there’s $9 million for a 
provincial birthday party next year — $9 million on a birthday 
party. This government has $2 million to introduce a new 
plastic health card. And the people of the province should 
realize that, that it cost $2 million for that piece of plastic that 
they carry around in their wallet and purse. 
 
This is the government that has $46.6 million for political 
advertising over the last four years. And I want the people of 
Saskatchewan to ask themselves how much they thought they 
might think that SaskTel would have advertised with the firm 
Roberts & Poole, or Dome Advertising in the last four years. 
What would the figure be for SaskTel? Would it be 2 million, 3 
million, 4 million? Hardly. You’d have to go up to $6 million to 
get the total advertising just in SaskTel alone in the last four 
years — $6 million. 
 
Or SGI, the total there rings up to $5 million — $5 million for 
SGI. Four and a half million dollars worth of advertising in the 
last four years from Tourism and small business; two and a half 
million by SaskPower; two and a half million dollars from 
Economic Development and trade; two and a half million 
dollars in Health advertising in the last four years. 
 
And in fact, in this most recent provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan ought to know just how warped this 
government’s priorities are, that in this most recent budget 
projections from the PC government, the total for information 
services for the Department of Health — information services is 
a nice little cushy code term for PR, or advertising — that that 
figure goes up from $2.8 million to $4.8 million in this most 
recent budget. That’s money to buy votes, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
all it is. That’s $4.8 million that isn’t being put into rural 
Saskatchewan to diversify the rural economy. 
 
And I say that’s wrong, and that’s immoral, Mr. Speaker, at a 
time when people are having to leave the province because they 
can’t find work, or they’re having to come into the cities and go 
on welfare and line up at the food bank because they don’t have 
any opportunity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d say it’s also wrong, Mr. Speaker, and it’s immoral for this 
government to impose a tax on lotteries and bingos to  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

740 
 

fund health care — that this province should have to stoop to 
that low level. That is just patently absurd and is even immoral. 
 
What is even more disturbing, Mr. Speaker, and what really 
cripples this government’s ability to do anything good for its 
people, is what it’s done with the provincial debt. 
 
I want to close on this note, Mr. Speaker, and it isn’t a very 
happy note to close on. In this most recent spending estimates 
for ’89-90 from the Minister of Finance, on page 44 we have 
the figures for servicing the public debt, and the total allocation 
by the Minister of Finance for financing or servicing the public 
debt is $380 million this year alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, put that figure into perspective for people: that 
$380 million goes to pay interest on the public debt. That 
doesn’t pay the principal on the debt; that $380 million, not a 
cent of it goes to pay the interest on the debt. 
 
(2100) 
 
That $380 million is three times the entire provincial budget for 
Agriculture, would you believe? That $380 million, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact is more than this government spends on its 
Department of Social Services, its welfare. Mr. Speaker, $380 
million going for nothing, to service the provincial debt; to the 
banks, and that’s why rural Saskatchewan goes begging. I say 
that’s criminal. 
 
People in Saskatchewan should know that if we have a 
provincial debt where we’re paying interest of $380 million a 
year, that that translates pretty clearly, or simply, into a million 
dollars a day plus, for nothing — for absolutely nothing. That 
doesn’t even tackle the provincial debt, the principal. That’s just 
on interest charges — a million dollars a day that can’t go into 
rural Saskatchewan, that can’t go into health, that can’t go into 
highways or education or economic diversification for rural 
Saskatchewan, that can’t go into jobs. 
 
Another way of looking at it is, if this province has basically a 
million people, and it does, that’s a dollar a day to pay the 
interest alone on the provincial debt for every man, woman, and 
child in this province of Saskatchewan. For a family of four that 
means that they would have to set aside $4 on Monday, and 
four on Tuesday, and four on Wednesday, and four on Thursday 
and Friday and Saturday and Sunday — $28 a week, just to pay 
the interest on the provincial debt, for every family of four in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford that kind of 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — We can’t afford that kind of bankrupt 
government. We can’t afford the kind of morally bankrupt 
government that allows its people to go begging for food in the 
city streets — literally begging for food. And so for that reason, 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to second the motion that regrets 
that the government of Saskatchewan has failed to provide 
adequate and effective support and  

opportunity for economic development and job creation in rural 
communities. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to debate this motion introduced by 
the member from Regina North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in case it has escaped the notice of the members 
opposite, rural Saskatchewan has been decimated by a drought 
the last couple of years. Regardless, regardless of any 
government program that could be initiated, the best support in 
any rural business is a prosperous agricultural economy. Every 
rural community is based on agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and 
everyone in this province knows that no government has 
supported agriculture the way this government has. Their record 
is there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are the government that established a counselling and 
assistance program for farmers in 1984, and we extended it 
through the end of 1989. This program provides financial and 
management counselling and offers operating and consolidation 
loan guarantees to eligible farmers. 
 
In 1984 this government enacted The Farm (Land) Security 
Act, Mr. Speaker, to restrict foreclosure actions against farm 
land. This Act, Mr. Speaker, established the Farm Land 
Security Board to investigate foreclosure cases and to mediate 
settlements between farmers, lenders, where mediation has 
failed. And it will provide a report to court. It was extended, 
Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Act in 1988, to provide farm families further 
protection in debt recovery actions. 
 
The Act includes a three-year stay of proceedings with respect 
to actions against home quarters, a strengthened system of 
mediation, and a right to first refusal for farmers who lost their 
land to creditors. 
 
In 1988, Mr. Speaker, we announced the new investment loans 
program to provide long-term subsidized loans of up to $8 
million for farmers investing in joint livestock operations. 
 
And I’d like to talk in specifics, Mr. Speaker, about how this 
government helped farmers deal with last year’s drought. We 
employed the 39 million Canada-Saskatchewan livestock 
program; we participated in the $25 million 
Canada-Saskatchewan green feed program; we committed 8.5 
million to the Saskatchewan water supply and enrichment 
program, Mr. Speaker, and we organized the PFRA emergency 
water supply program. These initiatives were in addition to the 
$12 million of the federal program to develop new water 
supplies, and 850 million Canadian crop drought assistance 
program of which 427 million will come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Our commitment is continuing, Mr. Speaker. This year we have 
several new programs to add to the list. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when you read what the motion says, and if you have listened to 
what I have just quoted, you would  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

741 
 

wonder how the members opposite could advance a motion like 
this with a straight face. 
 
It says: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has failed to provide adequate and effective 
support and opportunity for economic development and job 
creation in rural communities. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the things that we 
have done, and just part of the money that’s been out there. And 
I have much more to say on this subject, Mr. Speaker, but at 
this time I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
I move adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to move 
down the order paper to government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
questions, Mr. Minister. I want to pick up where my colleague 
from Cumberland left off last night. He had asked you a 
question about, I believe, the assistant director of municipal 
affairs through the northern branch, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
could you indicate if this position has been filled by anyone 
else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the name of the position, if 
you’re talking about one Jonas Bird, who I was not familiar 
with until the question came up last evening — since then I 
have had an opportunity to talk to my officials — his position 
was the former education extension co-ordinator, and that has 
not been filled. And there’s a whole lot of reasons to what 
happened to his transfer of Parks. But basically, Mr. Bird did 
not want to leave the North, and through a search made in 
government, because of his knowledge of the North and the 
Cree language, we found a position for him in the Department 
of Parks and Recreation. 
 
I might mention, Mr. Chairman, too, that one other piece of 
unfinished business from last night my critic asked me for the 
1989 revenue-sharing grant distribution to the urban centres. 
It’s the only piece that’s unfinished. I have that available. I’ll 
ask the page to deliver it to the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, are you indicating that the 
position that one Jonas Bird held in municipal affairs, that that 
position was done away with by your  

department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The position just simply doesn’t exist any 
more. What we had up there was a couple of people working as 
co-ordinators in the North. And what happened was that as the 
work got caught up, there was no more need for that particular 
position so we moved one into Regina, and Mr. Bird we found a 
position for in Parks. So that there is no vacant position; it’s just 
that that position doesn’t exist any more. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I just 
want to touch on a couple other items in the estimates. And I 
see in subvote 5 that there has been $112,000 reduction over 
last year’s expenditures in northern municipal services. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could explain why the large 
reduction in that subvote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Basically it has to do 
with the reduction of those two positions. There was 62,500 
decreased in salaries, along with 18,000 associated travel. And 
also there was just a straight reduction of $20,000 in the number 
of miscellaneous professional services that have been 
contracted out that are no longer required now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have a number of standard questions that are asked 
every year, questions as to your staff, travel, advertising, 
polling, and the like. And I wonder if I might send these 
questions over to you and have you indicate before we adjourn 
tonight whether or not you are in a position to answer these 
questions, and if so, then fine, I’ll accept that you’ll get the 
information to us at an early opportunity. 
 
If you have problems with these questions, then let us know 
tonight and we may want to reword them or want to have some 
further discussion on those. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, when I see the questions, 
we might have all the information here. I’d rather put it on 
record now and wind up the business rather than have anything 
outstanding if I could. But I’ll have my officials check these 
questions while you’re continuing. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to go 
back, too, to an item that we were discussing last night. You 
will recall that we were discussing the question of shopping 
hours, store hours in Saskatchewan. And at one point during the 
discussion you alluded to a resolution that had come to the 
province, to the provincial government, from the city of Regina. 
And that particular resolution called upon the government of the 
day to consider turning over responsibilities for the regulation 
of shopping hours, to turn that over to municipalities. 
 
You left the impression, Mr. Minister, that somehow that I, as a 
member of the Regina city council at the time, had played a role 
in that, and that somehow that I was a party to this motion, that 
somehow I supported that motion. You left that impression. I 
asked you to table any  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

742 
 

documents that you might have in that regard that would back 
up your claim; you declined to do so. 
 
I want to give you one further opportunity, Mr. Minister, to set 
the record straight and to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
you have no information which suggests that I supported that 
motion or any way encouraged that motion. Can you do that 
tonight, Mr. Minister, and clear that up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there’s an old letter on file 
. . . a copy of an old, torn copy of which I’m looking at, of 
November ’81 that indicates that: 
 

The city council of Regina requests the Minister of Urban 
Affairs to amend section 167 so that municipalities may 
regulate the hours of business both as to when shops may 
open and close. 
 

And that Regina city council, a meeting held on September 14, 
1981, considered and adopted that motion. 
 
Now you served on city council in 1981. If you were not 
present at that meeting, then you may not have been part of that 
resolution. So I could stand to be corrected if you were not 
present at that September 14th council meeting. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know that I 
wasn’t present at that meeting; you know that I played no role 
in that motion. Somehow you tried to convey the impression 
last night that I had a role to play in that motion. 
 
I want to make it clear that my stand then, my stand now, is that 
I think that there’s a role to play for the provincial government 
in so far as it comes to regulating shopping hours on Sundays in 
this province. And although I’m a strong believer in local 
autonomy, I believe too that there’s a role for the provincial 
government to play, especially in matters of shopping hours 
where the decisions of one municipality may have an impact on 
other municipalities. And I think, therefore, that there is a role 
for the province, as there has always been in Saskatchewan — 
something that you do not choose to believe. 
 
I want to make it clear, Mr. Minister, that the motion that 
evening in Regina city council — and again, I wasn’t present — 
was put forward by a PC colleague of yours, one Tim Embury. 
And the first person to offer his support for the motion is 
another PC colleague of yours, one Larry Schneider. And the 
next person to vote for it was one Irwin Strass, another PC 
colleague of yours. 
 
So it’s clear then, that even then . . . And of course there was 
Ted Cholod . . . It was clear then that the PCs wanted to not 
have any provincial involvement in so far as shopping hours 
was concerned; wanted to throw it wide open; that it was the 
PCs on Regina city council that took that stand, and it wasn’t 
myself. 
 
And again, sir, I want to invite you to stand up and make it clear 
for all concerned that I was not a party to that motion, as you 
know now, that I was not a party to that motion, and that 
anything that you might have tried to  

convey last night about my having some responsibility was 
simply false. Can you stand up now and just make that clear for 
the public who might have been misled? Can you do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I have before me the 
information, or some information that indicates that on 
September 14, 1981, Regina city council considered and 
adopted that motion. If the member was not at that meeting, I 
don’t have that information before me. And if he indicates that 
he wasn’t at that meeting and did not vote on that resolution, 
then I will have to accept his word for it. 
 
But none the less, I will still say that Regina city council in 
September of 1981 passed that resolution, and that member at 
the time was indeed a member of the Regina city council. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I know the facts of the matter and 
the minister is relating the facts now. It’s unfortunate that last 
night he tried to relate a little bit more than the facts, Mr. 
Chairman. He also tried to convey some impression that 
somehow I was responsible for that motion, had a part to play in 
that. The record will show that I was not a party to that motion, 
had no involvement with it, and that he somehow tried to leave 
a different impression of that yesterday evening. 
 
He says that based on the information that he had, and now he 
says that might be some of the information, that he may have 
been wrong yesterday evening. I would suggest to him that, as a 
minister of the Crown, that he has a responsibility to make sure 
that he has all the facts before he opens up his mouth and tries 
to leave some impression about what it is that other people are 
doing. That’s something that I would encourage you to do, Mr. 
Minister; that is, to check out all the facts before you open up 
your mouth. 
 
With reference to the question that I sent over earlier, Mr. 
Minister, there is one thing I wanted to clear up. And that is that 
. . . It’s my understanding — and I want you to correct me if 
I’m wrong — it’s my understanding that you attended the 
annual convention of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association this year in late January, early February. And this is 
the custom of the Minister of Urban Affairs to always attend the 
annual convention of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, SUMA. I can’t think of a minister of Urban Affairs 
who has not been present in the province to attend the 
convention — that is a given that the minister attends. And 
generally ministers try not to be away from Saskatchewan so 
that they can make it their business to be readily available to 
attend the convention. Can you confirm for me, Mr. Minister, 
that in attending this year’s convention that you had to fly in, at 
government expense, from Hawaii? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, surely the member jests. 
Surely that’s not a legitimate question. That the government 
brought me to the convention from Hawaii is an absolutely 
absurd statement. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well answer the question, Mr. Minister. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

743 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think I answered it very 
clearly. No, the government did not bring me to the convention 
from Hawaii, definitely not. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister for clearing 
that up. 
 
I want to turn to the area of student employment and the 
Opportunities ’89 program. And the people of Saskatchewan 
will know, and the members of the Assembly will know, that 
the Opportunities ’89 program is a recurring program, takes 
place every year. It’s a program that the government has used 
over the years to encourage employers to hire a post-secondary 
student for 12 weeks, or high school students for a period of 
eight weeks. 
 
The grants are calculated to provide half the minimum wage. 
The intent is to provide student employment, and the 
government has played a very significant role in that over the 
years. 
 
One of the groups that was always assisted prior to 1987 was 
urban municipalities, and if urban municipalities had students 
that they wanted to engage for summer employment, then the 
government would assist them. And this made a lot of sense to 
urban municipalities as it did to students. Because urban 
municipalities, given some of the seasonal nature of their 
activities, always needed extra people during the summer 
months, extra people to help with things like recreation 
programs, extra people to help with things like public works 
programs; and especially, I would emphasize, in the area of 
recreation, where it was not possible to keep skilled people 
around for a full year, for activities that would simply only take 
place during the summer months. So that this was a partnership 
between the province and the municipalities that made a lot of 
sense to a lot of people. 
 
But the government started to discontinue the system of 
encouraging urban municipalities to hire students during the 
summer months. Beginning in 1987, assistance was still being 
made to businesses and to farmers in Saskatchewan, but the 
assistance was discontinued in 1987 for urban municipalities. In 
1987, Mr. Minister, I asked you concerning this matter, and I 
said at that time, and I want to quote from Hansard: 
 

This year you know that the Opportunities ’87 program 
was not available to municipalities. I wonder if you can 
assure municipalities that you will be making every effort 
to convince your colleagues in cabinet that they, in fact, 
made an unwise decision, and that next year there will be a 
summer student employment program that again 
municipalities can take advantage of. 
 

You then said, and I quote you, sir: 
 

Mr. Chairman, the member does bring up a good point. 
 

Then you go on to say — and you refer to municipalities: 
 

They have, in no uncertain terms, indicated their  

displeasure with that to me. And as the member points out 
again now, I can say that yes, again, when and if that 
program should ever be put in place, I will surely make 
representation on behalf of the municipalities to see if they 
could participate in it. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, you weren’t very successful in 1988, and I 
see that the Opportunities ’89 program has even less money for 
1989 than it did in ’88, and again urban municipalities cannot 
take advantage of the program. Can you tell us what happened 
in the cabinet table; can you tell us why you were unsuccessful 
in restoring this program for urban municipalities? 
 
You will know that more than 90 per cent of municipalities, 
when they were surveyed, said that this program makes a lot of 
sense to us; this is something that should be continued. Can you 
tell us what happened; can you tell us what happened to your 
good intentions of two years ago to argue for a restoration of 
that program with your cabinet colleagues? What happened, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously I can’t 
discuss what occurs around the cabinet table; I think the 
member is aware of that. The question is better suited to the 
Minister of Human Resources because he indeed is responsible 
for that program. And there are other areas that that minister has 
satisfied different municipalities, coupled with the fact that New 
Careers is also active in some areas of employment in the 
municipal area. 
 
Regarding the information that the member asked for, Mr. 
Chairman, the name, title, and salary of my personal staff, I 
have two gentlemen — one Steven Hurlburt, and one Warne 
Rhoades, both ministerial assistant 3’s, both earning $2,894 a 
month; and one Caroline Hudyma, a ministerial assistant C, at 
$2,003 a month. 
 
For 1988-89, the number of out-of-province trips taken by the 
minister — I took one. My destination was the municipal affairs 
conference in Quebec in the summer of 1988. The total amount 
spent by myself was $1,130.60, and I was accompanied by my 
deputy and assistant deputy ministers. 
 
For 1989-90, there is no amount budgeted for out-of-province 
travel. 
 
For 1988-89, the total amount spent by our department on 
advertising amounted to $122,250. Next year’s budget includes 
an estimate of $100,000. 
 
For polling and market research we spent zero, and we are 
budgeting zero for next year. 
 
And for charter aircraft last year, our costs were $51,140; for 
this year we are budgeting $63,520. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the minister for that information. 
 
Just getting back to student employment, am I to understand 
then that if urban municipalities have a  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

744 
 

concern in this area, that is to say with the shortcomings in the 
Opportunities ’89 program, that rather than asking you as the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, that you want to shuffle them off to 
your colleague, the member from Melville, the Minister of 
Human Resources; that you no longer care what it is that 
municipalities have to say to you about this program? Is that my 
understanding? Am I interpreting your remarks correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that it’s fair to say 
that all ministers have different areas of responsibility. It’s not 
unlike our capital funding, our revenue-sharing pool. There’s no 
question that the Minister of Finance has an awful lot to say 
with what is spent in the budget, and as much as we argue for 
our respective positions around the cabinet table, each minister 
has his own area of responsibility. 
 
The area that you’re talking about, about student employment, 
comes under the area of Human Resources. There are several 
programs that that minister operates under, and municipalities 
may take advantage of some and not take advantage of others. 
He is in the position to answer those questions much better than 
I. All I can do is encourage my colleague to try to include in his 
budget as much funding as he can for different areas that he’s 
looking at. And ultimately that’s his responsibility, and he has 
to be the judge. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, might I suggest, 
respectfully, going back to your remarks of two years ago, that 
you went to bat for municipalities around the cabinet table, that 
you struck out. And now you’re saying that if municipalities 
have any more pitches to make that they should throw them at 
the Minister of Human Resources because you want to back out 
of this one. 
 
I just want to tell, sir, that in case you’ve forgotten, that this 
program benefitted local governments, urban municipalities in 
Saskatchewan. They saw a lot of sense in this program, and 
frankly, a lot of young people who were helped through this 
program also saw a lot of sense in the program. 
 
A survey that we undertook less than a year ago suggests to us 
that municipalities very much want to see them participating in 
the summer student employment program. We asked them the 
question: do you agree with the government’s refusal to allow 
municipalities to participate in the opportunity summer student 
employment program? Two said yes, we agree. One hundred 
and seventeen said no. And when you break out the percentages 
it works out that 1.5 per cent agreed with your government’s 
position; 85 per cent said that they did not support what it is that 
you’re doing. 
 
We then asked them: would you hire more students if the 
Opportunities program were reinstated for municipalities? 
sixty-nine per cent said yes, 17 per cent said no, 14 per cent 
weren’t certain at that point. Again, I think you’ve blown an 
excellent opportunity to not only help urban municipalities but 
also to help young people in this province — a group of people, 
I would submit to you, sir, are in real desperate straits for 
employment opportunities because the employment 
opportunities simply aren’t there. They need the employment  

opportunities if they are to be able to have some chance of 
paying the heavy load, the heavy burden that’s for them there in 
our universities, or to be able to continue on in universities. 
 
And I submit to you that you struck out, you struck out on 
behalf of urban municipalities, and that now you’re passing the 
buck, and that, frankly, urban municipalities expected a lot 
more of you, sir, when you said two years ago that you were 
going to go to bat for them and that you were going to try and 
do whatever you could to restore the opportunities for urban 
municipalities to hire summer students under the Opportunities 
program. 
 
I want to turn to the question of hospital funding, if I might 
briefly. And that is to emphasize something that I think that you 
know, based on representations from the city of Regina. And 
they point out that in 1988 the city of Regina, pursuant to The 
Hospital Revenue (Tax) Act, is expected to pay in excess of $2 
million, $2.182 million towards the hospitals in the city of 
Regina. They point out that Saskatoon, on the other hand, 
budgeted to pay about $1 million as a voluntary levy towards 
the City Hospital, and Saskatoon and Prince Albert had smaller 
numbers. The cost per capita worked out to $12 in Regina, 
$5.45 in Saskatoon, $6.98 and $6.99 in Moose Jaw and Prince 
Albert, respectively. 
 
They simply make the case that the people of Regina are 
expected to pay almost twice as much as what the other large 
cities — the people in the other large cities — are expected to 
pay towards hospitals. They perceive this to be an inequity. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: does this budget begin in any way to 
address this inequity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I . . . There’s no way, 
that as much as I’d like to help the member with that, that I can 
respond to that. That’s totally in the Health budget. I think that I 
would advise my critic, the member from Regina Victoria, to 
bring up that question in the Health estimates, because there 
may be some mitigating circumstances that the Minister of 
Health can clarify that I can’t. 
 
I should point out as well, Mr. Chairman, that when I responded 
a few moments ago concerning the information that the member 
had sent over in his letter, that just for clarification purposes, 
those numbers were supplied to me by my officials. And I’d 
just like that to be in the record so that at some future point we 
can’t argue about who made them up, or whatever, but that was 
the information supplied by me by my officials tonight. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just might say, Mr. Minister, and this 
is not an issue that necessarily affects other municipalities, but 
it’s a matter of some significance, you can appreciate, to Regina 
city council, the matter of a million dollars — of some 
significance — and to the taxpayers, I would submit, in your 
own constituency of Regina South. I think it’s some 
disappointment to Regina city council, and after having raised 
this matter with you on occasion, to now have you say that . . . 
to not ask you, but to ask other ministers. Don’t you have any 
concern in this matter? Don’t you understand the implications 
for  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

745 
 

taxpayers in Regina? Can you not go to bat for them with the 
Minister of Health, or are you now also, in addition to being the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, the minister for buck passing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now that was brought up between myself 
and the minister, and I can report to you that my Minister of 
Health did indeed meet with the respective parties about that 
concern. And whether there is offsetting situations that he can 
explain, I am as deeply concerned for the taxpayers of my 
constituency as you are for those of your constituency, and 
indeed for those of the province. I think the Minister of Health 
has the adequate answers, and that’s where they should be 
addressed, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I’ll certainly convey that message 
back to the city of Regina that to not ask you about any 
assistance in this matter and that they should go to the Minister 
of Health; that you don’t care much for their problem, which is 
a substantial one. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year in your amendments to The Urban 
Municipalities Act, among the more interesting provisions was 
a provision that henceforth, commencing in 1989, 
Saskatchewan cities would be required to publish public 
accounts. You require them by law to publish on or before 
September 1 of a year, eight months after the close of the fiscal 
year, public accounts for that past fiscal year. 
 
Now I find it passing strange that a government such as yours, 
which has taken twice as long to table its own public accounts, 
would now be requiring urban municipalities to table public 
accounts in a period of eight months. Now my discussions with 
urban municipal officials suggest that they don’t have any real 
problem with the requirement that’s there in legislation and are 
anxious to comply, and have held discussions with your 
officials about how they might do that. And they want to, they 
want to fulfil the requirements of the legislation. But they do 
ask me, they say: can you explain to us why it is that in our city 
we’re being required to publish our public accounts by 
September 1 of the year; therefore, to publish our public 
accounts eight months after the close of the fiscal year, when 
the Minister of Finance for the province of Saskatchewan will 
take 16 months to do the same thing. 
 
I wonder, do you have any explanation in this matter for them, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess all I can tell 
you is that as is the norm with our department, we believe in 
consultation, and my officials sat down with the officials of the 
cities. And on discussion with what we were trying to 
accomplish, the format and the timetable were agreed to, no 
problem. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, I’ve made that clear, that they 
agree with the legislation and that they want to fulfil the 
requirements of the legislation. That’s not the question in 
dispute here. I guess I might word it differently, and that is, can 
you take the message from urban municipalities, Mr. Minister, 
can you take the message to the Minister of Finance and tell 
him that urban municipalities want to do  

the very best job they can in terms of publishing the public 
accounts, but frankly do not appreciate a double standard in 
Saskatchewan. Can you take that message to the Minister of 
Finance for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I believe that your request will be on the 
record, and I will point it out to my colleague. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And while you’re doing that, Mr. 
Minister, can you also point out another little double standard? 
Now one of the things that you’ve asked municipalities to do is 
to publish a supplementary public accounts, which will show 
the aggregate of all moneys going to an individual from all 
departments. 
 
Now the province’s Public Accounts will list the moneys going 
to an individual from a particular department. The province 
used to also publish the aggregate amount going to individuals; 
for example, Public Accounts now list payees, money going to 
individuals where the pay-out is more than, I believe, $10,000. 
But anyone who is getting less than $10,000, say $9,000, that 
wouldn’t be published. You could have an individual who 
might be getting $9,000 from 15 different departments and we 
wouldn’t know about it. That information wouldn’t be 
published. 
 
Now it used to be published, something that the NDP 
government brought in at the request of the PC opposition of 
the day. It is something that used to be published, but your 
government decided that it no longer wanted to publish that 
information. You are asking municipalities to publish that kind 
of information, and again I wonder if you might also point out 
this little double standard to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that that’s up to 
the committee to establish how they choose to operate and the 
information that they choose to get, but again, I will point out 
the member’s opinion to my colleague. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I thank the minister for that, in his 
recognition that there is, in fact, a double standard existing in 
Saskatchewan. It’s taken quite a while to get any admission 
from your government that it is, in fact, in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t have a great number more questions, just 
one on a personal note. I note that you’ve quit smoking, sir. 
This is something that’s known to members of the House, and I 
congratulate you on that. I know that from personal experience 
that this is a tough, a difficult thing to do, and I congratulate 
you on your courage and in doing that. 
 
And in this vein I want to ask you, would it be possible to 
encourage your officials to draft model by-laws for 
municipalities that might want to encourage — or discourage 
smoking in public places in Saskatchewan, to make available to 
them model by-laws? Not to tell municipalities you have to put 
a by-law into place, or force them to do anything like that, but 
simply to point out to them that, if you’re interested in doing 
this, because many larger municipalities have done so, we have 
for you  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

746 
 

a number of model by-laws that you may want to look at, that 
you may want to implement in your own municipality as one 
way again of discouraging smoking in public places, and 
hopefully, more importantly, to encourage more people to kick 
the habit. 
 
And Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’ve had any discussions on 
that with your officials, if that’s something that you might 
entertain and undertake to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, I’m not sure yet, I don’t know that if 
I’ve made it yet or not. I don’t think that I really quit smoking 
so much as that I haven’t had a cigarette for 25 days. 
 
But part of our regular service to municipalities is to provide 
that kind of service. I don’t think that it’s fair for us to impose 
or suggest to any municipality what they choose to do. But 
certainly, if they require any help in by-laws, we’re willing to 
provide that service, and it’s not unlike the earlier conversation 
that we had regarding other ones. 
 
We can’t take it upon ourselves to indicate that that by-law is 
accurate. We would help them draft it up and still recommend 
that they see their own legal advisers to ensure that it indeed is a 
by-law that they can defend. But it’s part of our regular service, 
and we would have no trouble doing that at all if the 
municipality asked for it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I thank the minister for that. Mr. 
Chairman, at the outset yesterday when we started these 
deliberations, I said that urban municipalities, the people of 
Saskatchewan, simply were not impressed with the kind of 
stewardship that this government has shown in the area of urban 
affairs; that people were less than impressed with a situation in 
which they saw property taxes increasing, net property taxes 
increasing in Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t want to take a great deal of time, Mr. Chairman, but I 
think the public and the people of Saskatchewan, especially 
those in urban government, want to have some yardstick with 
which to measure this government on how well it has done in so 
far as Urban Affairs is concerned. 
 
And I want to turn the attention of the Assembly and that of the 
public back to 1982, and more particularly to April of ’82, 
during a provincial election campaign that saw the election, for 
the first time, of a PC government — in modern times — saw 
the election of that government at that time. 
 
And part of their program of that time, part of their program of 
that time was the following declaration, something that they’d 
made to the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
And they said to the (Saskatchewan) Urban Municipalities 
Association — and after years in opposition, and after years of 
studying the whole question of urban affairs, after becoming 
thoroughly familiar with the area of urban affairs — we want to 
declare the following to you urban municipalities. Because 
these are the objectives, these are the principles that will guide 
us in our years as government. 
 

And I quote to you from the letter that was sent on April 19 to 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
 

We are in favour of unconditional grants as opposed to 
conditional grants. We feel that unconditional grants allow 
municipalities to establish their own priorities. In view of 
this, we favour ongoing capital grants assistance with 
appropriate annual adjustments similar to the operating 
grant program. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, we certainly have gone a long way in the 
opposite direction, haven’t we? Here you are proudly 
proclaiming in 1982 that capital grants were to be adjusted on 
an annual basis, that grants should be made to the extent that it 
was possible on an unconditional basis; that is to say, to 
encourage municipalities to make their own decisions. 
 
Now you’re taking the point of view that it’s your priorities that 
should prevail, not the local priorities. At least that’s the 
message that you’ve been giving us. 
 
When you talked about “we favour ongoing capital grants 
assistance with appropriate annual adjustments,” I don’t think 
there was one municipality in Saskatchewan that interpreted 
your phrase “appropriate annual adjustments” to mean that you 
were going to discontinue the program for a period of two 
years. When you said appropriate annual adjustments, they 
thought that you meant that you would be making inflationary 
increases or appropriate increases to the capital grants program, 
not to cut it out entirely for a period of two years. And then 
when you do bring it back, it’s less than when . . . it’s less of a 
program than when you assumed power in 1982. 
 
Now there’s another commitment that you made in 1982 in this 
letter to SUMA, and that is, and I quote your letter: 
 

It is our view that the Crown should pay full grants in lieu 
of taxes on all of its property in the same manner and to the 
extent as an ordinary taxpayer of the province. 
 

Well we know that that’s been an empty promise. You said that 
you believed that government departments should pay their fair 
share, and it’s something that you said about the NDP, about the 
NDP administration, that they weren’t doing that and you were 
going to right that wrong. 
 
Well here we are, Mr. Minister, seven years later, seven years 
later. You said this on April 19, 1982. Here it is April 11 of 
1989, seven years later — seven years later, and you’re still not 
paying full grants in lieu of taxes on all the properties that you 
own in the province of Saskatchewan. This matter has been 
repeatedly brought to your attention by municipalities. This is a 
matter that was fully researched by your own Local 
Government Finance Commission who also strongly 
recommended that you do this. You still haven’t done it. 
 
You also said in your letter that: 
 

We believe that the burden of education costs and the 
property tax should be reduced. Some  

  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

747 
 

members of our party are on the record in favour of the 
elimination of this tax from property, period. 
 

Now anyone reading that, or anyone hearing that, would assume 
that you’re in favour of reducing property taxes. 
 
There was a program in place called the property improvement 
grant which was intended, intended to ease the property tax 
burden for property taxpayers in Saskatchewan, a program that 
especially benefitted those with the least ability to pay. You’ve 
had seven years, seven years to fulfil that promise, but you’ve 
gone in the opposite direction. 
 
We’ve gone from a situation where the net property tax load in 
Saskatchewan was a reasonable one compared to other 
provinces, to one where it’s now the third highest in all of 
Canada. And those are not my figures, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Chairman, those are the figures of your own Local Government 
Finance Commission — your own commission, your own 
people. 
 
And so I ask, I ask the public of Saskatchewan that if they want 
to judge the government’s record, the record of the PC 
government in so far as urban affairs is concerned, I ask them to 
judge this government by the promises that they made in 1982 
when they were elected. 
 
And they promised to do a number of things that, simply, they 
have not lived up to; they’ve gone in the opposite direction. 
They will offer any number of excuses about why they haven’t 
been able to live up to their promises, but the bottom line 
remains that you made those promises. You thought you could 
fulfil them. You didn’t do it. You don’t deserve to be re-elected 
as a government in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 12 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask if you’ve 
given any consideration to changes to The Planning and 
Development Act with respect to redevelopment charges, so 
that the urban municipalities would be allowed to collect 
off-site service charges, rather than just the direct service 
charges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, that was a new resolution 
passed at SUMA, and it’s under consideration at this time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, my understanding is that 
SUMA has been asking for that change for quite a number of 
years, that it’s not just a new resolution. And I’m wondering 
why you haven’t taken steps to act on that kind of resolution 
from SUMA and are still studying it. What’s the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my officials advise me that 
it’s a complicated issue that requires some study, and it’s under 
consideration at this time. 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Well perhaps the minister could just simply 
enlighten us very briefly as to what the problem is. If it’s 
complicated, what’s the sticking point? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, basically what it does is put 
extra charges on new developments, and while the 
municipalities may be interested in that, I can tell you that home 
builders and developers are not. So it’s a delicate balance. It 
requires discussion with several interest groups because, you 
know, we don’t want to do one thing on one hand and do 
something on the other hand. 
 
As everybody knows, we’re having a great deal of difficulty in 
our province right now with home starts. And I think that 
everything that we can do at the present time to encourage 
keeping that price of homes down is what we should be looking 
at. So it’s fair to say that if there was more pressures put on the 
home builders than we presently have, that would just 
complicate the situation more. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, what you’re really saying is 
that you don’t trust urban municipalities. I’d like to ask you 
another question relative to the sales tax applying to the 
municipalities, particularly as it pertains to major projects and 
the sales tax being levied or charged to municipalities for that. 
Have you given any consideration to amending that and giving 
urban municipalities a break in the sales tax for major projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I want to clarify 
something that . . . Don’t put words in my mouth. I didn’t say 
that I don’t trust municipalities at all. I said it’s a matter of 
consultation between municipalities, home builders, and 
developers. There’s a whole lot of difference between that and 
trust, so don’t be quite so loose with what you’re saying that 
I’ve said, because I never said that I don’t trust municipalities. 
 
The other thing, as it relates to taxes, Mr. Chairman, obviously 
that’s a question for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us 
whether your department is planning any steps with respect to 
the promotion of the use of passive solar energy in new 
subdivisions? Are you encouraging municipalities around this 
province to design their subdivisions in such a way that the 
streets will be laid out so as to afford homes good access to 
sunlight, so that home owners who want to build 
energy-conserving houses, and who want to design them in 
such a way that they could take maximum use of sunlight in this 
province are able to do that? 
 
Because at this point in time, Mr. Minister, street designs and 
subdivision designs make it very difficult for a lot of new home 
owners to integrate solar technology into the design of their 
buildings, and I’m wondering what steps you are contemplating 
to rectify this difficulty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, our regulations presently 
permit some of what the member asked about. I’m not sure that 
the minimum standards for solar use might be included in that, 
but certainly it would be the  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

748 
 

municipality’s decision in any event, and if a municipality were 
to ask for that, and we could put it into the regulation, I don’t 
suppose that we’d have much difficulty with it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, what you should be looking at is 
legislation in the area of — for instance, many U.S. states have 
passed right-to-sunlight legislation in their states, that 
guarantees home owners access to sunlight; ensures that, for 
instance, construction will not take place adjacent to the home 
that will cut off their access to solar energy. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, should be encouraging municipalities across 
this province to implement subdivision designs that will 
specifically enhance the ability of home owners to make 
maximum use of sunlight in this province. Many U.S. states 
have been doing that as well, Mr. Minister. We’ve got 
municipalities in Ontario — Brampton is a good example — 
that are now starting to lay out their subdivisions so that home 
owners can make use of one of the best and most natural 
resources that we have in Canada, and that is access to sunlight. 
 
And this province, Mr. Minister, has better access to sunlight 
than any other province in Canada, and yet your government, 
Mr. Minister, has cut back on all the energy conservation 
programs that used to be in place under the NDP in the late 
1970s and early 1980s, and has done nothing at all to encourage 
and support municipalities in making use of solar energy. 
 
And I ask you again, Mr. Minister, when is your government 
going to take the obvious step to promote solar energy and to 
support municipalities in doing that, and to develop model 
by-laws that municipalities across this province could put into 
effect that would begin to encourage the use of solar energy in 
subdivisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I have been advised that our 
regulations do permit and encourage exactly that. As far as it 
relates to the larger municipalities, however, they control their 
own regulations. 
 
Item 12 agreed to. 
 
Items 13 and 14 agreed to. 
 
Item 15 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Rural Development/Urban Affairs 
Vote 66 

 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Urban Affairs 

Vote 162 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 162 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my 
officials. I think that they were able to supply us with the 
technical questions and the numbers that the opposition asked 
for. And I’d like to thank the opposition members for the 
questions and for dealing with my departments in an efficient 
manner. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the 
Assembly and the public will know that our side of the House 
and that side of the House will have a very strong difference of 
opinion in so far as Urban Affairs is concerned in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe that that government simply has not fulfilled the 
mandate that they set out for themselves in 1982. We appreciate 
that the . . . and I think urban municipalities appreciate that the 
minister is doing the very best that he can. Frankly . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The estimates for Urban 
Affairs are finished. There’s certainly opportunity to thank the 
officials. There’s no opportunity for a wrap-up. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was just 
getting around to that, but I wanted to say that both sides of the 
House will agree that the minister’s officials have done a good 
job for urban government and for the people of Saskatchewan 
over the years, and we thank their participation in these 
estimates. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:12 p.m. 


