


















































March 22, 1898 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 22, 1989 

321 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure that I introduce to you, and to all members of 
the Assembly, some 15 grade 6 students from the Pense School; 
they’re in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Mrs. Debbie Quinlan, chaperons, Mrs. Marie Whaley 
and Mr. Dave Ounsworth. I look forward, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the hon. member from Thunder Creek, Mr. Swenson, 
to meet with these students after question period and join with 
them for, as I say, questions and refreshments. I ask all hon. 
members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in welcoming the 
students from Pense. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, two people who reside in my constituency, James 
Mills and Jim Geddes. They’re here in Regina as part of their 
union’s attempt to increase the number of qualified journeymen 
carpenters in Saskatchewan. They are members of the 
International Brotherhood of Carpenters (and Joiners). I’d like 
to welcome them to the legislature and wish them all the best in 
their endeavours to teach Saskatchewan young people to 
become qualified carpenters. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cut-Backs in the Regina Separate School System 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, last night the Regina 
Catholic School Board announced the closing of six schools in 
the city of Regina — two high schools and four elementary 
schools. Today the Leader-Post carries a story of those 
closures, and the headlines I want to put on the record, Mr. 
Speaker, are: Closure stuns students, parents. Students feel 
betrayed by closing of schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is the tragic result of your cutting of the 
provincial share of funding for education in this province. It’s a 
betrayal of the education needs of our children by your 
government. In view of the fact, Mr. Minister, that in 1978 the 
provincial grants to this school board covered sixty-three and a 
half per cent of the costs of educating children in that school 
system, and in 1988 that was only 44 per cent; and in view of 
the fact that you have obviously shifted 20 per cent of the 
educational tax burden from the province to the school board 
and the property taxpayers, would you then care to explain to 
the parents and to the students who will no longer be able to 
attend Marian and Sister McGuigan high schools, St. Anne, St. 
Joseph, St. Patrick and St. Paul’s schools, how you are 
preparing our education system for the 21st  

century with that kind of massive cut-back? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
school closures, what schools are going to have what grades in 
them, or for that matter where the school buses are going to run, 
as you well know, that’s a decision of the locally elected school 
boards, and these are not ever easy decisions and there is 
always a lot of emotion surrounding them. However, I do 
respect that these people are duly elected. 
 
Now the hon. member tries to suggest that somehow they are 
having to grapple with these closures as a result of government 
cut-backs, provincial cut-backs to education. The reality is, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not true. He brings forth statistics about the 
percentage of provincial funding that that board receives, and he 
knows, Mr. Speaker, that that is based on a formula. And for 
every example that he will bring forward where the provincial 
share has gone up or down, it’s because there’s been a formula 
that’s been agreed to by all trustees across the province. 
 
Because you’ll bring that example in about 63 to 44, I will bring 
examples in here where the funding is 99 per cent provincial, 1 
per cent local. Northern Lights School Board would be a good 
starter, because that formula is based on the ability to pay. And 
the reality is, in Regina they have a broader tax base and they 
have a larger tax base to draw upon, whereas somebody, for 
example, in northern Saskatchewan may not. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that with the exception of one year, 
the amount of money that we’ve spent on education in this 
province has risen every year and has risen dramatically even 
through tough times, Mr. Speaker. And that is a fact. Or to put it 
another way, Mr. Speaker, to put it another way, per-pupil 
spending in the last seven years of this administration has gone 
up 60 per cent per pupil, 60 per cent per pupil, Mr. Speaker, and 
the number of students has basically remained stable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, the Regina Catholic school board will 
need an additional $1 million a year to keep those schools open. 
That means about $838 per student a year. If you would stop 
wasting $34,000 a day on leasing empty office space for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, you would be able to find $800 
per student a year to keep these schools open and keep our 
education system the way it should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — When are you going to get your priorities 
straight and begin to put our children first instead of your 
politics first? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, our government  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

322 
 

does have our priorities in the right places for the children in 
this province, and our spending would indicate that. Health, 
education — the two things that people like to see sustained 
through good times or through bad times, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is exactly the position of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, the school board that we refer to has 
done a study of its financial situation and that study tells the 
whole story. I quote for you one section of that report in which 
it says, I quote: 
 

Surpluses built up in the ’70s and the early ’80s have been 
used up. We operate with no provision for contingencies. 
 

Mr. Minister, they’re up against the wall. Under a New 
Democratic government our schools built up contingency funds. 
Under your administration they have eaten up those surpluses, 
and they’re faced either with running up massive deficits, as 
you have done, or closing schools. And you have the audacity 
to talk about using education as a tool for the future? 
 
Mr. Minister, even you know that to provide education we’ve 
got to have schools. And so I ask you: will you stand up in this 
House today, and will you assure school boards and parents and 
our students that in next week’s budget address this crisis in 
education will provide the funds necessary to ensure that our 
schools have the money they need to educate our children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I will stack our record 
up, the PC record in education compared to the NDP record, 
any day. And if you’d care to check what happened during the 
NDP years of the ’70s and look at the mill rate increases that 
were thrust upon local boards when they NDP were in because 
they squeezed the life out of them, forced it back onto the 
locals, Mr. Speaker, you will see that those mill rate increases 
far outstrip anything that’s happened during this administration. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, do we want to go back to the NDP 
days? I say no. The NDP days did . . . under the NDP there was 
not a $150 million fund put in place to buy computers for our 
schools, Mr. Speaker, to buy books for our libraries, and to help 
handicapped children get a better education. There wasn’t that 
fund under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The facts are: 60 per cent increase in spending, inflation was 
only 40 per cent during the same time, and the number of 
children in our schools has basically stayed level at 200,000. 
The facts speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker, and we stand by 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before the next series of questions and 
answers, I would just like to bring to the attention of the House 
— I think we all agree that we have an element of  

debate going on, and I’d like to ask the future questioners and 
those who answer the questions to be more in keeping with the 
spirit of question period. 
 

Grants to School Divisions 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Minister of Education. I 
think that Minister of Education is the only person in 
Saskatchewan that doesn’t want to go back to the good old days 
of the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, from 1981 to 1988 your 
government’s grants to school divisions dropped from 55 per 
cent to 49 per cent of total school board revenue. In fact, Mr. 
Minister, your funding has dropped by more than $3 million 
even before inflation is taken into account since the 1986-87 
year. 
 
In the face of your cut-backs, boards of education across this 
province have tried to minimize the impact on the individual 
taxpayer by dipping into the reserves and by reducing teachers 
and programs, and they’ve still had to increase school taxes in 
spite of their reductions in expenditures. 
 
You say your government is committed to education. The facts 
show they are not. Why don’t you stand up and tell the Minister 
of Finance that the future of our young people is in education 
and not in birthday parties? Why don’t you put your money 
where your mouth is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question is: do 
we want to go back to a situation where in ’74-75 or ’79-80, to 
use the example the other hon. member used, where provincial 
funding for kindergarten to grade 12, Mr. Speaker, was 120 
million in ’74-75 or 228 millions of dollars in ’79-80, or do we 
want to continue onward and upward with numbers well into 
the 450 millions of dollars under this administration, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
But let’s set the rhetoric aside. I mean, we’ve heard terms like 
betrayal. We’ve heard terms like crisis, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
sheer overstatement. Sheer overstatement. Is it not a fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that you can always use more money in education? I 
mean, we could always use more money. And I think the fact 
that last year we took four out of our new five tax-generated 
dollars and spent them in areas like health and education — that 
speaks directly to our priorities, Mr. Speaker; the fact that over 
the last six years in the very school district they ask about that 
there’s been over $15 million of provincial dollars into their 
capital projects over and above the operating grants, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That speaks very well to the kind of commitment we have in 
education, whether it’s in Regina, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s La 
Ronge, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in Nipawin, Swift Current, 
Maple Creek, Halbrite, or Midale, we are committed to the 
education of these children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 22, 1989 

323 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Mr. Minister, why don’t you 
tell all of that to the 1,200 students that are going to have to go 
to another school because of your government’s underfunding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, your government has given us 
school closures, increased student-teacher ratios, crowded 
class-rooms, teacher walk-outs, enrolment quotas, and 
cut-backs in services to students who are most in need. Won’t 
you admit, Mr. Minister, that our young people deserve better? 
Won’t you admit, Mr. Minister, that your underfunding is 
depriving our young people of the future that they so much 
need, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member mentioned 
pupil-teacher ratios, Mr. Speaker. And I think we’re all agreed 
that any class-room that has 35 or 40 students in it is an 
undesirable teaching situation. But the reality is, the reality is, 
Mr. Speaker, in 1985 the pupil-teacher ratio in this province 
was 16.8 and today it’s 16.5:1. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — What I was trying to show with those 
numbers, Mr. Speaker, is that the pupil-teacher ratio is in fact is 
going down across the province. Am I satisfied with that, Mr. 
Speaker? The answer is no, because that probably doesn’t 
reflect some of the realities these class-room teachers are faced 
with — the realities of drug and alcohol abuse and substance 
abuse, and the pressures that that puts on class-room teachers. 
So could we use even more help for the class-room teacher? 
You bet. 
 
But the hon. member is clearly off target when she suggests that 
there’s been cut-backs and a pupil-teacher ratio that’s 
expanding. And I want to make sure that the facts are before the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, and that the hon. member is clearly off 
the mark with that accusation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Payment Program 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier. 
The Minister of Agriculture knows that on top of all of the 
major agricultural problems that are facing the farmers today in 
Saskatchewan — in fact another one yet today, the bank rate 
has gone up yet again, up about four points in one year to 
something like 12.4 per cent — on top of all these serious major 
agricultural problems that our farmers are facing is the dilemma 
and the inadequacy and what can only be described as the badly 
bungled drought payment program. 
 
Now in making the announcement, Mr. Mazankowski of 
Ottawa said that the drought payment program would be cost 
shared equally by the provinces on a 50-50 basis. My  

question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: will you confirm that in 
fact there was an agreement between you as Premier and 
Minister of Agriculture, on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and Mr. Mazankowski, representing the federal 
government, for a cost share based equally, 50-50, and that 
since that agreement you and your government have reneged on 
it? And if that’s not the case, then why did you not take 
objection to Mr. Mazankowski’s statement of the 50-50 
agreement before this time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to interest rate 
protection for farmers, we have several programs out, and you 
will see in the budget that we will continue to provide new 
programs for agriculture, particularly for farmers that are facing 
high interest payments and who are faced with the drought 
program. 
 
With respect to the federal announcement, I never heard Mr. 
Mazankowski come out and say that it’s going to be cost shared 
50-50. If he did say that, I would say that I disagreed with it. It 
is not the case. There’s never been an agreement that that’s been 
the case. So I can flatly deny it today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve said to the hon. member before in question period, we have 
cost shared programs before. We’ve looked after 
administration. In some cases we’ve gone on a share, like the 
livestock program where it was cost shared between the feds 
and us. This, Mr. Speaker, is something that we’re examining 
with the federal government and I will be glad to report 
progress to the hon. member when in fact we’ve finished those 
negotiations. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. He has told the House 
today, I think for the first time, that the provincial government 
is not going to cost share on a 50-50 basis. 
 
I want to ask the Minister of Agriculture this. If that’s the case, 
namely that the arrangements of cost sharing were not finalized 
at the time of the announcement of the drought payment 
program in the middle of the federal election in November, why 
wasn’t that fact made known? Why wasn’t the fact that the 
provincial government in Regina, being in disagreement with 
Ottawa on the degree of the cost sharing, made known to the 
farmers Saskatchewan at that time? And if it isn’t 50-50, what 
amount of money are you prepared to offer in order to get this 
program up and running so that the farmers can get their much 
needed payments at this point? What is the payment that you 
advocate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the payments are in the 
neighbourhood $850 million, with the majority of that coming 
to the province of Saskatchewan. And the federal government 
has said that, and the members of parliament are saying that. 
The initial payment is $12 and $7, and the final payment will 
depend on if you’re in the real severe drought area. Could be as 
high as $40, $45. 
 
Now they’ve got the forms out and they’re filling them in.  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

324 
 

They said they’d have an initial payment and a final payment. 
The total amount of money is $800-and-some million, most of it 
coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we said that we would help in terms of administration, and 
they’re asking us to help more and more with respect to 
finances. I’m saying, we’re talking about it. The total package is 
going to be same, regardless. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question, perhaps a 
supplementary question to the Minister of Agriculture. The 
Minister of Agriculture, will he please tell the House: what are 
the sticking points in the negotiations? Why is it that for four 
months now you’ve been negotiating with Mr. Mazankowski 
and Mr. Mayer and virtually every other federal minister, and 
there’s still no agreement? Why is it after four months that you 
and your government is incapable and/or unwilling to come to a 
satisfactory agreement? What are the sticking points? Give us 
the precise details. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the hon. member 
knows that this is a national program. And I don’t think he’s 
heard of any agreements between Ontario and the federal 
government, or Quebec and the federal government, or 
Manitoba or Alberta or British Columbia. There haven’t been 
any agreements. This is a federal program. This is a national 
program, initiated by the federal government and the national 
government. 
 
They want help from us through crop insurance information, 
they want help from us through administration, and they’re 
asking for money with respect to financing the project. It’s a 
national program. All the provinces are involved one way or 
another. We are finally deciding to what extent we can help 
with respect to information out of crop insurance; how we can 
help with respect to administration and/or finance. 
 
So he hasn’t heard anybody come to any solution. It’s a national 
program; they decided to do it; we said that we would be there 
and help them where we can and where we thought it was 
reasonable. All the provinces are in the same boat. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Agriculture. And with the greatest of respect to the Minister 
of Agriculture, he can treat me with little respect in that kind of 
an answer, but please don’t insult the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I know that this is a national program. I 
know that it’s a federal provincial cost-sharing program. I know 
that. I’m not in the House of Commons; I’m not in the Alberta 
legislature; I’m not in the Manitoba legislature — I’m in the 
Saskatchewan legislature, and I am asking you, sir, as the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, what your position is 
and what the sticking points are from your point of view that 
prevent this deal coming to conclusion earlier than up to now, 
four months in delay. What are the sticking points from your 
point of view? You can give us those answers, surely. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the national program is 
unfolding under the complete national administration after they 
accept the information received from crop insurance. And now 
they’ve got the forms out. It has nothing to do with these 
negotiations at all. The program is designed on the basis of crop 
insurance data. It is in. In fact, our crop insurance data is in 
ahead of other provinces, and they will tell you that. So we’re 
co-operating as much as possible. 
 
Now if the hon. member says that Saskatchewan taxpayers 
should bail out the federal government and fund this program, I 
disagree with him. The NDP might be saying that; maybe the 
Leader of the Opposition’s going to say, well we’ll just go tax 
the farmers to pay for their own drought program. If he’s saying 
that, Mr. Speaker, I disagree with him. 
 
This is a national program, and the majority of the money’s 
going to come out of the national government, and as long as 
I’m the Premier of the province, on a national program, the 
federal government will pay the lion’s share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to 
the Minister of Agriculture and Premier, and I disagree with 
him. He hasn’t got money for a drought program for farmers, 
but he’s got money for a Future Corporation $9 million birthday 
party. He’s got money for Joytec and the boondoggles there. 
He’s got money for the Rafferty boondoggles, but he doesn’t 
have money for the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
Yes, I do object to you. 
 
I want to ask this question, Mr. Speaker, of the Minister. Why is 
it, Mr. Minister, that you can explain . . . how is it that you can 
explain that four months ago you promised the farmers of this 
province that they’d get 40 to $45 per acre payment? They’d get 
it early in 1989, the forms would be there early in 1989. There 
would be no hassle because they had the problems, faced not 
only with respect to high interest rates and operating costs, but 
the spring seeding plans. Why is it that you made those 
promises then and you’re not able to fulfil them now and, worse 
yet, you’re not even intending to fight for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. What’s the change? Why the change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition perhaps has a short memory. I can say you . . . I 
mean, he talks about $9 million for this and he’ll talk about $3 
million for that. We’ve put $1.2 billion out, more than the 
whole federal program, to help farmers. We’ve got a low 
interest rate program. 
 
On the last program, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the deficiency 
payment, it was a complete gift right across the province of 
Saskatchewan that went to everybody, universal, and the 
members opposite stood up and say:  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

325 
 

well you can’t have universal programs. And we provided 
assistance to every single, solitary person that had a wheat 
board permit book, and they complained about that. Now we 
went to the federal government and said, get a drought program 
out here that will be $850 million — the lion’s share coming to 
Saskatchewan — and they’re complaining about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We just put practically $100 million in a new agriculture 
college, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got programs that are cash 
advance at zero per cent interest rates; we’ve got nine and three 
quarters; we’ve got 8 per cent money; we’ve got 6 per cent 
money out for farmers, like they’d never seen before. And the 
Leader of the Opposition stands up, stands up, Mr. Speaker, 
because he was burnt a little bit for his own actions on farmers, 
and he’s standing up and says, well you haven’t delivered for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I’ll put our money and our interest rate packages and the cash in 
farmers’ hands up against that member’s record, at 20 per cent 
interest rates, or his own actions in foreclosures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. And I say to the Premier that if he says I’m concerned 
and angry, he’s doggone right, I am concerned and angry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Premier, I am, because you promised the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, you promised the farmers of Saskatchewan, you 
gave them their word, you gave them their solemn word that 
you would give them the drought payment, and you betrayed 
them personally, Mr. Minister, and you’re doggone right, I’m 
angry about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And my question to you is, sir, how in the 
world it is that you can get up now, four months after making 
this promise, how in the world it is that you can get up now and 
blame everybody, make speeches which are six or seven years 
old and watch those farmers go belly up because of your 
inattention to detail? I’m saying to the minister, why don’t you 
take a piece of advice from the Premier — the Premier should 
fire the Minister of Agriculture and get a minister full-time to 
do the job for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think spring must have hit 
the opposition side of the legislature this afternoon. The hon. 
member . . . I can recall the hon. member putting his cowboy 
hat on backwards and said, anything for the farm vote. And he 
got out there, Mr. Speaker, and they all denied him any kind of 
support, all across the province of Saskatchewan. They did it in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and they did it in ’82, and they did it 
in ’86, and they will in 1990, Mr. Speaker, because all the fancy 
talk and all the rhetoric and all the things that  

the NDP propose from land bank to all the kinds of things that 
they were going to do to limit farm size are not acceptable. 
 
And we haven’t heard one new farm policy, not one new farm 
policy coming from the NDP. The same old line: don’t worry 
that we haven’t got a farm policy; this phoney medicare stuff 
works all the time. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan have figured it out. There’s no agriculture policy 
over there; it’s all here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before ministerial statements, I 
would like to request leave of the House to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I’d like to introduce some guests to the 
Assembly this afternoon from the town Raymore. There are six 
grade 12 students, accompanied by their teacher, Cheri Jordan. 
They’re taking a Law 30 class, and they’ve been paying a visit 
to Regina today. They have visited the court-house this 
morning. I have arranged for them to visit with the Clerks this 
afternoon, and now they have witnessed question period. I hope 
they have enjoyed it. I would like all hon. members to please 
welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — I will be meeting with them in a few 
minutes for pictures and drinks and a short discussion. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act respecting the Protection of Children 
and the Provision of Support Services to Families 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Protection of Children and the Provision of 
Support Services to Families. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 8 — An Act to Promote the Growth and 
Development of Children and to Support the Provision of 
Child Care Services to Saskatchewan Families 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to Promote the Growth and Development of Children and 
to Support the Provision of Child Care Services to 
Saskatchewan Families. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act respecting Adoption 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Adoption. 
  



 
March 22, 1989 

326 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
and by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by my seat 
mate, the member for Melville, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 4, An Act to 
amend The Residential Services Act, be discharged, and 
the Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, as well I move, seconded 
by my seat mate, the member for Melville, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 5, An Act to 
amend The Line Fence Act, be discharged, and the Bill be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-controversial 
Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to establish the Public Participation 
Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Public Participation Act. It’s a straightforward 
way, Mr. Speaker, and a straightforward way this Bill 
establishes the department and sets out the following. It sets out 
the purposes for public participation, the role of the Department 
of Public Participation, protection offered employees by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and protection of the public 
interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a co-ordinating Bill for major public policy 
initiative of this government. It is this government’s stated 
objective to build and diversify our province through increased 
economic participation by Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will act as a facilitator of public 
participation policy across government. It will ensure 
co-ordination with other public policy initiatives of the 
government. The Bill is complementary legislation. Enabling 
legislation for initiatives such as widespread equity share 
offerings will be brought forward through separate legislation in 
this House for full and proper debate. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the integrity of this Bill rests upon  

the respect and recognition of other legislation. On that basis, 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to protect the public interest and 
that of public service employees cannot be disputed. 
 
The Bill recognizes the rights afforded employees in The Trade 
Union Act and their collective bargaining agreements. It 
provides for the possible continuation of existing pensions and 
benefits and for early retirement in some circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also ensures that standards and practices 
will meet or exceed current levels, that initiatives are evaluated 
and that the entire process is open and fair. This protects the 
public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the main comments I’d have regarding 
the content of the Bill. I’d like now to take a bit of time of the 
House to explain what public participation in Saskatchewan is 
all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation certainly is an initiative that is 
moving around the world, from all governments of all 
ideologies. It has different names in different countries. We see 
that Mrs. Thatcher in England calls it privatization. In New 
Zealand they call it corporatization. And we see in France and 
in Russia and in various other countries the same movement is 
taking place. Governments around the world, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are investigating new ways of delivering service. And 
we in Saskatchewan are bringing our model to this province, 
and that is the model of public participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear many say that public participation is just 
privatization, was just the selling of assets. And I hope in the 
next few minutes I can indicate to you and other members of 
this House that the public participation model, the 
Saskatchewan model, is much broader than that. 
 
In fact, the public participation model in Saskatchewan has four 
basic dimensions, Mr. Speaker — four basic dimensions in 
which we involve the public of Saskatchewan in building this 
fine province, in building this province in a way that the 
average man and woman of this province, that their children of 
this province and succeeding generations can benefit from that 
building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent a lot of my time travelling the province of 
Saskatchewan and talking to groups throughout this province. 
And I can tell you, if there’s one underlying cause that people 
feel and they want to support, they all agree that it is in the best 
interest to build this province. There may be disagreements as 
to how it is done, but let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people in Saskatchewan want to build Saskatchewan, and they 
want to build Saskatchewan in a manner that benefits them, 
their families, their neighbours, and their children. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what I want to see happen in this province, and 
that’s what this government wants to see happen in this fine 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me indicate to you then how this program, this 
four-dimensional program, can work to build Saskatchewan and 
to diversify Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, coming from a rural 
seat, as many of us do in this  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

327 
 

legislature, we understand all too well the necessity to diversify 
the economy of this province; to decentralize many of the 
initiatives, and the building, and the new things that will be 
brought in in this province over years to come, so that we can 
have a strong and vibrant Saskatchewan; a Saskatchewan with a 
strong rural base; a Saskatchewan in which we are doing the 
value-added with the wonderful resources that we’ve been 
blessed with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you look at this province and you compare it 
with other areas of the world, there are many who would like to 
be in our position. Mr. Speaker, we are blessed in Saskatchewan 
with an abundance of natural resources. Nowhere else will you 
find potash resources like there are in Saskatchewan. Nowhere 
else will you find heavy oil resources like there are in 
Saskatchewan. Nowhere else will you find resources in uranium 
like there are in Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan has its fair 
share of natural gas and of light crude. 
 
Coupled with that, Mr. Speaker, the pulp and timber resources 
we have, the agricultural land that we have, and the vast 
potential for tourism in this province, and especially in our 
northern part of the province. Taking all those ingredients, Mr. 
Speaker, we sit in one of the most blessed areas of Canada, I 
believe, and, I believe, of the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the challenge for this government in this 
province as we move towards into the 21st century is to build 
those resources — to build on those God-given resources in a 
way that it will benefit the people of this province. And I 
believe through public participation we’re giving that 
opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan because, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a pride in this province. We have a pride of 
being a province that can come up with some of the most 
leading type initiatives in all of this country. 
 
I just look at my colleague over here, the Minister of Health. 
Across this country today, across North America and around the 
world the plastic health card is admired. They’re saying we’re 
leading the way . . . Laugh, laugh, if you may. Laugh if you so 
wish, but I can tell you, I can tell you, I have visited people in 
other parts of this world who have asked to find out about the 
plastic health card. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look at the initiatives in agriculture. Look at the 
way that this government, the Devine government, has dealt 
with very serious situations in agriculture over the past five 
years. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask members not to use 
other members’ names in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I apologize. I’m proud of that name, but I 
won’t use it again, Mr. Speaker. And I share that pride with 
many in Saskatchewan. That name is a name of pride across 
this province. 
 
But let us get on with public participation, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
illustrate to you and to the members of this Assembly where 
this diversification, the building, the value added — taking our 
commodities, our raw resources, and using the expertise — 
because I believe  

we’re as good as anybody else in the world — and using that 
expertise and that Saskatchewan pride to build new initiatives, 
new ways of delivering government services. And that’s what 
public participation the Saskatchewan way is going to be. 
 
Let me illustrate the four examples for you. You know many 
say, well, it’s just privatization. And I will say to you, yes, 
privatization is one part of public participation. And in my 
mind, privatization is where you take an asset that is owned by 
the Crown and you sell it to the private sector. And yes, we did 
sell one to the private sector. 
 
(1445) 
 
We sold the Prince Albert Pulp Company, or PAPCO — which 
you’ll be familiar with, it’s your area, Mr. Speaker — that was 
losing $91,000 a day of your tax money and of my tax money, 
and we sold it to Weyerhaeuser Canada. And yes, 
Weyerhaeuser Canada did build a paper mill, a state of the art 
paper mill where the paper that is produced in Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan today is as good as any paper anywhere in the 
world. 
 
And what has that resulted in? As I told you, there is 
constructing the paper plant, the mill, 700 jobs — 700 on-site 
jobs; two hundred and fifty new permanent jobs in Prince 
Albert with about a half a million dollars a month coming in in 
revenue; and the announcement just two weeks ago of 31 new 
jobs because not only are we producing paper but now we’re 
going to cut that paper and put it in even a more demanded type 
of commodity, because from what I understand that paper’s 
going to be used for . . . that paper is going to be used for 
computers, that paper is going to be used for photostatic . . . and 
we all know in this day and age those are great demands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a good example of taking a raw resource, 
the pulp wood of northern Saskatchewan, and not just cutting 
down the trees, not just producing pulp, but producing the value 
added — paper, demanded in the world economy. 
 
And that’s an example of privatization, and that’s an example 
that I think benefits Saskatchewan people. And I can tell you as 
I talk to people around this province, they say, right on. Those 
are the kind of things that should take place to have that value 
added, to create jobs for our children, and to put our products 
into the world market. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me look now at the second aspect of public 
participation. And many of the people in this legislature, I’m 
sure, have taken part in this, and probably some across the way, 
and that is in the widespread bonds and shares. You’ve seen 
what happened in the Power Plus bonds, Mr. Speaker. The 
Power Plus bonds — $343 million sold right here in 
Saskatchewan; $343 million sold to Saskatchewan people to 
service and help SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we came with the SaskTel bond, and again, 
108 million. I remember the prophets of doom and gloom said, 
oh, you won’t sell 50 million. We sold 108 million, and we’ve 
sold them on the convertible bonds to the small person in 
Saskatchewan to help them reduce their telephone rate. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s giving the people  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

328 
 

of the province, about 73,000 of them, the opportunity to build 
and to take part in this development in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I cross this province and 
I say to people: do you want us to go out to Tokyo, do you want 
us to go to New York, do you want us to go out of the country 
to borrow, or do you want the opportunity to invest in 
Saskatchewan and buy bonds here? Because if you look at that, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s about $80 million of interest that’s staying 
right here in Saskatchewan, and those spin-off activities will 
help the economy in this province. And across the piece, when 
I’ve talked to people about this, they say, right on, right on. 
Now I hear the member opposite. He would like to send the 
province to New York, as they did with their government. 
That’s his choice. I prefer to see that interest stay here in the 
pockets of Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve explained a 
couple of aspects of public participation. Let me now move to a 
third. And the third one that I often describe to people is that of 
contracting out, of contracting out of services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to give one example of them that 
happened just a few years ago; we’re into the third year of that 
now, and that is the mowing of ditches in the highways. My 
colleague, the Minister of Highways . . . Again, you may laugh. 
You may laugh, but let me just explain a minute here. I want to 
give you a little example here. Two years ago we put out 10 
contracts to the private sector. Mr. Speaker, let me tell you what 
happened. Let me tell you what happened. Those contracts 
came in 50 per cent cheaper than if they were done within the 
department, so we did another 25 contracts this year and the 
same thing has happened. And the minister will be bringing 
forth more contracts for the next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many things that can be done by the 
contracting out of services. To provide services to the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mowing the ditches. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well you can laugh about mowing 
ditches, but I think it’s an important part of the beautification of 
this province. Look, when I was minister of Tourism . . . one 
thing that people told me, Mr. Speaker, as the minister of 
Tourism, is that was one of the things that first impresses you 
when you come into the province of Saskatchewan is the 
beautification of the province. And if you’re driving in on a 
road and you have a nicely mowed ditch and it has a good 
appearance, I tell you, you have a good impression upon that 
visiting public. Now you may like to see them all full of weeds 
and so on, and if that’s your desire, please go ahead. I cite that 
as an example of some of the aspects of contracting out. 
 
Now they will probably complain about the contracting out of 
the auditing services to the Crown corporations because, Mr. 
Speaker, we did that a few years ago too. There’s a strong 
auditing service in this province, and there’s no necessity for 
government to employ all the  

people to do these services. So, Mr. Speaker, I see contracting 
out as a third part of public participation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to one that I think is of great 
importance, and I’d like to see the position of the members 
opposite on this one. And that is employee buy-ins, where we 
can take the service that is being provided by government and 
employees can buy that service, start their own company, their 
own co-operative, their own employee association — whatever 
it may be — and provide that service. 
 
And I want to give you two or three examples of that that I 
think are very good examples. We had the whole system of tape 
duplication in the Department of Education. We put it out for 
contract; three or four firms bid; an employee won the contract, 
an employee who’s going to form his own company. 
 
Now you can laugh at employees forming their own company, 
and if you’re against that I’m glad to see where you stand. That 
employee is going to be able to add some dimensions to the 
tape duplication that we would have had to spend taxpayers’ 
money to do, and he’s going to be able to do that and provide 
the service. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be at a $100,000 
saving to the people of Saskatchewan. Let me tell you, if we 
can provide that service through alternate ways and we can save 
taxpayers’ money in doing it, then I believe that’s the type of 
thing we should do. 
 
The other day, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite . . . they 
think it’s necessary to have a printing company; we believe it is 
not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The government opposite, now you’re 
hitting the nail on the head . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well when you were the government you 
thought you should have a printing company and you thought 
you should control everything. 
 
They had a printing company — Sask Government Printing. 
I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that the employees have bought 
Sask Government Printing. Every employee has a share in Sask 
Government Printing, and they will be able to do our printing 
on a diminishing balance over years with the contract they have 
and go out and compete in the private sector. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, with public participation we are 
able to take people who are civil servants and allow them to 
become entrepreneurs. 
 
I remember the other day, the news conference down in the 
basement here when we announced the initiatives in the yellow 
pages, and I remember the person from SaskTel that was sitting 
at the front with myself and Mr. Lane, or my seat mate here, the 
Minister of Finance . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It’s sometimes difficult to not 
have a slip of the tongue, but I ask members again not to use 
other members’ names. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s understandable when you’re sitting 
with a person for 10 years you get to know them by  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

329 
 

their name, but that’s fine, we’ll continue on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I wanted to say was that the employee was 
sitting there, and when the press asked him — and the press can 
attest to this — what he felt about this, he said, it is giving me a 
chance to become an entrepreneur. That’s what the employee 
said. And you’re going to see more and more of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my office I have almost 100 proposals of 
various types. There’s a great deal of interest taking place in 
Saskatchewan for employee buy-ins of services, and we’re 
going to see more of this where people in Saskatchewan can 
have a real opportunity, where employees can have a real 
opportunity to own and supply their services, where people can 
become entrepreneurs and people can build expanding 
businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen many of these. We look at the 
WESTBRIDGE computer company. We took some of the 
SaskCOMP, along with SaskTel, merged it with some private 
companies, and today we see WESTBRIDGE computer 
company based here in Regina, state of the art computer 
company, competing for contracts right across Canada. And 
that wasn’t the case before, Mr. Speaker, but that’s certainly the 
case now. And you’re going to see more of these. 
 
I remember being in Meadow Lake one day with my colleague, 
the Minister of Health, announcing the sale of the Meadow 
Lake pulp mill. Do you know who bought the Meadow Lake 
pulp mill, Mr. Speaker? The pulp mill was bought by the 10 
Indian bands and the employees of the Meadow Lake pulp mill 
— 96 per cent of those employees are shareholders in that and 
we know that there will be added . . . value added developments 
coming in Meadow Lake. And I can tell you, if you go into the 
town of Meadow Lake and you ask them what they think of 
public participation, they were there 3,000 strong that day, Mr. 
Speaker, to say yes, this is what we want to see happen. We 
want to see that value added, that development in our town, and 
it’s going to take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say to you that you’re going to see much 
more of this in the year to come in Saskatchewan. You’re going 
to see three major initiatives take place in debate this year in the 
legislature. Following this debate on this Bill, we’re going to 
see a Bill brought forward on the potash corporation, on 
SaskEnergy, and also on SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are fundamental changes to Saskatchewan. 
They are changes that I believe will help diversify the economy 
of this province. They are changes, Mr. Speaker, that I believe 
will give people in this province true ownership. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they are changes that I believe will once again grab 
that Saskatchewan spirit, that pride in our province, that ability 
to say, yes, we are only a million people, but we are a million 
people who put things together as we see fit in this province, 
and we develop systems that are copied throughout the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other areas, as I said at the beginning, are doing 
this, but we can’t take an idea from New Zealand or France or 
England or Indonesia or Russia or wherever it is,  

and implement it into Saskatchewan. 
 
The other day I was speaking in Rockglen, and I said what may 
work there doesn’t necessarily work in Rockglen, 
Saskatchewan, but I can tell you, with talking to those people in 
Rockglen, Saskatchewan, we can come up with models that do 
fit Rockglen, Saskatchewan, that do fit Saskatchewan in every 
way, shape, and form, that will help diversify this province, and 
that will bring about that diversification in such a way, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan will build, will build 
on the resources, will build on the God-given gift that we’re 
lucky enough to have, will build on those in such a way that the 
people across this province will benefit from those. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is the motivating force behind public 
participation, to create that Saskatchewan pride, that first again 
so that we can stand proud in this country in saying, yes, we did 
it our way and we did it in a way that will build this province, 
diversify, and it will benefit not only now but succeeding 
generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to move second reading of Bill No. 1, 
The Public Participation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want 
to take a few moments to outline our opposition to Bill 1, the 
Bill that will privatize, as the minister says, three main 
corporations — SaskPower, SGI, and the potash corporation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister says from his seat, 
SaskEnergy, but of course everyone knows it’s SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — SaskPower by any other name is still 
SaskPower. I mean, the minister can pull out one part of 
SaskPower and call it by another name and then say, we’re now 
privatizing something else. But the people of the province, 
when they get their bill every month, know it’s SaskPower. 
 
And as the rates go up over the coming years as a result of this 
piratization, they will in fact know that the minister in 
privatizing SaskPower, was the creator of these new increases 
in the power bills that they will be getting in their mail. 
 
I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, that we will be opposing the 
Bill. And in completing my remarks today, which I intend to 
keep short, I’ll be moving for adjournment so I have time to 
look at the Bill. Our caucus will want to take time to look at the 
minister’s remarks, short as they were, and then come back at a 
future day to have a full-blown debate on this Bill. 
 
I was interested to hear from the minister, and I don’t want to 
spend much time on what he said because I didn’t think there 
was much in his speech, but . . . 
  



 
March 22, 1989 

330 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very 
important Bill that we’re dealing with here today. 
 
The minister talks about how impressive it is that we were able 
to get rid of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), a Canadian 
and Saskatchewan-owned company in Prince Albert, and sell it 
to the Americans. How impressive that is to give the 
management from Saskatchewan people to Americans, and how 
impressed he was that we can have people from Saskatchewan 
mowing the highway ditches. 
 
Now that’s a nice analogy, that we’re now world class, that we 
can’t run our own pulp mills, that we can’t build our own paper 
mills, but have to get American corporations, giant American 
corporations, to come in and do that for us. But he’s very proud 
that our farmers can mow the ditches of the province because 
they have no income — because they have no income, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They have no income because this is a government bankrupt of 
new ideas. The most innovative thing they’ve done, one, is to 
allow farmers to mow the ditches along the highways; and 
secondly, to sell off a major portion of northern Saskatchewan, 
7 million acres of forest land, to an American corporation. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now that may be progress. That may be progress Tory style. 
But I’ll tell you, there are many people in this province who do 
not agree that setting up these kind of projects that basically line 
the pockets of the friends of the Conservative Party is a good 
idea. I don’t think it is. 
 
The one privatization this minister refused to talk about is one 
that ties directly to farmers mowing the ditches, and that is the 
farm equity program. This will be privatization Tory style as 
well, where we’ll get offshore money to come to Saskatchewan 
to set up a large landholding company, owned in part by 
Saskatchewan people, but I believe the majority owned outside 
of the province with the possibility of much foreign money 
coming in to own the province of Saskatchewan’s farm land. 
That’s privatization. 
 
This is very exciting that we lend out money, over a billion 
dollars to farmers at 6 per cent, entice them to take it; then 
when they can’t pay it, jack up the interest rate to nine and 
three-quarters; then send out the lawyers to seize the farm; then 
set up a land corporation, owned by private and foreign owners, 
to buy up the land. I say to you, this is piratization and 
privatization Tory style. 
 
At every turn we see this government taking away from the 
people — farm land, potash corporation, selling it to a foreign 
government; the forests of northern Saskatchewan, 7 million 
acres, being sold to an American corporation. I’ll tell you, the 
cartoon I saw in the Toronto Globe and Mail two days ago that 
had an outline, a silhouette of the province of Saskatchewan 
with a for sale planted in the middle of it, is very, very 
appropriate, very appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say this is not a public participation Bill. 
This is Saskatchewan for sale Bill No. 1 of this province, 
because it allows for the sell-off of almost every asset the 
people of this province have owned. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I want to outline how we 
got to the point that we’re at in Saskatchewan today. We have 
an economy, at least up till 1982, that was crafted by successive 
governments — Liberal, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation), New Democrat — that after the crash of 1929 
when the unfettered capitalism was found wanting, when no 
regulations were in place, the economy and whole operation of 
this province, including the farming area, collapsed as a result 
of unfettered capitalism with no regulation. 
 
We had the Winnipeg grain exchange buying up the farmers’ 
wheat in the fall at harvest time for a few cents a bushel and 
then selling it for three or four times as much when the price of 
wheat went up later in the year. We had this before. We had a 
privatized wheat board like these Conservatives are trying to do 
here in the province. We’ve tried this system before. 
 
So the people in the province got together to create wheat pools 
and force the federal government to set up the Canadian Wheat 
Board. This wasn’t an idea of a socialist government or a 
Liberal government. This was an idea that farmers getting 
together setting up co-operatives and demanding of their 
government the Canadian Wheat Board that would regulate the 
sale of wheat and take the massive profits out of the grain 
exchange in Winnipeg, and share it among all the farmers. 
That’s how it worked. 
 
And when they needed power in rural Saskatchewan they got 
together in groups and demanded of the government that a 
power corporation be set up that would take power to rural 
Saskatchewan. And when the power corporation was set up 
farmers got together to actually set the poles in the ground, dig 
the holes by hand and tap the dirt around them to set up the 
power poles. And it was built by people and the government to 
service the needs of people. 
 
And when the banks were repossessing farm land back in the 
1930s when we had Conservative governments, they set up the 
credit union system to protect themselves against the free 
market system unregulated. And what we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan up to 1982 is crafted a society and an economy 
that was based in sharing and caring for each other. We 
believed in the free enterprise system. We had a flourishing 
private sector which included much manufacturing. 
 
I remember Friggstad Manufacturing in Frontier, an individual 
farmer who wanted to set up a corporation, and he did, and he 
built manufacturers and he built air seeders and cultivators. And 
we gave grants directly to that private sector individual to start a 
flourishing corporation — private sector. Well even that private 
sector initiative is now broke; there’s no more Friggstad in 
Frontier. It went broke shortly after this government took 
power. 
 
And we built a Crown corporation sector that, one,  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

331 
 

through the public utilities, we believed that Crown 
corporations should own the public utilities. We believed in the 
resource sector, that the government should have involvement 
but not control; that we should have a window in the industry, 
in potash and oil and uranium. And then in every other area of 
the province, where necessary, we involved Crown 
corporations. If we wanted to develop something and the 
private sector didn’t want to do it, we would then use Crown 
corporations to do it. And it was a system that was built over 50 
years, and it worked together — co-operative, private sector, 
and the public sector. And they worked together and things 
flourished. 
 
In 1982 when we left office there was no deficit. In fact we had 
a surplus of $140 million that we turned over to the Premier of 
the province — 140 million by their own documents. In fact the 
minister of Finance at that time, the member from Kindersley, a 
few months after the election, issued a document with his 
signature on it that said in fact there was $140 million in the till. 
 
And we had an unemployment rate of 4 per cent. The debt was 
non-existent, as I mentioned, in the Consolidated Fund and 
there was a small debt in the Crown corporation sector . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The members mention to me it was 
lowest per capita debt in Canada. In fact it was — and the 
lowest unemployment rate. And private sector investment was 
high. Home building was high. We had over 9,000 houses built 
per year in the last six years of our term. 
 
Well what has happened? Where are we at today? After five 
years, or four years of privatization what has happened? Is there 
a glowing province here that is successful, driving young 
people with jobs, building homes. Where is the example that 
privatization is working? 
 
I tell you, in every sector of the economy, every sector of the 
economy, the debt . . . Let’s look at the debt — no debt in the 
Consolidated Fund when we left office; in fact, a surplus of 140 
million. It is now $4 billion in the Consolidated Fund and 8 
billion in the Crown corporation sector. That’s after we’ve been 
privatizing for four years and selling off the assets. And they 
said that they would be lowering the debt. And many people 
ask, where did the money go? Who lined their pockets? Where 
is the money? This is what the people of the province are 
saying, where did the money go? 
 
Well we know where the money went. The money went to the 
friends of the Conservative Party. Look at Weyerhaeuser. I 
want to take one example of Weyerhaeuser profits. In 1985, 
international Weyerhaeuser had a profit of about $120 million. 
In 1987 that profit had gone to over $500 million, in large part 
as a result of the drastic increase in pulp prices and the purchase 
of the P.A. pulp mill for nothing. The P.A. pulp mill was sold at 
a time when the price of pulp was at a low, low ebb, and all 
pulp mills across North America were losing money. 
 
Now these are the business wizards of Canada. They have 7 
million acres of forest land, the best in Saskatchewan, to sell. 
They have a pulp mill in P.A. They have a chemical  

plant in Saskatoon. They have a saw mill in Big River. This is 
the package they have. Now the market is depressed, the market 
is depressed. Would a normal business person decide to sell off 
those assets when they were depressed? What would you do, 
Mr. Speaker? You would hang in there until the price of pulp 
went up, as it is today, and then sell them. 
 
Well what did we get? We sold off a pulp mill at a time when 
pulp was depressed. We sold off a chemical plant, a saw mill, 
and 7 million acres of prime forest land. What did we get? We 
got a promise that we may get $248 million, which was later 
reduced by 12 million bucks. No money down. No payments 
due unless profits were over 14 per cent. And they were saying 
that the debt of that corporation was losing $91,000 a day. I 
remember the ads. 
 
Well even if it were true, where did the debt go? Where did the 
debt go; where did the debt go? And I ask the Deputy Premier, 
if we were losing that much money in 1986 when you sold that 
corporation, where did the debt go to? You got no money. You 
must still be losing $91,000 a day and you’ve got no income. 
The pulp mill’s gone, the forests are gone, our people are out of 
work. And I say to you, these business wizards of Canada have 
sold off a major asset and have got nothing in return. I want to 
say we’ve got no cash, no money. 
 
One other point. The interest rate that they allowed these people 
when they were selling it — if they ever had to pay any interest, 
but they didn’t have to pay any unless profits were over 14 per 
cent — was eight and a half per cent. Eight and a half per cent 
interest, if any were ever paid — this over 30 years. 
 
And at the end of the 30-year period they would not get any 
cash after 30 years if they still owed 248 million. Do you know 
what you would get, the people of the province? You would get 
some non-convertible shares in this corporation, that you 
couldn’t sell. Now that is an exciting deal and prospect for the 
people of this province. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that was the first 
example of Tory piratization, sell-off, Saskatchewan style, Tory 
style. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well that’s one part of the economy that 
has been a shining example of privatization. 
 
Let’s look at employment. What has happened to employment 
since privatization was held up as the flagship that would take 
us into the 1990s? What has happened to unemployment? 
 
Well when we left office, unemployment was just over 4 per 
cent, just over 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And I say to you that 
that has climbed and climbed steady since that time. Last month 
was the first month since statistics were collected in this 
country, 1966, that our average unemployment was higher than 
the national average. The first time — the first time since 
statistics have been kept, that we’ve had higher than average 
unemployment in his province. Unemployment being created 
by privatization. 
  



 
March 22, 1989 

332 
 

I want to list out a few of the places where we’ve lost jobs. The 
dental plan lost 400. When we privatized the highway workers 
and the highway equipment we lost another 400. When we 
privatized SED Systems in Saskatoon and sold it off to Fleet 
Aerospace out of province, we lost jobs. When we sold off 
Saskoil we lost 25 per cent of the work-force within a matter of 
weeks. At every turn we have lost employment as a result of 
piratization. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that you know full well 
the problems associated with people not having work to do and 
meaningful employment. 
 
You can send the farmers off the land and repossess their land 
and send them out mowing the ditches of highways, but I want 
to say to you that is not what farmers want to be doing. They 
would much rather be farming their land the way they were 
back in the 1970s, not worrying about having to go off farm, 
finding little jobs, working for the government mowing the 
ditches. That they don’t want to do. They’re not trained to mow 
ditches, they’re trained to produce wheat and sell it in a world 
market at a meaningful price and getting a living out of it. 
 
But I want to say, the most drastic, and I think the most telling 
story is the fact of the unemployment of young people; 17 per 
cent of those young people and families under the age of 25 are 
now unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan. Poverty and 
child hunger is second highest in Canada, only behind 
Newfoundland, who have none of the resources that we have to 
build the economy on, none of the resources and none of the 
strengths in terms of the economy that we have. 
 
But when I looked at the statistics for February and saw 7,000 
people, most of them young families, fleeing the province, I 
knew that privatization was not working, and the people of the 
province know that it is not working. 
 
I say to you on the final point I want to raise today before I 
adjourn the debate, on services, the final criteria which could 
convince people in this province that this is a good idea is the 
area of services. There was a belief created that if we were to 
privatize, services would be improved in this province. Well I 
want to say to you that service in every area, whether it’s in our 
parks, whether it’s our highway system, whether it’s the dental 
plan and health care — and yes, we are privatizing the health 
care in this province under Tories — in every area services have 
been reduced. 
 
So the three main criteria that I base my opposition to 
privatization — employment: if they could point to the 
employment being increased and unemployment going down, 
that would be an argument in favour of piratization, but it isn’t. 
Unemployment has almost doubled. If they could say the debt 
of the province was being reduced as a result of selling off the 
assets, that would be an argument that could convince some 
people, but it isn’t. The debt has gone in total from about 2.5 
billion in 1982, to $12 billion. And taxes have gone up at the 
same time. 
 
(1515) 

And if they could say that the unemployment, the outflow of 
people was going down, or services were increased, all of those 
are arguments that would convince people. But on every one of 
those areas they have failed, and failed miserably. On every one 
of them they are found wanting when it comes to privatization. 
 
I want to conclude by saying that it’s unfair for the New 
Democratic Party to say that everybody loses under 
privatization. It’s not true. We will not be making the statement 
that everyone loses under privatization. Some people do win. 
Paul Schoenhals wins, George Hill wins, Weyerhaeuser wins, 
and the list goes on and on of those people who win. The 75 per 
cent of the shares in Saskoil that went outside of the province, 
those people may win. They haven’t won yet because the shares 
haven’t gone up on the common shares, nor have any dividends 
been paid. They may win. 
 
So the list of winners, Mr. Speaker, is very short, and we don’t 
argue that there aren’t winners in privatization. But I want to 
say to you that the few friends of the Tory party who benefit do 
not outweigh the ordinary families who are going to lose by 
paying higher utility bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to you that these assets 
are presently owned by the people. There’s no way in the world 
that the people don’t understand, after 50 years of developing a 
Crown sector and a private sector and a co-operative sector; 
getting dividends from their co-ops; getting dividends from 
their government Crowns by having things like dental programs 
directly paid for out of some of the Crown profits — people 
understand that. They own the Crowns, they benefit from the 
profits, they have service, and they have jobs as a result. People 
know that. 
 
So I say to you that this idea, this sham that is being put over 
the people of the province today — and I hear the minister in 
great, glowing terms talking about taking something that 
Maggie Thatcher has in Great Britain and bringing it here — it 
won’t work. It can’t work. It’s been tried before. 
 
This is a march back to the future, Mr. Speaker. It’s been tried 
here before and found wanting. We had this system that you 
proposed before the Depression, in the 1930s. We had 
unfettered capitalism, no co-operative movement, and no 
Crown corporations. And we know what happened to the 
economy of this province. 
 
Now many people around don’t remember. In fact, most of us 
don’t remember, but most of us can read. I wish that the people 
of the opposite side would take time to study the history of this 
province, how it was built, the development of this economy 
that we’re now ripping apart. 
 
And I say to you that this does not surprise me that a 
government bankrupt of ideas, bankrupt of money, $14 billion 
in debt, striving to win one more election — it doesn’t surprise 
me that they’re making a grab for cash, trying to get a billion 
dollars out of the potash corporation  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

333 
 

for a slush fund for the election for one more promise. That’s 
what this is about. 
 
This is a desperate government that has driven the province into 
the hole to the tune of $12 billion. Mr. Speaker, this is not a 
brilliant strategy by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
This is a desperate government that is bankrupt. This is a fire 
sale of assets because there’s no other place to get money. The 
people of the province will know that when you’re $12 billion 
in the hole and you go to borrow money in other parts of the 
world, that many of those lending institutions simply don’t want 
to talk to you. This is a last resort to try to rob the bank 
accounts of ordinary folk in this province to pay for the slush 
fund that will attempt to get the Tories back in power in the 
next election. That’s what this is all about. 
 
What really disappoints me even more than that though, Mr. 
Speaker, is this: this government is once again attempting to 
divide and conquer in the next election. We have seen farmers 
pitted against non-farmers, and the ripping and tearing in the 
destruction of the economy that goes on when you have rural 
versus urban. We’ve seen native pitted against non-native, and 
now we’re seeing the proponents of the free-market system 
being pitted against those who believe in public or the mixed 
economy. 
 
But I want to say that the only way this province can survive 
and flourish is having farmers working with their urban brothers 
and sisters to create a society that is productive and meaningful. 
The only way we can survive in a province with now fewer than 
a million people, as a result of the outflow last month, is to have 
native people working with non-native people. The only way 
we can survive is to have the three sectors of the economy, 
co-operative, public, and private, working in unison, pulling 
together to create an economy that will work for the people of 
this province. That’s why . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Those, in brief outline, are reasons why, 
when the vote comes, we’ll be opposing the Bill. But I want to 
take some time to consult with my colleagues after the 
minister’s speech. I therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act respecting Railways in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me this afternoon to introduce second reading of a very 
important piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And when I speak 
of this new legislation, Mr. Speaker, I am speaking of the new 
Saskatchewan Railway Act which replaces antiquated 
legislation that has essentially been unchanged since 1906 — 
that’s since 1906, Mr. Speaker. And many, many times I sit in 
the legislature and we pass laws, and many of them in each 
session, and I wonder sometimes, Mr. Speaker, is it really 
necessary to be updating so many pieces of legislation. 
 
But here with this particular piece of legislation, Mr.  

Speaker, there hasn’t been a change to it since 1906. So I 
advance to you, Mr. Speaker, that certainly it is time that new 
laws be created that reflect the needs of today’s changing 
transportation environment. Progressive legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, must come from a Progressive Conservative 
government. And that is why it is this government that has 
implemented this important and necessary change. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, by the very fact of this 
legislation that I am introducing today, most definitely has its 
eyes set on the future, the future potential of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. This government is following the lead of our federal 
counterparts in providing new legislation that will create a more 
efficient transportation system throughout this country. 
 
I’m speaking, Mr. Speaker, of the recent National 
Transportation Act. That Act has created a less regulated 
environment in all areas of transportation. It will lead this 
country into a much more streamlined era of transportation. The 
legislation before the House today, Mr. Speaker, continues this 
trend by creating flexibility in the rail industry away from the 
current rigid standards and brings it more in line with 
transportation issues that are being faced today in the 1980s and 
on into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The original 1906 legislation effectively met the needs and the 
issues of that era, but with many changes in the last 82 years, it 
does not meet the needs of today. The present government is 
most concerned for the welfare of the Saskatchewan public, and 
I believe that this is reflected in all decisions related to 
transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that presently there are 
many rail lines in Saskatchewan which are generally 
unregulated. Some of these rail lines, in fact, cross public roads, 
Mr. Speaker. This new legislation will place railways that are 
not currently regulated by the federal government under 
provincial guide-lines. This new Bill ensures the safe operation 
of all rail lines with modern safety standards. 
 
Guide-lines will also be developed to guarantee equipment 
operators are sufficiently qualified. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is 
a progressive solution for the future direction of rail line 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m speaking, Mr. Speaker, of the concerns Saskatchewan 
producers are experiencing with the possibility of rail line 
abandonments by major railways. Virtually all of the grain 
produced in our province and 90 per cent of the potash depends 
on our rail system for transportation to market. Mr. Speaker, 
these industries are vital to our provincial economy, and this 
government is committed to fighting for efficient and effective 
transportation service to producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I are constantly stressing the vital 
importance of the rail system in rural Saskatchewan to our 
federal counterparts. These efforts, Mr. Speaker, have been 
carried out by several presentations and many briefs and letters. 
These presentations have been well received, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 22, 1989 

334 
 

And I’d like at this time to pay tribute to many of the members 
on the government side of the House from all over rural 
Saskatchewan who are well acquainted with the facts out in 
rural Saskatchewan today. These members — many of them 
who have first-hand working knowledge of what a farm is, how 
a farm operates, how a transportation system operates — these 
members on the government side of the House with full 
working knowledge of what a permit book is; these members on 
this government side of the House, Mr. Speaker, with an 
in-depth working knowledge, comprehension and 
understanding of rural Saskatchewan and the farms that are the 
backbone of this province; these members, Mr. Speaker — and 
I have been there right alongside them — when there are rail 
line abandonment hearings, these members have been there 
standing with the local people in the community, side by side, 
fighting to retain these lines. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here today I want to give credit to members 
such as the member for Redberry, the member for Morse, the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena — all of these members, Mr. 
Speaker, from rural Saskatchewan and integrally involved in 
their communities and knowledgeable, Mr. Speaker, about 
farming and farm life. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, despite our best efforts, despite all the fight 
and all the work that we go through, there is still the reality that 
rail line abandonment to an extent is inevitable. This legislation 
before the House today provides alternatives to empty rail lines 
lying around unused. 
 
We have met, Mr. Speaker, with many of the concerned groups 
of producers, and we are working with this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide alternatives and solutions to the problems 
that exist today. 
 
This new Act, Mr. Speaker, provides the opportunity for a 
railway to sell a rail line to an independent operator who will 
run it as a smaller short line service. Not only does this provide 
more options for dealing with an abandoned rail line, but it 
could permit a more streamlined, more cost-efficient operation 
that will benefit both shippers and consumers. 
 
It is an opportunity for producers to ensure that important rail 
line service is maintained for the people of Saskatchewan. It is 
an option that the people want, Mr. Speaker. It is an option that 
the people need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public knows what it wants. This government 
has been listening to those kinds of practical solutions that will 
move our province into a bright economic future. 
 
This Act ensures that the public interest will continue to play an 
important role in the development of any independent rail lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, once again, with this piece of 
legislation, is leading Canada with innovative and progressive 
ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Railway Act, is the first provincial  

Railway Act to be updated across this country of Canada. Other 
provinces across this country have been awaiting this piece of 
legislation. They have been consulting with the people in our 
department and with myself respecting the specifics of this 
legislation, and I hazard to guess, Mr. Speaker, that this 
legislation will be duplicated in many provinces across the 
country. 
 
And I stand here today, Mr. Speaker, with a fair degree of pride 
in knowing that here again, Saskatchewan is taking the lead; 
Saskatchewan government is recognizing that there are changes. 
We are recognizing, Mr. Speaker, that we are moving rapidly 
into the 21st century. Some changes have to take place. 
 
This legislation recognizes that operating a provincial railway 
line is significantly different from operating a national railway. 
It allows such a railway company to design their operations to 
respond, to respond, Mr. Speaker, to the specific local needs of 
people. This may allow such a railway to continue to provide 
rail service to Saskatchewan communities and producers where 
the CNR or the CPR have failed to do so. 
 
It allows for private railways to haul their own product without 
excessive regulations, but does provide protection to adjacent 
landowners and the travelling public, should the rail line cross 
public roads. 
 
It makes provision for the private sector, for the private sector 
to invest in a railway line and contract the operations to others 
who have the knowledge and experience to operate a railway. 
 
The legislation has streamlined and simplified the complicated 
process involved with constructing or acquiring a railway. No 
longer will it be necessary for a perspective railway company to 
go through the cumbersome, costly procedure of obtaining a 
private Act. 
 
(1530) 
 
This government recognizes that the service which a short-line 
railway might offer is similar in character to that provided by 
the trucking industry. To be successful, the small railway must 
respond quickly to changes in market opportunities or operating 
conditions. This new Act allows for quick response through the 
Highway Traffic Board. It is a progressive step that will permit 
carriers greater access to rail lines. This, Mr. Speaker, can only 
lead to a more efficient industry. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, in developing this legislation we have 
worked toward a more safe and efficient transportation network. 
I believe this legislation will respond to a more competitive era 
in transportation as we move into the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, specifically, this legislation is new, is innovative. 
It is long overdue, as I stated at the outset. Since 1906, no 
changes to this legislation have taken place. I believe that this 
legislation fits now and will serve us very well in the years to 
come. 
 
I use a specific example, Mr. Speaker, that comes to mind of 
where this Act may in fact be practical, and I speak of a  
  



 
March 22, 1989 

335 
 

new member in our House, the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. That member has been working with 
the local community for a number of months on what we call a 
road-railer demonstration project. That man was very, very 
involved with the community in developing this proposal. The 
proposal is currently under study, but I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
that that member’s firsthand working knowledge of the road 
railer concept in his own area — down on the Killdeer line — 
was in part responsible for that man’s election to the legislature. 
It’s a pleasure, it’s a pleasure for me to have the new member 
for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg with us today with the introduction 
of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do look forward to the comments from the 
opposition. I would hope and trust that the opposition would 
pay close attention to this Act. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
the opposition will respect that it is time for changes in The 
Railway Act and that they will indeed support such progressive 
and innovative legislation that, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, is 
long overdue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do move second reading of An Act respecting 
Railways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been 
monitoring the movement of this particular Bill for some time 
now, and I was impressed with the minister’s verbiage in 
bringing forward the Bill for second reading at this time. He 
launched into his discussion about antiquated legislation which 
is on the books since 1906, and he said there are provinces just 
waiting for Saskatchewan to forge ahead in this area so that 
they can copy Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, two Bills the same as these, 
virtually word for word the same as these Bills, were introduced 
in this House back in June of ’88, June 16 and June 20 — Bill 
100 and Bill 102 — the same content in the two Bills, The 
Railway Act and the consequential legislation. They sat around 
on the order paper, and finally they fell off the order paper 
when the last session prorogued. There is no urgency about this 
Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What the minister is attempting to do 
is to avoid some of the issue here with regard to this particular 
Bill. 
 
I listened to his comments about rural Saskatchewan and about 
rail line abandonment. Well that’s true that under this 
government the fabric of rural Saskatchewan has been ripped 
and torn, and the people out in rural Saskatchewan are 
suffering. And the minister who talks about rail line 
abandonment in rural Saskatchewan, on this particular issue this 
government has been johnny-come-lately on the issue of rail 
line abandonment. Right from the first day they were in office 
they’ve been johnny-come-lately on rural line abandonment, 
and still are. They feel that they have to give the impression 
they’re doing something out there in rural Saskatchewan. That’s 
why the minister is talking about rail line abandonment. 
 
It’s interesting to note, the minister in his comments never once 
mentioned the name Manalta Coal — never once mentioned 
Manalta Coal. I want to spend some time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
talking about Manalta Coal because this  

Bill is the stalking-horse for privatization in Saskatchewan by 
this government; it’s the stalking-horse for Manalta Coal. And I 
want to talk about that give-away because there is some 
privatization the people of Saskatchewan need to know more 
about. And I will be taking the opportunity later on to discuss 
that at some length, and to discuss some of the aspects of the 
Bill. 
 
I’ll want to have an opportunity to discuss or to look over the 
minister’s remarks in moving second reading of the Bill, and 
will do that in due course and hope to participate and reveal 
some of the aspects of this Bill which the minister failed to 
bring to the attention of the House in second reading, some of 
the very important aspects. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 
of The Railway Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill is 
simply, as it says, a consequential amendments Act respecting 
The Railway Act itself, and it will go on to be part and parcel of 
the implementation of a new railway Act for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that once again, when we’re talking 
about this piece of legislation, indeed it has many practical 
areas in which it will be put into place. I say again, Mr. 
Speaker, that many of the rail lines in Saskatchewan today are 
unregulated and have been for some time. The member 
opposite, I know, has taken the position that there’s no urgent 
need for this legislation to be introduced and, indeed, in some 
respects that is true. But the delay in passage of this piece of 
legislation means, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite want 
to close their eyes, stick their heads in the sand, and not look at 
any alternatives. 
 
I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
opposite, who I know is opposed to the legislation, is the 
member for Saskatoon Westmount — Westmount, I believe. 
The member opposite talks about railways and rail lines. I ask, 
Mr. Speaker, has the member opposite any real true in depth 
knowledge of rural Saskatchewan? Does the member opposite 
have any real true understanding of farm problems today? Has 
the member opposite ever been at a railway line abandonment 
hearing? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the purpose of second 
reading is for the minister to address the impact and what the 
Bill is, not wandering off into the wilderness trying to kill time, 
because in fact the legislative agenda here is not even sufficient 
to fill in the afternoon and he’s wasting the time and the 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I find the point of order not well 
taken. 
 



 
March 22, 1989 

336 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
certainly will talk about the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and it is a Bill 
that is necessary, Mr. Speaker. In fact the consequential 
amendments Bill is necessary for implementation of the whole 
structure of this subject, this subject of what do we do with the 
future of Saskatchewan, the future of rural Saskatchewan. 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, do we stick our heads in the sand? Do we 
close our eyes? Or do we face the real problems that are out 
there with respect to rural Saskatchewan and the abandonment 
of rail lines? 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I would commend and compliment 
the members on this side of the House, the members who have 
that intricate knowledge of rural Saskatchewan, who have been 
there hand in hand, side by side with rural communities, 
fighting railway line abandonments. 
 
The question becomes, Mr. Speaker, if it was left up to the 
NDP, would the NDP look at a piece of legislation like this or 
would they close their eyes? I hazard a guess, Mr. Speaker, that 
the members opposite who have no working knowledge of rural 
Saskatchewan would in all fact close their eyes to this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve stated before that indeed we won’t win every 
fight against rail line abandonment. And the option is close your 
eyes or take a real look at if there are some alternatives. I 
believe there are alternatives, Mr. Speaker. I speak of short line 
railways. I know in the United States there are probably 150 or 
160 short line railways operating in rural America. I know, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is an integral part of many industries in 
Saskatchewan who need a short railway. 
 
The member opposite, I know, is very familiar with Manalta 
Coal, and indeed they would be opposed to doing anything that 
would assist industry to grow and prosper and build and 
develop and create jobs. But a railway line for such industries 
as Manalta Coal is exceedingly important. Without this 
legislation being passed by this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that 
rail line adjacent to Manalta Coal, and an integral part of their 
industry, would not be legal. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I urge members opposite to read this 
legislation thoroughly. I urge members opposite to study the 
merits of such proposed legislation. And I do move second 
reading of Bill No. 3, The Railways Consequential 
Amendments Act. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased that 
the minister had an opportunity to get a few remarks off his 
chest that he forgot to make in second reading of the previous 
Bill. 
 
Never before has so much been said about so little as Bill No. 3, 
An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts resulting from the enactment of The Railway Act. That’s 
about all there is in that Bill, and I recognize that. I’ve been 
around this place long enough to recognize that these are 
consequential amendments, and really there’s nothing there to 
discuss, but the minister has spent a fair bit of time discussing 
them. 

And really what the minister is concerned about is the 
consequential effects of him not spending a lot of time talking 
about these two Bills today, because the consequence of that is 
that he’s going to run out of work. And he’s the House Leader 
and he’s supposed to have some work here for us to do. We 
came here to do . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, there’s the member from Cut Knife 
wants to take some more time up with specious points of order. 
We came here to discuss Bills such as Bill No. 2, to discuss 
Bills such as Bill No. 2, An Act respecting Railways in 
Saskatchewan. We get a long, flowery speech from the Minister 
of Highways, of very little substance, and then he follows up 
with discussion on the consequential amendments — much 
more than the consequential amendments warrants. And the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster is upset about this. 
 
The main theory of the Minister of Highways with regard to 
these two Bills is that he should try and stampede this 
legislature to put through these Bills because all of Canada has 
been waiting . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had a point of 
order raised by those members opposite where our minister had 
been speaking on the Bill. I know that members opposite don’t 
have a whole lot to say about this because they do not have an 
understanding of the importance of this Bill. But I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this member has not 
even referred to the Bill as of yet, and he is . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I find your point of 
order not well taken. It’s a dispute between two members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
should get his hearing-aid tuned up because I read out the title 
of the two Bills that are under consideration today, and I am the 
one that introduced the question about Manalta Coal, which the 
minister forgot to address and which he rushed to address in the 
consequential amendments that don’t relate to Manalta Coal at 
all. Now I will be taking the opportunity, and since this is just a 
consequential Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be taking the 
opportunity later to address this Bill, and as a consequence of 
that I ask for leave to adjourn the debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Would the member move to . . . 
Order. Would the member move to adjourn debate rather than 
ask leave, beg leave? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’ll certainly move that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1545) 
  



 
March 22, 1989 

337 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Wills Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Wills Amendment Act of 1989. The 
formal requirements of The Wills Act, Mr. Speaker, dates back 
to the 1800s. These formalities, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly you 
know, in all seriousness, are important because obviously the 
testator will not be able to be there at the time to speak to the 
true intention of the will when it is being interpreted. 
 
On the other hand, the common law jurisdictions around the 
world have been attempting to temper the formalities in recent 
years to ensure that whenever possible the court can give effect 
to the testator’s intention. This Bill adopts that approach for 
Saskatchewan. And as we all, I’m sure, as elected members 
have heard and have experienced, and certainly as members of 
the legal profession have experienced, that this can at times 
become very, very difficult; can stretch what otherwise was a 
tremendous bond within families. 
 
The law currently requires that a will be signed at the foot or at 
the end of the document. By removing this requirement, the 
court will be able to determine the validity of the will on the 
basis of whether the testator intended by his signature to give 
effect to the will. 
 
Holograph alterations of former wills are confirmed as being 
valid. And what that means, Mr. Speaker, for those that don’t 
understand that legal jargon, is that if you were to a lawyer and 
had a formal will prepared, and then the testator decides to 
make some alterations — and perhaps it’s at a time when he’s 
unable to make an appointment to go to a lawyer — he can 
change that will or make some alterations by writing on that 
will, and that becomes a holograph alteration to the formal will. 
 
Substantial compliance test is added to the Act. If the court is 
satisfied that the document submitted was intended by the 
testator to be his will, the court may order that it is an effective 
will. This section has been in force in Manitoba for five years 
and has been used by the court there to overcome harmless 
errors which would have otherwise invalidated a will. 
 
Currently, where a person in his will leaves land to a 
beneficiary and then enters into an agreement for sale of the 
land, sells the land, and takes a mortgage back or grants an 
option to purchase the land, the beneficiary receives nothing. 
The rule of law which causes that results in a reversal by this 
Bill, so that the person would receive the deceased’s interest in 
that land. 
 
A beneficiary who is also a witness to a will, or the spouse of a 
witness to a will is given an opportunity to prove to the court 
that the deceased intended them to receive the gift. If the 
witness or his spouse can prove to the court that they did not 
exercise any improper influence on the testator, the court can 
then declare the bequest to be valid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that these amendments to The Wills Act 
certainly are designed for the situation where people can 
inadvertently do something with their will  

causing a completely different interpretation than they intended, 
where the court is somehow bound by common law and by the 
law or the Act of the legislature to interpret in a way that the 
court would not see as the proper intent of the testator. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an 
amendment to The Wills Act and would ask that all members 
read carefully this Act and support this Act. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want just to 
make a few brief remarks in respect to the amendments to The 
Wills Act that are being proposed by the minister. And I think 
the intent is certainly evident that what he is doing is allowing a 
greater scope to the courts to give . . . to make a will valid if in 
fact it represents the intention of the testator. 
 
I think that’s a legitimate direction to go. I would want to know 
whether the minister, and he can do this in third reading, 
whether or not he got this recommendation from the Law 
Reform Commission, and also whether he has been in contact 
with the legislative committee of the Saskatchewan bar for their 
input into it. 
 
I know what the intention here is, but I also caution to some 
extent that far more wills, by the leniency of validating them, 
could indeed end up with more court actions. The one 
provision, for instance, that you indicated, where the 
beneficiary as a witness to the will could not in fact receive 
under that will, if there were a witness to that will. Now of 
course the provision provides that a beneficiary can be a 
witness to the will, and in order to prove that there was no 
undue influence that has to go to the court. 
 
Also in respect to any codicil, that has also been extended, 
allowing the testator to unilaterally change some of the content 
of it without his witness and two attesting witnesses. And all 
I’m saying to you here is that in helping to facilitate the 
validation of the will, before a validation of the will we have to 
be careful. And I think only time will tell, but it may lead to 
substantial more court interpretations. 
 
I think overall we support this. I will ask the minister if he 
would just indicate whether it came from the Law Reform 
Commission and whether he had contacted the legislative 
committee of the bar, Saskatchewan bar. Otherwise we’ll be 
supporting the amendments, Mr. Minister. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:53 p.m. 
 


