





























































Hansard: August 11, 1989


August 11, 1989 
 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 
 

The Acting Clerk: -- It is my duty to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will not be present to open 
today’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20 – An Act respecting the reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, the manner in which these privatizations proceed I think has become 
something of a scandal. And let me begin by describing, Mr. Minister, why I think that’s the case. The Bible 
on privatizations, as has been scripted by the folks from England, is that you sell these assets for less than 
what they’re worth so that those who buy the shares will realize an immediate appreciation in the value of 
what they buy. 
 
I think that’s despicable, Mr. Speaker, because what it overlooks is another group of people, the taxpayers, the 
people of this province who do not get full value for the value of their assets. You forget, Mr. Minister, that 
you are a steward of these public assets. These are not yours to fritter away as you may feel appropriate. 
They’re not yours to squander for your own re-election purposes. You are a steward of these assets for the 
public, and it’s high time that you and other members of the treasury benches started to remember that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you’re going to have to forgive us then if we scrutinize with the utmost care 
the details respecting the sale of these shares. We have every expectation, Mr. Minister, that you’ll attempt to 
sell these for a lot less than what they’re worth, and that they be useful for the 50,000 or so – I’d be surprise if 
there were that many – the 50,000 or so well-heeled people who purchase these shares. But it’s a raw deal for 
the rest of the public of Saskatchewan, who also have an interest in these assets, who are ultimately going to 
wind up paying the debt, the mountainous debt that you’ve accumulated, and the debt which you could go 
some distance toward paying off if you got full value for the assets. 
 
It is the taxpayers, your constituents and mine, who are getting the raw deal, who are going to have to puck up 
the debt that you people leave behind when you give these assets away to your friends for a lot less than what 
they’re worth. 
 
With that as a background, Mr. Minister, my first question is when you expect the shares to be issued, the date 
when you expect these shares to go on sale to the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well no date has been set, as I’ve indicated to the press. What will happen after the 
legislation is passed, assuming it does, then the investment advisers, syndicate managers, whatever, will 
prepare the prospectus. I would see that in all likelihood, but it depends on market, that perhaps late 
September or October would be a selling period for a fertilizer issue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – So I gather, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying is that your target date for selling these 
shares is approximately a month to six weeks. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I don’t have a target date. I did not say that. 
 



Mr. Shillington: – Well the minister says he doesn’t have a target date. Mr. Minister, you’re not dealing with 
a group of children. I know your opinion of us may not be what we wished it were, but you’re not dealing 
with a group of children, Mr. Minister. 
 
If you’re going to sell these shares in the fall, you must have a target date by this time. This is not something 
that you wake up . . . you don’t wake up some morning and stretch and yawn and say, sounds like a good day 
to sell Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, I think I’ll go ahead and do it. This requires a great deal of 
advanced planning, and if you’re going to sell them this fall, you must have a target date. 
 
I don’t even believe, Mr. Minister, that you would operate in such fashion, certainly not with a company 
that’s worth a couple of billion dollars. This, Mr. Minister, will be one of the largest sale of shares on the 
market in 1989 in Canada. Since this is a major sale of shares, it’s not something that can be done in a 
haphazardous fashion. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Minister, is the middle of September your target date? And please don’t give me all the 
pedantic nonsense about it may be later, it may be earlier depending on when the market falls out of bed or 
whatever. We understand that target dates are just that – target dates. But will you confirm if it is your target 
to sell these shares in the early fall, late September or early October? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Again, there is no such target date. What I have indicated to you is that based on the 
advice of when a fertilizer issue would be . . . not better received but more awareness, perhaps, in the market 
place, you tend to look at the fall and the spring . . . probably a lot to do with the agricultural seasons in the 
United States. 
 
But having said that, there is no fixed target. I have indicated to you in fairness that after the passage of the 
legislation, the work will be done, the work will be done. I would think that that would take six weeks. But at 
the end of the time when the work is done, if the advice on the market is no public issues, unwise to do a 
public issue or unwise to do a fertilizer issue, then you don’t go to market. Okay? That’s all I’m saying to 
you. I mean, I would like to have it done; I’d like to be able to say that it’s going to be done by October 1, 
September 15, or whatever the date, but that’s not the way you assess the market. 
 
There may be a change in market come early fall, after the summer. I can’t tell you whether there is or is not 
going to be one. I do say this, that there has been a change in the market over the last six months in terms of 
public issues. Recently in Canada there have been several major public issues that the market is now looking 
for or accepting new public issues – Air Canada being one, CAE being another in Canada. But that is 
something that the investment managers ultimately will give you the decision on that, or give you the advice 
to make the decision. 
 
So I’m not trying to be imprecise. I’m telling you when the window is; I tell you when I would like to see it 
done, but it will be decided by the investment managers as to when the appropriate time is to go to market. I 
fit’s not appropriate, it will not happen that soon. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, I’m just going to have to absolutely insist that you stop playing games with 
us. You’re sitting in the legislature of Saskatchewan; this is not some sort of a play school you’re in, and you 
owe us some answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is patently obvious to anyone with the remotest interest in the subject that the investment 
houses have already give you this advice. They’ve already told you when you the appropriate time to go is, 
and you already have that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you haven’t come this far without getting a good deal of advice from whoever is going to 
handle it. And I ask you to stop playing games with us, Mr. Minister. You owe the public of Saskatchewan, 
who’ve elected something a little more than that. 
 
(0815) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to be . . . I want to try to get you back on track again. And let me just set aside the 
nonsense about selling these shares I the spring of the fall when the farmers are taking off their crops or 



seeding. This has nothing to do with the agricultural cycles. Farmers are relatively small buyers of equities. 
These will not, by and large, not be sold to rural people at all, but to people who wouldn’t know a hoe handle 
from a cow’s tail. These are sold basically to urban people who have nothing to do with the agricultural 
cycles. 
 
Now I ask now . . . Mr. Minister, I take it you are planning on selling them in September. You said that – late 
September. You said that – late September. That gives you about six weeks. That being the case, much of the 
preliminary work must already have been done. It is true that there have been other issues of new shares in 
this country, but nothing of this magnitude. Assuming this company’s worth a couple of billion dollars, that 
will make it a major issue, a very major issue, particularly on a market as small as Canada’s. 
 
Mr. Minister, the next question I have is: if you’re planning on selling these in late September, if that’s your 
target, what investment firm will be the lead investment firm in handling this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The lead is Woody Gundy; the U.S. tranche is Merrill Lynch; European tranche is Credit 
Suisse; the Saskatchewan tranche will be Richardson . . . I’m sorry, RBC Dominion Securities. Those are the 
heads of the various tranches. 
 
The full syndicates have not been finalized. But each of those except in the cases of Merrill Lynch are the 
lead province of Saskatchewan managers or co-leads in our various syndicates. The exception with Merrill 
Lynch is because Merrill Lynch has done, I believe, two of the three large potash issues in the United States 
for IMC (International Mineral and Chemical Corporation) and have some expertise or experience in the 
fertilizer issues. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Okay, Mr. Minister, I take it that Wood Gundy, then is the lead firm with the other 
operating in concert. Mr. Minister, is that the full list? You’ve no Asian – Japanese or Hong Kong – firms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, one of the questions to be decided ultimately, or several questions, obviously size of 
the issue, because if the market would only accept say a smaller issue of say 2 to 300 to 400 million, we 
would suspect that Saskatchewan would obviously take up some, Canada would take up some, United States 
would take up some, and less for Europe. There would not be enough left, depending on the size of the issue, 
for a nation market issue. 
 
So in all likelihood there won’t b an Asian issue, or an Asian trances, is the word. I am not ruling it out, but at 
this stage we don’t think it’s likely. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Okay, I gather then that is the, at least in a preliminary way, that is the full list of firms 
which will be involved under the general leadership of Wood Gundy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’ve indicated the leads and the co-leads. In each case the Canadian firm Wood Gundy will 
be a co with the U.S. or with Europe. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Can we have the full list then, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case. May we have the full list 
then, if that’s the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m saying that we haven’t put the full syndicates together. These are the people that are 
doing the lead work. I’m more than pleased at the time that the syndicates are finally decided, to supply you 
with that. I mean, it’ll be a matter of public record anyway. 
 
But the determinations, we will lean – let me put it this way – we will very much lean first to the investment 
syndicates that the province of Saskatchewan uses, particularly if on an international tranche we think that 
there is some advantage to using the firms that have a knowledge of the province and have an interest in terms 
of being part of the syndicates that the province has used. 
 
But I’m more than prepared when those are done, to supply them, but again they’ll be a matter of public 
record. 
 



Mr. Shillington: – I gather that one of the reasons why Wood Gundy was chosen because they’re trying to 
recoup some of the losses they took on a sale of issues for this province, I think last year at this time. They 
took a real bath on a somewhat overly imaginative sale of issues last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, that brings me to the next question. What is the fee that the investment house takes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Let me come at it this way. The standard fee overall, and this is for all the syndicates and 
the participants of the syndicates, is 5 per cent. We expect . . . That’s for all of them, okay? That’s not for 
each one. That’s the total. We expect to do better than that when the full syndicates are put together because 
the issue will be larger, but I’m prepared for discussion purposes to have that accepted. 
 
What will happen then, so that the hon. member understands, what will happen then, as your syndicates are 
established, you will have to negotiate the percentage of that 5 per cent in total. So that will be negotiated 
down as the syndicates are established. But I think for debating or discussion purposes, I’m better prepared to 
indicate, although I think we’ll do better than 5 per cent which is very much, I gather, accepted on the initial 
public offerings. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – I may say that is quite a sum of money, Mr. Minister. We’re now starting to get into, I 
suppose, some of the cost of your ideological obsession with disposing of provincial assets. On, say, 400 
million – that’s exercising every doubt in your favour – on a sale of 400 million, that’s $20 million this costs, 
$20 million in fees. This at a time, Mr. Minister, when the roads are a disgrace, when any number of groups 
of people cry out for some sort of assistance. You, Mr. Minister, are spending $20 million on a pipe-dream 
that nobody wants, that the public of this province has said clearly they do not want. 
 
I think it’s apparent, Mr. Minister, to use and apparent to anyone but the members opposite that there are far 
better places to spend $20 million than on this bit of privatization which, as I said, everybody in the province 
says they don’t want. 
 
Mr. Minister, is 5 per cent the full cost to the province of Saskatchewan of this sale? Is that everything in? If 
not, what are the additional costs of this extravaganza of yours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – There will be additional costs for the promotion of the issue, obviously the province’s own 
legal fees, and the preparation of that activity. Understand what happens with the syndicates. The syndicates 
buy the shares and then have to place them. There is some risk. Well . . . but I mean, I don’t think there’s 
anything out of the ordinary in terms of the amount. I’ve said it is likely going to be on the low side. 
 
However, having said that, you’ve got that fee plus the promotional costs. I can’t tell you what those will be. I 
know that whatever they may be, the opposition will say that they’re too high and that the material is too 
glitzy and the usual arguments, but having said that, there are those costs. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, I’m even more upset than I was at 8 o’clock when I started to find out that 
we are spending $20 million on a privatization that nobody wants. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- To another friend. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Yes, to another . . . I might add, $20 million to, by and large, yet another friend of the 
Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not secret that Woody Gundy, and in particular, John Ritchie of that firm has worked very, 
very closely with this government. Seems to me it was John Ritchie of Wood Gundy in Regina who made the 
prediction that whatever housing problems may occur elsewhere in Canada, thanks to the magnificent 
management of this government, there’d be no dropping off here for the house sales. Of course the opposite’s 
been the truth; we have the highest vacancy rate in Canada. Such is the balance and independence of the firm 
of Wood Gundy here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to try to put $20 million in perspective. Mr. Minister, you’re spending more on this bit of 
foolishness, and that’s as accurately as I can phrase this within a legislative Chamber. There is far more 
accurate language but language that would not be permitted here to describe this. Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 



interjection) . . . Yes, one may think this is perhaps empty-headed. Seems to be phrase to which you can 
relate. 
 
Mr. Minister, $20 million is more than is spent by the Department of Economic Development and Tourism. 
Just think about that for a minute. You’re giving more to your friends in the investment firms than you’re 
spending on Economic Development and Tourism in this province. That, as a matter of interest, is more than 
we are spending on Energy and Mines. You’re spending more for this sale, which the public of Saskatchewan 
don’t’ want, than you’re spending on the entire management of our natural resources. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re spending more on this sale than you spend in the Department of Environment and Public 
Safety at a time when environmental problems have this government absolutely at bay You’re spending more 
on this privatization, which the public of Saskatchewan don’t want, have said so in every conceivable way, 
than you’re spending on the environment. 
 
This sounds hard to believe, given the fashion in which the ministers opposite travel, but you’re spending 
twice as much on this as you are on Executive Council. As I say, given the royal trappings in Executive 
Council, that’s hard to believe, but that is the case. It simply puts all this into perspective. 
 
Mr. Minister, in additional the $20 million, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell us what you’re going to 
be spending on the promotion of this. Will this be another $20 million that you’ll be spending on advertising? 
What figure do you have budgeted for promotion? 
 
(0830) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well, the NDP are critical of the 5 per cent, which I’ve indicated is a standard. You pay 7 
per cent if you’re selling your house. That’s a commission that most people can relate to. 
 
But let me put things in perspective, and I’m going to give you some figures. In 19, I believe about 74, 1974, 
a company called AMAX bought Esterhazy, and they paid IMC about $12 million. In 1976 in your wisdom, 
and you were a vital part of that decisions, you then paid to IMC some $85 million for the same . . . or to 
AMAX, I mean, for what two years before was $12 million, So the expenditures on the ale of the potash 
corporation are going to pale before some of the costs of acquiring. 
 
So having said that, we will do a budget are we, one, assess the Saskatchewan market – and I indicated last 
night we’ll have to assess the effect of the debate on the willingness of Saskatchewan people to buy the 
shares. I having said, and I have said it quite pointedly, that we will be taking the steps that we believe to be 
necessary to encourage Saskatchewan people to buy the shares, and that will requires some promotion. As 
well, as in the case of any such share issue, there will be the costs to meet with the potential investors and the 
various . . . well the investment community, after the prospectus is filed and the issue is decided upon. 
 
So yes, there’ll be promotion costs. No, we do not yet have an estimate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, that’s just not believable. That is not accurate. And I have the greatest 
difficulty being charitable enough to believe that you thought that answer was accurate when you gave it, Mr. 
Minister. I just have the greatest difficulty being that charitable. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re spending $20 million on this bit of foolishness, this bit of empty-headedness, at a time 
when hunger stalks the streets of our cities; at a time, Mr. Minister, when people on welfare have not had any 
increases in the last . . . and in fact have experienced cuts, that’s right, as one members says; at a time, Mr. 
Minister, when agriculture is yet again sliding into a crisis with a harvest that is deteriorating and alarmingly 
low prices. What’s your priority? Your priority is giving $20 million to your friends, the vast majority of 
whom could, quite frankly, are less about this province, could quite frankly care less about this province. The 
people, Mr. Minister, who you are benefitting by this, by and large, could just care less about this province. 
They have a very different agenda. Mr. Minister, they operated by the law of greed. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you about the cost of promotion. I well recognize that you’re going to have one obscene 
extravaganza when it comes to advertising. I can imagine, Mr. Minister, that you have every single moment 
of television time and air time, as much print space as you can muster, not to sell the shares – that’s not how 



this is done. What you’ll be doing is to try to justify the disaster, which you’ve unfolded over the last few 
weeks. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know full well that these shares aren’t sold by advertisements; they’re sold in a different 
fashion. When Air Canada, as much as I disagreed with it, was privatized, I didn’t have to watch wall to wall 
advertising telling me what a great deal a privatized Air Canada would be. It was simply sold in the normal 
fashion. You’re going to be advertising, Mr. Minister, not to sell the shares but to try to redeem your own 
political fortunes, what I think is a thoroughly hopeless venture. But that’s going to be the effort. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, how much you’re going to be spending trying to save your political hides when 
this issue goes on sale. How much are you going to be spending on advertising and promotion? Give me the 
figure, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’ve already answered the hon. member, and I will put the Air Canada issue in response. 
There was, as a matter fact, promotion on the Air Canada issue. But member this as well, that the Air Canada 
issue was primarily designed for the sophisticated investor, the person who would normally buy. Now 
certainly they had a hope that it would be broader than that. I gather there are indications that it was broader 
than that, but I would suspect only marginally so. I don’t know that, but I would suspect that beyond the 
traditional sophisticated investor that Air Canada did not expand much of the market. 
 
That’s a different type of activity than what we want to do in the province of Saskatchewan, and we do want 
to encourage. I thin it fair to say that if the public believes that the advertising is overdone, that they will 
reaction, and quite properly. You know that; you know what happened to the family of Crown corporations’ 
ad. It turned out to be a mistake in terms of the objective that it was set out to meet. All governments, all 
advertisers run that risk. You’re right; it can be overdone. But if it’s overdone, then the government will be 
criticized. 
 
So we have to make those decisions and operate on the basis of . . . we’re trying to certainly expand the 
number of the people, encourage more and more Saskatchewan people to invest in their own province. You 
disagree with that, that'’ your choice. That’s one of the fundamental difference that we have, as stated by the 
Leader of the Opposition and myself yesterday, where he very pointedly left out the involvement of people 
themselves in the economic development of the province. 
 
So yes, there will be advertising and promotion. I have said that. The extent and the effectiveness, well I mean 
that will obviously be decided. You may want to prejudge; that obviously your political right. You want to 
prejudge it. That’s fair enough. Ultimately the public will say whether it’s too much, too little, not enough. 
But one of the things that has been made clear to us is that if there was to be a public issue of PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), a great number of people of this province wanted the opportunity to busy 
shares, and we will give them that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – I’m sure, Mr. Minister, farmers who are looking at a crop which is wilting in the heat and 
working people who haven’t had an increase in minimum wage for many years, I’m sure they’ll be deeply 
appreciative of an advertising program running into many millions of dollars which tells them why they 
should buy shares with that money that they don’t have. I’m sure they’ll be deeply appreciative of this 
information. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you for your budged figure. If you’re going to be selling these in six weeks, you must 
have a budgeted figure. I ask you for that, Mr. Minister. It’s your responsibility to give us information, not the 
nonsense which you’ve attempted to pass off on us this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’ve already indicated to the hon. member that the figure has not been budgeted. We will 
do an assessment after as to the effect of this very debate on the Saskatchewan market. I think that’s only fair 
and you would expect us to do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Chairman, I’ve been listening to the minister try to tell us that he has no budget for 
the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which we believe the government is going to do as 
soon as the legislation is passed. And it’s simply hard to be believe, in fact, we don’t believe that the minister 
doesn’t have a budget laid out that would include the fee that the workers will get – and he’s given us that, 5 



per cent – and we know that 5 per cent of 400 million will cost the taxpayers about $20 million. We got that 
number. 
 
Now in advertising, surely, Mr. Minister, you’re not telling us that you don’t have a budget item. Give it to 
the nearest million. I mean is it 500,000, is it 1.5 million, is it 2 million? Certainly you must have in your 
mind, in a budget somewhere what the cost of advertising the share offering is going to be. 
 
You’ve done a budget up. You’ve given us what you’re going to give to the brokers, to Wood Gundy, your 
friends in the brokerage firms. That’s going to be $20 million. How much is the advertising? You must have 
the firm that’s going to advertise lined up and ready to go, just as you have the firm that going to be doing the 
brokerage for you. 
 
Can you tell us who that firm will be in the province of Saskatchewan, who – or other places – who will be 
doing the advertising of the share offering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We will be using Dome – may be familiar to some of you 
 
I would just like to correct something, and I find it very, very interesting that the member, and member that 
preceded him, critical of Wood Gundy and friends of the government, etc., etc. The investment syndicates 
that we have used as province are very little different from the investment managers that the New Democratic 
Party used. And the two leads under the New Democratic Party were Wood Gundy, Dominion Securities, for 
along time, for along time. 
 
Now we’ve certainly expanded the number of managers because companies change, some improve their 
experience, others have better distributive powers because of the change. But to be up and slamming the 
investment managers, I suggest is exactly what you did to the management of the potash corporation. The 
management of the potash corporation, judged by the potash industry is probably the best managed potash 
company now in the free world. 
 
So you can make those allegations, and you can in your mind relate them. But let me tell you, if these 
companies are friends of the present government, then by your convoluted, paranoid logic, they were 
obviously friends of yours because you used them. 
 
The fact is that the investment community in Canada, provinces of all political stripes have their investment 
syndicates and their investment managers, and they choose them for their abilities, they choose them for their 
abilities to distribute, they choose them for the financial advice that they give the province. That’s no 
different, that’s no different . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s simply not true and you go and check your 
syndicates. You know that’s not true So that’s no different and provinces can’t operate any other way, I think 
in fairness. 
 
So you can make the allegation. You are surprising a great number of the business community, as you 
continue to do, but in fact we get investment advice from syndicates, different syndicates in the Untied States, 
different syndicates in Europe, different syndicates in the Asian markets. So having said all of that, I think the 
reason that you put out for the use is not a valid one. 
 
I have indicated to you in terms of promotion, we will do an assessment after the Bill is passed to determine 
the state of the Saskatchewan market. On the one hand you stand up and say everybody’s against it. If you’re 
right, the obviously we’re going to have to promote. We don’t happen to accept that and we don’t happen to 
believe it to be in the case, and we don’t think that . . . we happen to know that there’s far more support for 
the privatization of potash than you believe, let me put it that way, and I’m putting it mildly. 
 
So we will do an assessment of that market; we will do an assessment after the debate, and then decide on 
what requires to increase and to get the greatest number of Saskatchewan people to invest in the potash 
corporation. 
 
(0845) 
 



Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well, Mr. Minister, that was one of the silliest arguments, I’ve ever been given in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – If you expect anyone in the province, outside of a few of your back-benchers – maybe 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd would believe what you’re saying here – some of the back-benchers who 
seem to believe everything that the front benches say to them, they may believe that you don’t have a budget 
for advertising. 
 
But obviously, Mr. Minister, when we talk about the 20 million you’re going to pay to Wood Gundy, that’s 
not an allegation, that’s your fact that you gave to us. You gave us the figure of 20 million. On a share 
offering of $400 million, you have told us that Wood Gundy will get $20 million of that 400 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I did not. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Yes you did. You said they would get the money and then it would be distributed to 
other people who would be selling for them. That’s the indication. You indicated that $20 million would go to 
the brokerage houses to sell the shares. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- In total. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well in total. That’s what I’m saying. But they’re the main brokerage house and they 
will distribute, where they need parts of the $20 million. That’s one item. That’s one item. There’s other 
major items of cost in this sell-off, There’s advertising. There’s the legal fees, and what we’re tying to do 
here, Mr. Minister, is establish what the cost of the sell-off is. That’s a perfectly legitimate question to ask. 
Perfectly legitimate. 
 
What isn’t legitimate is you, Mr. Minister, and you r cowardly government cutting off the debate and then 
avoiding answering questions. That is not acceptable, and that is not a principled way for you to be acting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – If you’re saying you don’t have all the answers – and I’m not saying about the very 
detailed answers – if you don’t have the answers on the legal fee estimate that you’re going to pay and on the 
advertising and the prospectus, then what are we doing here? Why is there a bill here if we don’t know any of 
the details? 
 
I say to you, when we did Saskoil – and I’ll give credit to the member of Saskatoon, Mr. Schoenhals – he 
came here with a prospectus; we looked at the detail, we knew how much the brokerage fees; we didn’t have 
to ask. I say to you that when you’re using closure, it’s incumbent on you to have the answers. 
 
Does it make any sense for you to say: look, we don’t want any more debate on this potash issue; the public 
knows all the detail of privatization, they know all the detail; we shouldn’t be debating any more because it’s 
costing too much money; the few extra hundreds of thousands of dollars that a week of debate would cost is 
unnecessary. That’s what you said. That’s what the Premier has told the people of the province. But now what 
we’re saying is we’re going to be advertising the sell-off – we’re going to advertise the sell-off. 
 
Now I say to you and I say to the press who were involved in that debate in their editorial, saying the debate 
had gone on too long that it wasn’t wasting too much money, I question whether or not you have the right, the 
right to now advertise the potash sell-off. 
 
And I really question the media, who will benefit from the sell-off in terms of the advertising the sell-off, 
whether or not the debate should go on at taxpayers’ expense outside of the Assembly? That’s the point I 
want to make to you, Mr. Minister. Because if the public already knows about the sell-off, if they already are 
tired of the repetition, then how doe sit make sense that you will now take tax dollars and advertise the share 
offering? 
 



Like, either the people know about it or they don’t You can’t say in here that it’s costing too much money 
when there’s a debate going on and both sides are being presented, and cut off that debate using closure, then 
come here and give us no answers, and then go outside the House and use taxpayers’ money to sell one side 
of the argument. That’s unprincipled and unneeded, and you have to be able to recognize that. 
 
And the press have to recognize that, that it’s undemocratic to cut off the debate in this House on the potash 
sell-off, then get out of the House and use taxpayers’ money tot pay the press in advertising to sell one side of 
the argument. That is neither fair or democratic. 
 
Now I want to ask you again” what is the budget for this one-sided argument, this debate on privatization that 
you will be putting on TV, on radio, and in newspapers, following the closure of this bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I will address the press, too, the same as the hon. member. There’s no need for you to sit 
and sulk and be . . . because you got cracked by the public as saying you overplayed your hand on the potash 
debate. The fact that you had no public support out there for you protracted filibuster is no reason to take it 
out on the press. That was the public speaking that felt you overplayed your hand and you went too far . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh sure it is. 
 
So you’re sitting here smarting and you’re still angry and you’re still upset over that. But I mean there’s a 
case of kicking the messenger. You sit and accuse us of doing it every day, but here you are sitting, kicking 
the messenger that told you that you’d overplayed your hand, which everybody knew – which everybody 
knew. 
 
But I want the public to see the inconsistency of the NDP argument. On the one hand they say, we’re only 
selling to our rich friends – and a couple of heads nod up and down. On the other they say, don’t advertise to 
get other people to buy. That’s precisely what they’re saying here today, precisely what they’re saying. You 
can’t have it both ways. 
 
Do you know what their great fear is here? Is that there’s going to be a successful advertising campaign and 
some little New Democratic Party members is going to surreptitiously walk down to a brokerage house or his 
credit union or the Bank of Nova Scotia or wherever, and take a little bit of money out of his pocket and say, 
can I buy some of those potash shares? I know my leader doesn’t want me to do it, but can I busy some, 
because I saw that advertising campaign and it looked pretty good. That’s what their fear is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – That’s what their fear is. It’s got nothing to do with the amount. It’s got nothing to do with 
the advertising campaign. It’s got nothing to do with who’s been doing it. 
 
It is this fundamental fear, fundamental fear in the New Democratic Party that some member . . . I mean, did 
it work in the past? Did the advertising work? I think you’ll find it interesting that Allan Blakeney, Allan 
Blakeney familiar to many of you, has got some Saskoil issues. Maybe it just may be that my logic and 
persuasive powers and the minister of the time convinced him in the legislature to do it. I don’t know. I doubt 
it I think maybe the advertising campaign had a little bit to do with it. 
 
So having said all of that, you can complain because you overplayed your hand. That’s your choice. And you 
can be critical because we’re going to advertise. And you’ve got the contradiction where you say, you’re only 
selling to your rich friends – don’t let anybody else buy. 
 
What I have indicated to you, and I’ve now repeated it – I don’t think anyone will deny but that the potash 
debate, protracted as it was, will have some effect on the Saskatchewan market. I think positive, but others 
think it may be a negative. So what I am saying is that we will encourage as many Saskatchewan people to 
buy shares in the potash industry, and we will also make sure that Saskatchewan people have, as they have 
requested of us, the opportunity to buy the shares. 
 
So having said all of that, you can complain because overplayed your hand. That’s your choice. And you can 
be critical because we’re going to advertise. And you’ve got the contradiction where you say, you’re only 
selling to your rich friends – don’t let anybody else buy. 



 
What I have indicated to you, and I’ve now repeated it – I don’t think anyone will deny but that the potash 
debate, protracted as it was, will have some effect on the Saskatchewan market. I think positive, but others 
think it may be a negative. So what I am saying is that we will encourage as many Saskatchewan people to 
buys shares in the potash industry, and we will also make sure that Saskatchewan people have, as they have 
requested of us, the opportunity to buy the shares. 
 
So having said all of that, we will do the assessment of the Saskatchewan market once the debate’s finished. I 
think that’s quite proper. That’ what any company would do before it goes into the market-place. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well, Mr. Minister, your logic totally escapes all the people in the province just as it did 
when you did your budget in 1986. What is clearly happening here is a minister who was involved in 
invoking closure, stonewalling in the House on a very important issue, and that is the cost of the advertising 
that he will at this point know full well. He knows exactly, within a few thousand dollars, what the advertising 
campaign is. He will also know what the legal fees, the legal charges will be for the share offering. 
 
What I want to know, Mr. Minister – first of all, I want to go back to the question of advertising. I want to ask 
you again, what is the estimated cost of the advertising that will be done outside f the legislature at taxpayers’ 
expense for the share offering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I’ve already answered the question on three occasions that we will do an assessment . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, we will do an assessment after the debate is finished and the Bill’s passed 
on the Saskatchewan market and determine what is necessary. 
 
I don’t think anyone will deny that the debate will have had some effect, will have some effect, and at that 
time we will do an estimate and see what the market is and what is necessary to ensure that the greatest 
number of Saskatchewan people have both the opportunity or the ability to buy the shares. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Minister, I asked you yesterday the percentage of ownership of Saskatchewan 
people in the corporation. It too a good 10 minutes for you to get the answer. I wonder if you would take the 
time to turn to your staff, who will have done the budgets. I mean, obviously, I believe that you know the 
answer, but if you’re saying you don’t know, will you turn to one of your staff and ask them what budget they 
have done for advertising, because it simply is not believable that you haven’t done a budget, that there’s no 
budget done. Will you just take a moment and ask your staff what your staff what budget they have done for 
advertising of the sell-off of the potash corporation, because it’s important to the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you’re doing here is stonewalling. You have moved closure because now there are only 
two days allowed for asking these questions; you know that. You know that if you stall for another 14 hours, 
you’ll be scot-free, and what you expect to be able to do here today is stonewall, I believe, on the prospectus, 
when the share offering will start, the advertising, and the legal fees. 
 
And you’re not obviously wanting to tell us. But that simply isn’t acceptable; you know that. And I want to 
ask again whether any of your staff know what the budget if for advertising. 
 
(0900) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I took the member’s suggestion that I take some time, and I simply indicate to the 
hon. member exactly what I said before. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well, Mr. Minister, that was a useful use of five minutes of the time of the Assembly 
consulting with your staff. If you didn’t have an answer, it would not have taken five minutes. If there was no 
answer, what you were doing is deciding whether or not to give the information. That’s what you were doing. 
And you decided to deceive the House and not give the information, and I find that unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, just for a moment I want to go back to the issue of the 20 million that will be going to Wood 
Gundy and to other brokerage firms. Mr. Minister, the reason we’re concerned about the choice of Wood 
Gundy is not because of other government’s having used them but because of political donations that have 
gone directly from Wood Gundy to your party. 



 
I have here information of donations that have gone to your political party I the province and federally. In 
1982 a thousand dollars, this was at the time of the previous election, 1982 when you were first elected, a 
thousand dollars. In 1988, $500. To the federal party in 1984 – you remember that election – 13,216. And in 
1987, prior to the last election, 29,864. Now there’s a direct relationship I think, Mr. Minister, federally, to the 
use of this company in the privatization in the federal government and the donations to the political party. 
 
This is the issue we’re raising here, Mr. Minister, that a company that gives $30,000 before the last federal 
election to your political friends in Ottawa, now is getting a major share of the money that is coming out of 
the privatization -- $20 million, or their share of it. And I say to your, Mr. Minister, that these are the kinds of 
answers the public want. 
 
Like we know in GigaText, you stated out in the same fashion, there are no answers – stonewalling. And then 
as the weeks went on, it was exposed. This is why closure is a devious move by this government because I 
believe if we could spend several weeks asking these kind of pointed questions, we would find the major 
scandal that is actually involved in this sell-off. That’s the point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Now the debate on things like GigaText may be boring and unpleasant for the 
government, but that is not reason to cut off the debate, and at 11 o’clock tonight you will effectively cut off 
the debate. And if you can stonewall on the cost of advertising until then, you believe that people will simply 
forget about it. but I say to you that these questions are important. 
 
Now I want to ask you one more time for the advertising costs. You have the budget; you consulted with your 
staff; they have a budget done up. What will be the cost of advertising the sell-off of the potash corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I just want the press to know, because the hon. member has just made some allegations 
that Wood Gundy, for example, a statement Wood Gundy has made political contributions to the Progressive 
Conservative party. He doesn’t say that Wood Gundy has also made political donations to the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We’re not selling off the potash corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Oh, so they’re friends because they make a donation to us, but they’re enemies if they 
make a donation. So understand the kind of perverse logic of the members opposite. And also note that he 
didn’t deny it; also note that he didn’t deny it – and, I suspect, other brokerage houses, as they do to all 
political parties. 
 
So the argument is a rather spurious one, and I indicate to the hon. member that I’ve answered the question 
now three or four times today. and I have indicated to the hon. member that I have little doubt that this debate, 
protracted as it was, had some effect on the Saskatchewan market and whether people will buy shares or not. I 
happen to thin it’s positive. Like I say, others think that less people would buy. and I have made the statement 
that after the legislation is passed, we will do an assessment of the Saskatchewan market with the objectives 
of getting as many Saskatchewan people to busy shares, and the second objective, to be able to respond 
appropriately to the message that we get from the people of this province, is that they want an opportunity to 
buy. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Speaker, you say you gave me the answer, and many people would call it a non-
answer. You haven’t given anything. You’ve been stonewalling for the last hour. That’s what you intend to do 
for the balance of the day. 
 
And the unfortunate part of this is that when the corporation was being set up back in 1976, you will 
remember when you had a least five or six days in committee to ask questions of the then deputy premier. 
You’ll remember that. And the debate wasn’t cut off. you were allowed as many days as you wanted, and in 
checking Hansard I find your name on each of the days, asking questions, that is was in committee. you knew 
the problem that would cause for you, and you argued with the cabinet to move closure to protect yourself so 
that you wouldn’t have to be here day after day answering questions. you told them clearly that, I can 



stonewall for two days, but you’ve got to have closure in place to protect me. That’s why you’re not 
answering any questions. 
 
And I say again that, in not answering the question, you tell the people one thing clearly, that the number is 
too embarrassing for you to give out. That’s all you’re saying. If it were a small number of no advertising, 
you would quickly tell us. But what you are telling us clearly, very directly, that it will be millions of dollars. 
And we will put our number in that blank because you won’t give it to us. So we’ve got 20 million for the 
brokerage houses. We have millions for advertising. Everyone will accept that now because you refuse to 
answer. 
 
I want to ask you now on legal fees, what is the estimated amount of legal fees, for example, for drafting the 
Bill, which went to one of your friends again in Saskatoon, one of the laws firms, I understand? Maybe you 
could give me the name of that law firm that prepared the Bill for you and gave you assistance, and then the 
total cost of legal fees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Now we will obviously, as in the normal course, get at the end of the time, the law firms 
are paid in the usual manner for the work done. 
 
But I would like to just put the debate on the time, because the hon. member very pointedly ignores, when he 
makes the argument that there were some five days in committee, I think the total debate was some 21 days. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Nineteen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Nineteen days. All in – all in. So now they say they’re being muzzled. the fact is, they 
went on for days. 
 
And let me tell you, after five days in 1976 . . . Because the hon. member is right. The hon. member is right; 
we did ask questions. Do you know what questions we asked? How much are you going to pay for the mines? 
Do you know what answer we got? We don’t know; we’ve got to start negotiating. Hundreds of millions of 
dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars that you would not give to the people of this province. 
 
Don’t stand up and tell me, don’t stand up and tell me that you were forthright on the potash – hundreds of 
millions of dollars. Do you know what they said? Well we don’t even know if we have to expropriate. We 
don’t know what those mines . . . we’ve got to do the valuation after. Do you have estimates? Well we’ve got 
people looking at them yet, but wait until we decide which mines – which mines. They didn’t even know 
which mines they were going to buy. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But we had a mandate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Oh you had a mandate. Oh, they had a mandate. They had a mandate. Now let me tell you, 
because I wish Dale Eisler was here, I really which Dale Eisler was here, because Dale Eisler – with the 
greatest respect that I have for the individual – has missed the inconsistency of the New Democratic argument 
and it is this. On the one hand their critic for potash says that the reason they nationalized the industry was to 
protect if from the big, bad federal government, and it was the only way to do it. Okay? That’s what he says. 
 
Then some of their other members said oh no, we had a mandate in ’75, which pre-dates the threat, pre-dates 
the threat from the federal government – pre-dates the threat. It wasn’t even an issue . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . There’s no doubt that it was philosophical, and I thank the hon. member from Saskatoon for 
her interjection. 
 
So for you to say that we’re more or less not giving you the information . . . Let’s put that back, because you 
made reference to it, I didn’t, the debate of 1976. And I have publicly given full credit to the Leader of the 
Opposition in the skilful manner in which he handled that debate – skilful manner. 
 
Other than asking him what constituency he represented, he never told us anything else. He never told us the 
number of mines, he never told us what mines, he never told us how much they’re prepared to spend, he never 
told us how much time was spent up to date, how much time was spent on studies, how much time was spend 



on evaluations – all of those because they could not begin to take the action until such time as the legislation 
was passed. 
 
And I have now said on numerous occasions today that after the Bill passes, we will do an assessment of the 
Saskatchewan market and take the appropriate measures to make sure that all Saskatchewan people have the 
opportunity to buy. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – well this is a perfect example, Mr. Chairman, of stonewalling, trying to burn up the two 
days time by now giving any answers. But I asked you, Mr. Minister, about legal fees. Gary, you’ll know I 
asked about legal fees. I want to know, what is the estimate of the total legal fees that will be paid out during 
the privatization of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’ve indicated that the professional advice will be paid in the usual manner, and when the 
work’s done they will get the bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I mean, obviously the work’s not completed. Now the hon. member knows full well 
that when that work is completed – she is a lawyer – that when that work is completed the appropriate firms, 
the accounting firms or be it legal firms, will submit their accounts for payment. That’s the normal way it 
works. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Minister, this idea that you can stonewall your debate here and get yourself through 
the day, it may work. but I say to you that I would like to know that to date, what is the amount of money that 
ha been paid out in legal fees or that has been received in bills in your department, in terms of the 
privatization of the potash corporation? You will know that the firms that have been drafting the Bill for you 
will have sent in a bill, and you’ll know that; preparation of documents. Can you tell us what has been billed 
to date? At least let’s get a little start on this. 
 
(0915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well we will certainly have to pull that information as to all professional fees, and I think 
at the end of the day what will happen as will happen in the normal course, that the appropriate forum will be 
there for answering those questions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – I want to ask you again, Mr. Minister, because we didn’t get anything out of the 
questions on advertising, but what would the budget be? Like, I’m not asking for the numbers, but what is the 
budget for legal fees? You can ‘t tell us that you go into a billion dollar deal and don’t have a budget done up. 
I mean there isn’t a farmer in the province, there isn’t a small-business person that wouldn’t, when they’re 
planning to expand or contract, do up an analysis of what the cost and expenses are going to be. It simply isn’t 
acceptable. 
 
Now I want to know what you have planned for legal fees in this billion dollar sell-off. You can’t tell me that 
we’ll just have to wait and see. That simply isn’t good enough. What is the budget time for legal fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well, I’ve already answered the hon. member that legal and the professional fees will be 
paid in the normal manner as the work is done. And I suggest to the hon. member, as in 1976, there were 
different types of work being done at various stages of the operation, either being tax consideration, being 
structure of the share, which has not yet been determined, and a great deal of the work to be done yet. And 
those accounts will be submitted, I suspect, in the usual manner. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well, Mr. Minister, I want to go back to advertising just for a moment because there’s 
been some expenditure and I’m sure that some bill shave been paid on advertising as well. 
 
The workers out at the potash mines had the privilege and opportunity of watching a videotape a while ago 
showing Mr. Childers selling potash. and this was an example of the ability of the individual . . . and I say 
again, contrary to your explanation of my opinion, I hold him in high regard. I think he’s an excellent manger 



for the private sector, and that is why you have got him to help you privatize the potash corporation. I’ not 
being critical here. I am saying that is probably the best you could get to sell off the potash corporation. 
 
My problem is, is the idea of selling off the potash corporation. what I want to know is what is the cost of 
advertising that has been carried out to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I will try and get for the hon. member the information on the videotape and the 
communication with the employees that was prepared, and I said I would get that for the hon. member and get 
it back to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Minister, the tape that I refer to you, I’m glad that you are aware of it. I wondered if, 
for the benefit of the members of the Assembly and others who are interested, whether you could get me a 
copy of that tape when you’re getting the cost of it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have sat here for some time and I have listened to the 
discussion on this sell-off of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and I really must say, Mr. Chairman, 
that I am shocked by the performance of the minister. That performance, Mr. Chairman, is making a mockery 
of this whole process to a level, to an extent that has never been witnessed in this House before. Here we have 
a case of deception by a minister of a Crown that has reached new heights. There is no doubt about that. 
 
We have seen today, without any doubt, a very clear indication of why closure was used. I t was used because 
the government wanted to spend no more than two days in this House to answer the questions in the 
committee because the government had decided some time before this that it was not going to provided the 
answers. This is the biggest cover-up since Watergate, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And the minister laughs. Well he might laugh but the public of Saskatchewan, who are the shareholders, who 
are the owners of this corporation and this resource, don’t find it very funny. How in Heaven’s name can a 
minister of the Crown stand up in this House and say to the people of Saskatchewan who own this company, 
you don’t have a right to know? That’s indefensible. 
 
Now maybe on the part of this minister it’s expected, because here is the minister who misled the public of 
Saskatchewan in 1986 . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I don’t believe that members are to refer to other members in the particular 
vernacular of misleading in the Assembly, and I ask the member to withdraw that remark and continue his 
speech. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – If that’s unparliamentary, I will withdraw it, Mr. Chairman, but I will say this, that this 
is the minister who in 1986 did not tell the truth to the people of Saskatchewan about his deficit in his budget 
and made an error of some $800 million. 
 
Let me qualify that. It wasn’t an error; it was intentionally said to the people of Saskatchewan that the number 
on the deficit was something which it was not, in order to try to get by an election. Today we are seeing the 
same kind of deception, which you say I can’t call misleading, on the part of this minister once again. That’s 
the history of this man, and I suppose that’s why he’s piloting this Bill through the House rather the minister 
of mineral resources. 
 
Now what have we seen here today and yesterday? We have seen the minister come to this House, when he is 
asked what are you plans, oh he comes and he makes glowing statement about how there’s going to be 
diversification, that the potash corporation is going to do major things. But when he’s asked what is it 
intending to do he says there are no plans. 
 
Today when he is asked, what is the budget for advertising for the promotion of this whole thing, he says 
there is no budget. This is August 11. The minister has made it clear that this whole thing is going to be in 
place by the end of September. Anyone who even knows a small amount about what it takes to put together 
this kind of a major proposition knows you can’t do it in that period of time. Therefore that whole process is 
done, and he knows it and we know and the people know it. And he’s hiding the facts from this House and 
he’s hiding the facts from the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
The minister was asked today, what have been the legal fees. He can’t tell us. Well all of those things, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s not a question of the minister can’t tell us; it’s really a matter of the fact that the minister 
refuses to tell us. And because he had determined and this government had determined some time ago that 
they weren’t going to provide these answers, they put closure in so that then over time they could not be 
forced to provide those answers by public pressure as the debate continued. 
 
There is all the evidence that anyone could possibly need including the editorial writers in our press, that the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t want this Bill to proceed. The other reason why closure was imposed – because 
opposition has been growing and the minister knew that as long as he stood up in this House and stonewalled 
and refused to provide the answer, the longer it took, the more that opposition would grow. 
 
I ask the question then. Let us assume that the minister is right Let us assume that none of these things have 
been done. Let us assume that there have been no plans. Let us assume there have been no evaluations. Let us 
assume there is no plan for an advertising. If that’s the case, then this whole Bill being before this House 
cannot be justified. 
 
No one could make such a major decisions with such major implications as to sell off a $2 billion asset, or 
whatever that valuation is, without having done some considerable study. We know that the government has 
done that, and yet they refuse to provide that information to owners of the resource and the company, the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the closure is here because the government did not want to give the answers. Earlier in this debate it was 
suggested that there is a sweetheart deal. And I say it again. I think that there is a deal. I think the minister is 
involved in that deal. I think this minister has been involved in selling us out, along with the Premier. 
 
Oh, he says, well we can’t do any of this work because we need the legislation first. Well if that argument 
holds true, how does he defend the Premier going to Korea and India and China and Japan and trying to wheel 
and deal and sell off the potash corporation. You’ve got to apply the same argument in that respect as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you then, as soon as your colleague moves away, in light of all of this, Mr. 
Minister, and in light of the fact that his company is owned by the people of Saskatchewan, why are you not 
prepared to stand up in this House as their representative and provide the answers which they as owners have 
right to know? How ca you justify hiding this information from the owners, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Sometimes, not intentionally, the hon. member is humorous. And for the hon. member 
from Regina North East to talk about cover-up, he’s an expert. he was prepared to risk the very lives of people 
in Regina to cover up a PCP (polychlorinated biphenyl) spill -- 10 feet of concrete, 10 feet of concrete on 
Federal Pioneer. He covered it up. He covered it up. PCBs could be seeping into the aquifers in Regina, but he 
covered it up; prepared to put lives at stake -–covered it up. 
 
Do you know how they got the information? They got the freedom of information legislation in the United 
States. That’s where the press in Regina were able to get the information that you had covered up for some 18 
months, I believe, 18 months. 
 
But I want to put the information on privatization in perspective. This government tabled the information on 
Weyerhaeuser. We perhaps made a mistake because it had a lot of big words in it and the NDP didn’t’ 
understand a lot of it, but we stacked big books and piles of information in this Assembly. You know that the 
NDP did with it? Who read it? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I read it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Okay, one read it, one read it all . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I believe that hon. 
member did. I believe the hon. member did. Well it’s interesting, if you did read it; there were no questions 
about it after. Very interesting that way. 
 
And then, Sask Minerals, information tabled, information tabled on the privatization, tabled and tabled and 
tabled. So the public does get the information. To say that they don’t is simply not accurate. And to say, and 



we can agree to disagree, that doing an assessment after this bill is passed as to the market and what 
promotional activities are needed to get the greatest number of Saskatchewan people buying shares but also 
giving comfort to the Saskatchewan people, even those that choose not to buy, that at least they had an 
opportunity. So having said all of that, I happen to believe that a fair position. 
 
So it’s fair, and you can I can get into a debate. I have given the documents here about how far are we out -- 
$12 billion on oil on $50 a barrel, and potash at several hundred dollars a tonne. But I’m prepared to get that 
information again because the member from Quill Lakes has an extremely short memory. So we can get into 
the personal debate, you and I, as to who does what to whom. 
 
The fact is, and you can debate it all you want, when potash was nationalized, you stood up in this Assembly 
and said you didn’t’ have information. You didn’t have the information on how much you were going to 
promote; you never told us. Never did find out how much you spend on the family of Crown corporations’ 
ads. Never did. Never did. 
 
So it’s all right, I gather, for you but not for anybody else, I gather. That’s the argument you’re making. 
 
You never knew the number of mines; you never knew how much you were going to spend; you never knew 
how much of the taxpayers’ money you were going to put out; you didn’t know what your legal fees were 
going to be because, if I recall the answers . . . as a matter of fact, we couldn’t’ even get all the firms, if I 
recall . . . 
 
(0930) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You haven’t read the transcript. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Oh yes I did. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Do you think we’re going to tell you publicly what we’re going to offer to buy a 
company in advance of the sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Do you think I’m going to tell you what the advertising costs, when people know what the 
advertising costs are? And a lot of times they have an objection to when the costs are out. So you know that as 
well as I do. You know that as well as I do. So be wise about it. Be wise in it. And as I’ve indicated on 
numerous occasions today, we will do the assessment of the market after – after the legislation is passed. 
 
To say that the public will not have the information, based on the track record of this government as opposed 
to your track record, the public gets the information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Mr. Minister, in that non-answer you admitted on e very significant thing which I took 
note of. You admitted that you do have an advertising budget and you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, I did not. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Yes, you did. And that you have a plan in place. Now, Mr. Minister, how can you 
justify, therefore, not providing the answer to this House? Well here’s what you said. You said, “Do you think 
that I will give you the advertising costs?” What can one conclude from that except for the fact that you do 
have the advertising costs, that you do have a budget, and that you’re hiding it from this House, and you’re 
hiding it form the people of Saskatchewan who are going to foot the bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in light of that, will you now undertake to do what any responsible minister would do and 
provide to this House the budget for the advertising for your political promotion, and what that advertising 
process is going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – There’s a difference between saying that if I had it, I would not give it to you for certain 
reasons, and saying that I don’t have it and what we will do after. And I’ve stated that position I think, seven 
or eight times this morning. 
 



Mr. Lautermilch: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the minister some questions regarding the 
advertising cost of this promotion for the sale of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. In this House 
yesterday, Mr. Minister, you indicated that you were targeting 50,000 Saskatchewan investors, so you must 
have done some kind of an analysis, you must have made some kind of decision as to what the economics and 
the economy of this province would allow in terms of Saskatchewan people who might be able to afford to 
invest in this province. 
 
So if you’ve done an assessment in terms of how many investors you would expect, clearly, given the 
millions and millions of dollars that you’ve spent on advertising over the years that you’ve been government, 
you must have some ideas of what it would cost to target the Saskatchewan people to sell these assets of this 
Crown corporation. 
 
You’ve indicated that your agent will be Dome Advertising of Saskatchewan, and I’m going to ask you again, 
Mr. Minister, to check with your officials as to how much they have budgeted in terms of targeting the 
Saskatchewan investors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Let me correct the hon. ember. I did not say that. I said I hoped. That was my person view. 
I’d like to see more of them than 50,000. I hope that the number are people that have not invested before in 
any way, shape or form, be it bonds, shares, or whatever. That was my hope. It was not a target. I think to be 
fair, it’s not a target that I set. 
 
We will meet, try to meet the following objectives, as I’ve said several times. One, we will try and get as 
many Saskatchewan people . . . One of the message that we get is that if there is to be an issue, a vast majority 
of the people of this want the opportunity to buy shares. So we’re going to try and meet that objective. But 
secondly, we have to meet the objective. But secondly, we have to meet the objective of even those who 
choose not to buy, that they have the comfort of having had the opportunity. Those are the two objectives. 
 
The number was my hope; it was not the target. I mean, we have to meet two more broad objectives than that 
specific number, but it was not the target that I set with respect. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Mr. Minister, it may not be your target, but it was figure that you used. And if we can 
use your figure, what it means is not mater how many millions of dollars that you’re going to spend in this 
province to advertise this foolish move, if we can use your figure, it means that you’ve got 950,000 
Saskatchewan people excluded from this privatization move. 
 
Now what I want to ask, Mr. Minister, and I will ask you again. As Minister of Finance, surely, given the 
amount of money that you’ve spent on advertising in the past years, having the knowledge of what it cost on 
your extravagant advertising of the privatization of Saskoil, having knowledge of all you’ve spent on 
Westbridge, having knowledge of all of this, if your officials haven’t prepared a budget, which I don’t believe 
and members on this side don’t believe and the people of this province don’t believe and if your move has 
been so ill-planned and ill-conceived that you don’t have these budgetary figures or a proposed budget, can 
you tell us what you would expect to be spending, through Dome, to sell the people of this province of the 
privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I get, I must say, a bit of a kick out of the ratio of the figure that is said I had hoped and 
what that is to the population and that we now have 950-some thousand people excluded. 
 
I must admit that I hadn’t given consideration to advertising on your favourite program, Romper Room, for 
the two- and three-and four-year-olds, so that they could go out and buy shares that are included in the million 
people. And I have not considered whether we should be advertising on the Flintstones for a rather particular 
market, at least of one Regina alderman familiar to many of you opposite. 
 
So when we take a look at the total numbers in the province, I think in fairness we’re probably dealing with 
the adult population – in fairness. I think ultimately if Saskatchewan shareholders were in the 15 to 25 per 
cent of the adult population, we would be higher by quite a ways than the national average. And I think that 
would be a big change in the province, and I think it would indicate a willingness and perhaps a desire of 
many people in this province to in fact participate. 
 



And there would be reasons for not buying. Certainly, I’ve never denied affordability. I have never denied 
that some people choose not to, some people do not want to invest in shares. Others make other decisions. So 
to include, say 950,000 would be excluded, taking the figure – and I said it was my hope as opposed to a 
target. 
 
I have restated several times what our objectives are, and they’re twofold, and they’re important. People tell 
us that they want the opportunity. But the second thing is, even if they choose not to buy, they have to have, 
the people of this province have to have the comfort that they had an opportunity. Those are the objectives 
we’re going to meet. We’ll do that market assessment after the legislation. I have no doubt that the debate had 
an effect on market, and I was through that earlier this morning. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Mr. Minister, that response is simply disgusting. But I tell you what did come out of the 
response was that you indicated that those who choose not to buy are going to be blasted with a barrage of 
government advertising, government advertising at their own expense to sell a corporation that they can’t 
afford to share in. 
 
And as my colleague says, what you’re continuing to do is force closure on this legislature, where this debate 
would be taking place, so that you can continue to debate outside of this Assembly, so that you can continue 
to spend millions and millions of taxpayers’ dollars on advertising to sell them something they can’t afford to 
participate in. and that, Mr. Minister, is why this debate should be happening in here. 
 
Because rather than funnelling tens of millions of dollars of taxpayers; money through your friends in Dome, 
you should be standing in this House and providing answers to the people of this province so that they can 
make their decision based on the facts surrounding this issue. But instead of that, Mr. Minister, you chose to 
introduce closure to this House, to close this debate so that one side of this issue can be heard, and one side 
only – and that’s your side. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that the 950,000, using your own figures, the 950,000 people who can’t be a 
part of this move of your government, will not forget you, nor will they forget the fact that you limited the 
debate on a $2 billion deal, one of the biggest financial deals that this country will see in this year or maybe in 
this decade. That’s the issue. The issue, Mr. Minister, is that you’ve chosen not to participate in any debate on 
one of the biggest financial moves that this province will ever see. 
 
I ask you one more time, Mr. Minister, will you allow the people of this province, the 950,000 people who 
won’t be able to be involved in purchasing the shares of the potash corporation – I believe it may be more –
but will you allow those people to know how much this political advertising that you’re about to embark on is 
going to cost them. Will you at least tell them that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I want the public to recognize that the NDP are saying that a great number of people will 
not have the opportunity and that many people are going to be upset with closure. I’ll tell you, the two-year-
olds that are going to be upset with closure and the two-year-olds that are going to be upset that they can’t 
buy a share are the same two year-olds that signed your petitions. They’re the ones that are going to be upset. 
And the two-year-olds that signed your petitions, you haven’t stood up and commended the Minister of 
Education for the advances we’ve made in our educational system that we got two-year-olds that can run 
around and sign petitions. 
 
So be realistic in your argument when you state that everybody, including babies and children are being 
excluded from buying shares. It’s silly. It’s a silly argument that you’re making. The hon. member happens to 
be backing the member from Prince Albert and saying that babies and two-year-olds . . . like I say, you want 
us to advertise on Romper Room because it’s the favourite program of one of your members. So let’s not get 
extreme in your statements. 
 
The fact is you look at the, by and large, the adult population, perhaps some of the teenagers that maybe 
interested. Certainly some parents will buy for their children. But to say that that’s part of the market that you 
would go out and promote and they’re excluded, I think, is silly. 
 
I have stated on several occasions this morning, quite properly in my view, that this debate has been a 
protracted one. The public are aware of it, the public are tired of it, but the public were aware of it, and that it 



will have some impact on how Saskatchewan people assess the issue of shares in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And we will dot hat assessment after the debate, and I think quite properly. I think quite 
properly that is the proper way to assess the market and what is necessary to meet the two objectives that I 
have set out, which is the opportunity to buy; and secondly, if choose not to buy, a comfort that the 
opportunity was fairly given. 
 
So having said that, I’ve not restated that several times today and I believe the hon. member from Regina 
Wascana would like to introduce some guests. 
 
(0945) 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: – Mr. Chairman, I beg leave to . . . would you mind if I introduce our friends from Quebec? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin: – Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take a moment of our time, with the blessings of the members 
opposite, to introduce some friends from Quebec who are attending the bilingual school at the University of 
Regina. What we have here today is – I understand you’re not allowed to speak French, so I won’t endeavour 
to try and speak French either – however what you see here today is a debate on the potash privatization. 
Potash, as you know, is a mineral that we have lots of in this province. It’s used for fertilizer . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I would ask the member just to introduce the guests and not to go into debate. 
 
Mr. Martin: – And the members opposite are asking questions of the Minister of Finance. So, Mr. Chairman, 
would the member opposite and the members here please welcome our guests from Quebec. 
 
Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill 20 (continued) 
 

Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I join with the member to welcome the guests in the gallery. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask a number of question to the minister who has been stonewalling this legislature 
this morning, virtually giving no information whatsoever. I want to deal, Mr. Minister, with the financial 
position of this province, a contrast of the financial position of when you took over, and the state of the 
financial position of this province under your stewardship. 
 
Today we sit with a debt, Mr. Minister, of $3.9 billion in the Consolidated Fund. We have an additional $10 
billion in Crown corporations. This province has a debt of $13 billion, and you say you have been building. 
You say you have been helping the people of Saskatchewan. You say there’s so much more we can be. 
 
When you took office this province had the lowest per capita debt in all of Canada. Today we have the 
highest per capita debt in all of Canada. Today we are offering a sell-off of a valuable resource corporation, 
and at the same time we have 90,000 people who are part-time workers. We have unemployment, we have 
people fleeing from this province – 13,000 left this province, out-migration over in-migration, in the first five 
months. 
 



We are paying on an annual basis, just to service that debt which you created, $390 million annually. Every 
man, woman, and child has to contribute more than a dollar each, every day, every day of every week of 
every month just to service debt. And you say, we are building. Oh boy, building for whom, the people of 
Saskatchewan ask. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is not the first privatization that your government has introduced. There has been a series of 
privatizations. And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, and certainly you should know this as Minister of Finance 
and certainly as minister of privatization of the potash corporation – you say it’s a great thrust for the 
province to privatize. I’m going to ask you, Mr. Speaker, can you indicate to this House the total amount of 
revenue that this province has received to date from the sell-off of assets up until the privatization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
We have sold off Saskoil; we’ve made hundreds of millions of dollars on that. We’ve sold off SaskCOMP. 
We sold off Sask Minerals. We sold off PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company). And what has been the 
consequences for the people of Saskatchewan here? Their debt has mounted – astronomical – to where we 
have the highest per capita debt in the nation. And when you took over we had the lowest per capita debt 
anywhere in Canada. 
 
The poverty rate -- Saskatchewan is the second highest poverty rate in all of Canada, second only to 
Newfoundland. You say privatization is working. Those are the bare facts. What about so far as the provincial 
government? The credit rating has gone down substantially under your administration. But you say we’re 
building. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, can you give a ballpark figure at least, as to the amount of revenue that has been 
taken in to date in respect to privatization, and the allocation and what it was done. Was that debt retirement 
or was it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I have to remind the hon. member, not surprisingly, that we are debating the details 
of the potash Bill. That information as to the moneys that have come in from the efforts, the privatization 
efforts to date, is quite properly directed to the Crown Management Board in the Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
Now what I am prepared to do is go and find out what is the total of those sales to date. But the hon. member 
has been around long enough – why, I don’t know – but he’s been around long enough to know what the rules 
are. That information is readily obtainable that way. Secondly, we have indicated from at the time of the sales 
what those amounts were. So again, they’re all public record. 
 
Now you want us, when we’re dealing with potash, to go and get the information dealing with a whole bunch 
of other departments. You know that that’s not the practice, but we’ll . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well sit down. If you aren’t going to give it, sit down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, I’ll finish my answer. You took long enough in your question; I’ll finish my answer. 
So I’ll tell you that that’s where that information is attainable, it’s readily attainable, and it’s in the public 
information, so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Speaker, the point of order is the minister gets up time and time again, stonewalling, 
saying he has no answer, and then speaks and wasters the time of the committee saying he has no answer, and 
then goes on talking, stonewalling – and we have closure. We know the debate is over at 11 o’clock tonight, 
and he is spending all the time filibustering in order not to give any answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I’ve listened to the point or order and I believe that in clause 1 in debate that 
there is wide-ranging debate allowed on all bill sand all motions. But I also – order – I also believe that the 
minister is allowed to respond as he would see fit. And review of Hansard over the years has indicated that all 
ministers have taken that rule. But I would also ask members to allow the minister to respond with the same 
courtesy that the members re allowed in placing their questions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – The point that I want to make, and I know you’re embarrassed n respect to it, but what has 
happened is our debt has risen astronomically. The benefit to the people—there have been cuts, there have 
been tax increases, debt has increased, interest payments have increased, and you say you are building. 
You’ve had privatization going since 1982.’ 
 
And I’ll tell you, you have sold off a lot of assets. Saskoil, over $100 million; PAPCO, over 248 million – at 
least you said. You didn’t receive anything – you have it to them, but you said you sold it for 248 million. 
You sold off Sask Minerals for 15 million; you sold off highway equipment; you sold off and sold off and 
sold off. And what has been the consequences for the people of Saskatchewan? Increased debt, increased 
taxes, cut in services, and more poverty because we are second highest rate of poverty of any province in 
Canada other than Newfoundland. 
 
That’s the point I was making. I thought you would be proud to stand up here and say, well, we have 
privatized and this is the amount that we took in. and I thought you would stand up in this legislature and say 
this is what we did with it. But you’re not proud of it because you’re trying to pull the wool over the people of 
Saskatchewan’s eyes. That’s what you’re trying to do. But it’s not working, and the polls indicate that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And you couldn’t come into this legislature and debate Committee of the Whole normal time. You had to use 
closure. And you had to come in here and stonewall and deceive the people of Saskatchewan with non-facts. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, you can give no answers in respect to the privatization of the potash 
corporation, but you’re going to obviously received some money I want to ask you, what is the intentions of 
the government once they sell off the potash corporation, what are they going to do with the money? Are they 
going to retire the debt which you have burdened the people of Saskatchewan? Or are you going to blow it on 
some more extravagant electioneering campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well the hon. member has restated the NDP rhetoric that has been on for four months, and 
that the public have made it abundantly clear that they no longer believe you. 
 
And let me just respond because it’s a statistic that I find one that the NDP tend to put the province in a bad 
light, and that’s the so-called poverty statistic. And it’s interesting the way the poverty statistics work, that if 
someone has zero income they’ve obviously below the poverty level. And so when our farm net income drops 
below, up with go that statistical number. 
 
So to put it in perspective, if you’re saying every farmer is poor, I don’t think that’s right. I freely 
acknowledge some are having serious difficulty. But to extrapolate that is a distortion of the statistical 
information. 
 
Now what we have said, what we have said and what the Premier has said publicly certainly we expect at 
least some of the moneys to go into further diversification, and that is the objective of trying to get the potash 
corporation, which is now a single commodity company, into a more balanced company to offset the cycles. 
 
Secondly, we will be taking the people of this province the question, what should in fact be done with the 
moneys? And we will be, after the sale . . . well you laugh at it. I don’t know what’s wrong with going out 
and consulting with the people of this province. We will go out and ask the people where they the money 
should in fact be spent. And I think that’s proper. And we will consult with the people of this province. The 
Premier has said that, and we will do that after the issue. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Mr. Minister, what are the possible uses for the money? What are the options that you’re going 
to be giving to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – I mean I’ve already indicated one. Further economic diversification is one; whether there 
are special projects or items that the public feels are worthwhile. The options are limited only by the 
imagination of the Saskatchewan people, and I happen to hold that in high regard I thin its quite fair and 
proper for the government to go back and consult with the people of this province as to where in fact this 
money should go. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Well just let me get it clear. You’re selling off the potash corporation which made $106 
million – you’re going to privatize it – turn that over to the private sector, and then you’re going to get the 
proceeds from the sale of the potash corporation, and they you say the potential is to go into other risk 
ventures? 
 
Is that the interpretation that you’re looking at, some of the areas of diversification and risk areas, after what 
you have already and the people own is a potash corporation with an outstanding future under proper 
management? But what are you saying? Is that your intentions to sell of the potash and then to use this money 
that comes in into new forms of investment? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
(1000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I have said we will – and I believe it’s quite proper – that we will consult with the people 
of this province as to where the money . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: – I want to be specific here. You have . . . selling off a valuable asset. The debt that you have run 
upon the people of this province is astronomical. Generations will be paying for the mismanagement and 
incompetence and corruption of this government. There’s no doubt about it. For generations will be paying 
for the sins and the corruption of that government and incompetence of the government. 
 
And I want to ask you, you’ve been selling off assets, and further and further is the debt piling up on the 
backs of ordinary Saskatchewan citizens, and what I want to ask you, that debt that this government has is on 
the backs of the people of this province -- $390 million annually in interest, over a million dollars a day. I 
want to ask you, out of the millions of dollars that you’ve done by selling, selling, selling, this is the 
consequences; millions of dollars you’ve taken in sell-off assets. Now you’re gong to sell off yet another 
assets, and I ask you, is debt reduction one of the options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I don’t know how I can express it more clearly, what we said we would do. And I’ve 
indicated now three times to the hon. member that we are going to consult with the people of this province as 
to where the proceeds should go. And I’ve given one. I believe economic diversification will be one that the 
people of this province will choose. 
 
Now I understand why you don’t like to hear the answer that the government’s going out to consult as to what 
we’re going to do with the proceeds, but we intend to do it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Mr. Minister, I think what you should have done is consulted with the people of Saskatchewan 
before you went into this here privatization; then you would have been on. But you’re going to dispose of the 
asset and then you’re going to say, well here’s what we’re going to do – we’re going to build some more for 
you, and you’re going to squander the money just like you have done in the past. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, there is no doubt, Mr. Minister, there are some winners. There are some winners in your 
privatization. There is no doubt about it. There will be an undervaluation of the assets that are sold. And 
buying Saskoil shares, you had to be blindfolded or have no knowledge not to know that you could make 
money, a good potential for making money in buying Saskoil shares. And there are winners then. 
 
And the Premier stood up and he talked about some of the winners when he addressed this legislature. And do 
you know what he said? There are winners with Saskoil. He said, the effective price was 5.34, and that stock 
is now trading at 11 and that stock is paying dividends. And there are winners, he said. 
 
But I’ll ask you, Mr. Minister, how many are participating in Saskatchewan in that? Twenty-five per cent of 
the shares of Saskoil, and 75 per cent down in eastern Canada. That’s where it is. They’re participating in our 
assets. 



 
And I congratulate the government in respect to the issuing of bonds. But just take a look at what the winners 
get. If you have some money to purchase SaskPower bonds you are a winner. But you know, there were on 
40,000 people that were able to purchase SaskPower bonds, somewhere in that neigbhourhood. 
 
And the Premier stood up in this House and you know what he said? Everybody’s a winner in privatization, 
public participation, SaskPower bonds. And he said, SaskPower bonds were issues at a hundred dollars, the 
bonds traded as high as $118. The $18 capital gain, he said, is tax free. You’d have to receive $36 per cent 
return, he said, in order to get that $18. And he said, besides there’s another 10 per cent on top of that. He 
said, do you realize that there’s 46 per cent in one year – 46 per cent in one year is what the Premier brags 
about. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, that’s what’s happening – 40,000 participated. They could have, I agree, gave 
them a good, reasonable rate, but 46 per cent. Who was paying for it? That is borrowed money by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. That interest has to be paid, and who’s paying for it? All of the users across 
the province. 
 
That’s what’s happening – 46 per cent – nice return. Participation, you call it. But how many? Forty thousand. 
How did the Joe on the street who didn’t participate, what did he get out of it? Well he helped to pay for the 
advertising, he helped to pay for the bond share issuing, and that is helping to pay a massive amount in return 
to those who are privileged in order to be able to participate in the tax break and in the interest rates that 
you’re paying. 
 
Now there’s nothing wrong . . .don’t get me wrong and don’t get up screaming and saying we’re against 
people of Saskatchewan participating in bonds. The federal government has been doing it for years. But just 
take a look at it and say, how many people have the opportunity to participate? Fifty thousand . . . 40,000, and 
you say it’s a massive success. Saskoil – 25 per cent only. How do those that are outside of it benefit? 
 
Today we own this potash corporation. For better or for worse – God help us, under your management it’s for 
worse. But we own a great asset, a great mining and development we had at the university. We had a funding 
for it. We were leading in the potash world. And that’s all going to be squandered, Mr. Minister, to the 
multinational corporations and the tycoons from down East, and the people of Saskatchewan pick up the 
wreckage that is left behind. And the wreckage that is left behind is the astronomical debt that has been laid 
on the backs of this people. 
 
I’ll tell you, under our administration, Mr. Minister, there was some different economic times, I agree, but I’ll 
tell you that there was administration under Alan Blakeney working for the people of this province. You may 
not have agreed with the ideology, but I’ll tell you, he ran this province on a business-like basis for the people 
of this province. We didn’t have the accumulated debt. 
 
And how is the ordinary citizen that is not able to buy shares in this potash corporation, are they going to 
contribute to the advertising and to the legal fees? Taxpayers’ money, of course it is. Are they going to, when 
the shares jump up because you undervalue the asset, are they going to get a gain? Of course not. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, who are the winners and who are the losers? And I think that the losers are 
the people of Saskatchewan, because throughout the world, if you look at the Japanese economy, they have 
virtually no resources of their own, and they go around the world and they purchase assets and they take them 
back and they manufacture, and they’re one of the leading industrial countries of the world, buying assets. 
 
Farmers want to own their land; business men want to own their business; Saskatchewan people like to be 
able to control their economic destiny. And what happens is if you give it into the hands of the few, Mr. 
Minister, we don’t’ have control of our own economic destiny. And if you don’t have control of your own 
economic destiny, you don’t have control of your political destiny. That’s because he who pays the piper and 
has control will dictate the government of the day. That’s a known fact across this world. 
 
And what I say to you, Mr. Minister, I’m shocked, I’m really shocked at this government, proceeding as it is 
with the massive sell-off of assets. Maybe there can be some realignment. Why didn’t we, if we’re going to 
privatize, do it over a series of years even, and allow Saskatchewan people, as they could raise the money, to 



be owners? Why do you have to go to Bay Street? And the Premier stands in this House and attacks eastern 
Canada for having all the privileges. And here he comes and he offers to eastern Canada one of the great 
resources, control of one of the great resources of this province. 
 
And so I just simply say, Mr. Minister, there will be some winners, but boy there’s going to be a lot of losers 
because you’ll squander this money like you’ve squandered the rest. And the people of this province, do you 
know what they’ll be left with is an astronomical debt of $13 billion with a $390 million just to pay the 
interest annually. With the highest per capita debt in the nation, how can you stand in this legislature and say 
that your economic philosophy is working? 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s the problem you have. The people of this province are saying, we gave them a chance; 
they’re going too far. And on this deal, Mr. Minister, you are doing too far. 
 
I want to ask you: how does the ordinary fellow on the street who can’t participate, how is he a winner when 
he loses? Now it’s owned by the government on behalf o the people of Saskatchewan. Foreign owned – is he 
better off? Maybe. You’ll say, oh there’ll be some more jobs and diversification. But you say you have no 
plans. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, could you address the question of who are the winners in this, the big winners, because 
I don’t think we agree. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We’ve agreed to disagree through this debate, and the hon. member added absolutely 
nothing to what was debated yesterday afternoon between the Leader of the Opposition and myself, and the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview and myself. I think to their credit they articulated it much more rationally. 
 
Let me take a look at the Japan argument. The Japan argument is one of the strangest ones that the hon. 
member could make, because what he says is absolutely right that Japan is going out and acquiring assets 
doesn’t have the resources. but where does Japan fundamentally get its money? From the people, from the 
people of Japan that are loaning their money and their pension moneys at 2 and 3 per cent to the large 
financial institutions in Japan, and that has been the fundamental source, has been the fundamental source. 
Now their ethic and their culture is such that the people are comfortable doing that and want to do that,. 
That’s not realistic in Canada, in my view, North America, different society. 
 
But that is where, I think, one of the largest investors in the world is the post office pension plan in Japan 
with, I believe 100 and nearly $200 billion U.S. The railroad pensions, one of the largest companies, huge, 
huge pools of investment capital from the Japanese people that put their money in these savings accounts at 2 
and 3 perhaps 4 per cent, I know is very high. So the people of Japan have in fact put their money into the 
economic development of their own country. 
 
Secondly, the question of management, and we’ve not had the third or fourth New Democratic Party members 
be critical of the management of the potash corporation. The management of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan today is recognize in the industry as perhaps the finest management team of any potash 
company in the world. And I don’t think that the people . . . I know that the people of this province do not 
have to in any way apologize for the management of the potash corporation. 
 
And I actually think, I actually think, from the people I’ve talked to in Saskatoon, some of the union people in 
the potash corporation, that they believe that the management that we have today in this potash corporation is 
the best management of any of the potash companies. And I’ve had that from union leaders within the potash 
corporation who believe that this management is extremely good. 
 
(1015) 
 
So I tell the hon. member that you sit and criticize the management; in fact, the management ream that is in 
the potash corporation today is recognized in the industry, it’s recognized by those that purchase our potash as 
perhaps the finest team, most credible team in this industry. And that that management, because of its 
credibility, has put the potash corporation in a position that it was not before; that is the price leader and the 
leader in the industry. 
 



Before, with the greatest respect we had size but IMC was the price leader, and it was until 1986. and you can 
dispute that. The leadership role has now moved to the potash . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. 
And the present president came over . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- From IMC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes, he came from IMC. And when he came over his skills were such and his abilities are 
such that that role of leading the industry moved rather quickly, moved within a matter of months to the 
potash corporation. I think it’s a credit to the individual and the team that he has put together. 
 
So then we’ve talked about the matter of control. and we went through the debate yesterday, nothing new. 
The NDP believe and equate control and ownership. and we went through that debate. And the hon. member 
from Saskatoon says, rightly so. And that is their equation. 
 
And I think that that’s a dangerous, dangerous equation and a dangerous concept. Because it leads you 
logically that if you want to control the oil industry, you have to own it If you want to control a gas industry, 
the government has to own it. If you want to control a forest industry, the government has to own it. If you 
want to control all of the mining industry, the government has to own it. If you want to control agriculture, the 
government has to won it. Those are logical extension of the fundamental premise put forward by the New 
Democratic Party that control only comes about through ownership. 
 
We don’t ascribe to that. And that is one of the competing differences. In fairness, and we agreed to disagree I 
think yesterday, unless the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is reconsidering my remarks today, which I doubt – 
but control equalling ownership has been restated, restated, restated by the New Democratic Party, and if 
there’s been on consistent theme through the whole debate for four months from the New Democratic Party, 
is that in order to control, the government must own. And we reject that as a necessary premise. We reject 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We control, Saskatchewan controls the oil industry, not by ownership, by legislation and 
regulation and the taxing powers. And the same for the forest. We sing forest management licensing 
agreements. We don’t own the forest industry; we sign licensing agreements. We don’t own the forest 
industry; we sign licensing agreements – not even legislation, just agreements – and we have the power to do 
it by legislation. 
 
And I go through the gas industry. Again, we can control and regulate through regulation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You’re just stonewalling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I am not, I am not. I’m responding to the matter raised by the hon. member opposite, and I 
think in fairness I should be allowed to do it. It may be repetitive but his arguments were repetitive with 
respect. 
 
So we’ve talked about that. We’ve talked about the fundamental difference of control, and I say that your 
premise and your position is an inherently dangerous one and also one that is not accepted by the vast 
majority of the people of this province. 
 
So you ask me who benefit. I say that the employees of WESTBRIDGE benefit – 97 per cent have bought 
shares. I say that the people of Prince Albert, and I say that the employees of Weyerhaeuser, and the new 
employees as a result of a paper mill, have benefitted. And I say that the province is better off having a much, 
much stronger company. 
 
So I can go on and on and on as to who benefits. And I suggest that the people of Meadow Lake will benefit. 
And I suggest that Indian people will benefit in Meadow Lake. You may not like that but I believe that they 
will benefit. You say they won’t; we say they will. They will be the judges and they will be the ones that 
ultimately determine the issue. 
 



Ms. Simard: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the minister has just given us another example of 
stonewalling in this legislature, taking up time for the purpose of avoiding answering the questions of the 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: – After closure was invoked by this government, after they limited the debate, they are 
attempting to limit further through stonewalling. The minister’s response to the member from Quill Lakes 
completely ignores the history of the potash corporation and the history of the potash industry in 
Saskatchewan, as was pointed out very aptly by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday, which I’m not going 
to go into in detail at this point. But when he makes his point about ownership and control, he ignores the 
facts, he ignores the history, and he ignores the fact that he doesn’t have the powers that he claims he does for 
regulation of the industry. 
 
The minister had indicated that with respect to the money that he receives from the sell-off of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, that he will consult with the people as to how it is to be spent. I would like the 
minister to tell us whether or not this money will be going into a special fund, or whether it’ll begin in to the 
consolidated revenue, or in what manner he intends . . . or in what way he intends to use this money or 
dispose of it. 
 
Now I just want to point out, and I think it’s important to point out that when the minister talks about 
consulting with the people, it’s very interesting that he has refused to consult and listen to the people about 
privatization in general, and about privatization of the potash corporation specifically, because the minister 
knows full well that the majority of people in this province, a very substantial majority, somewhere between 
60 to 70 per cent ore more, are opposed to his privatization measures, and are opposed to the privatization of 
the potash corporation. He’s not consulting, Mr. Chair, he’s not listening, Mr. Chair, but not he’s going to 
consult with the people on the issue of how the money is to be spent. 
 
Mr. Minister, then my question to you is how are you going to deal with this money? Are you going to put it 
into a special fund, or will it be going into general revenues and then you will ask the people how they wan tit 
disbursed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The hon. member understood the Crown corporation’s report are handled by a holding 
company, Crown Management Board. Proceeds obviously go there. 
 
Now it may well be that the people say establish a trust. It may well be that the people say that some money 
should go to native economic development, It may well be that the people say that money should go to 
economic diversification. I mean, that’s why we’re going to consult on it. And you have your views as to 
whether people are opposed. We happen to totally disagree and we’re very comfortable with our position. 
 
But even if I were to take your position that we should govern by polls, a position that you’ve bee highly 
critical of us before, let me tell you what the people of Saskatchewan said when you nationalized the industry. 
The hon. member freely acknowledges that it was not popular; you did not have the polls on your side. And 
I’m just responding to your argument. You accuse me of stonewalling when I respond to the arguments that 
you raise. Am I supposed to sit here and take it and not respond?. No, course not. 
 
So I’ve indicated what we propose to do, what we propose to do. And you know, you may not like that, but I 
have stated what the government policy and position is. 
 
Ms. Simard: – Mr. Minister, you’ve said that you’re going to consult with the people. We see a situation in 
Saskatchewan right now with the privatization of the potash corporation where you are selling off – and from 
all the reports that I have heard, you will be selling off at a substantially reduced value – a major, major asset 
in Saskatchewan, owned by the people of Saskatchewan; an asset that has a lifetime of hundreds, if not 
thousands of years, Mr. Minister, that will bring in substantial revenues to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But instead you are in such a rush to sell it off and give it away, Mr. Minister, that you have introduced 
closure on this legislature without being prepared or coming forth with all the information that is necessary 



for the people of Saskatchewan to fully judge whether or not this venture of yours is a good venture from the 
point of view of the people, Mr. Minister. 
 
You have introduced closure, and now you’re attempting to stonewall this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: – You’re selling away the heritage of the people of Saskatchewan, you’re selling away the 
heritage, Mr. Minister, and you’re doing it in a rush. And I submit, Mr. Minister, the reason for the rush is that 
you wish to create a slush fund in a pre-election year, and that that money is going to be used for the re-
election for the PC Party, and that’s you’re game plan, Mr. Minister. 
 
In other words, your game plan is short-term gain for the PC Party and its friends, and you do not have at 
heart the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. We have asked you repeatedly today for information on 
how much this is costing the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and you don’t know. You don’t’ have any plans for 
diversifying; you don’t know how much the legal fees are going to be; you don’t know how much the 
advertising, advertising your ideological approach and your game plan for a slush fund in a pre-election year, 
Mr. Minister. You don’t have any of the answers. You don’t know what you’re doing, except that you’re bent 
and determined to sell off the heritage of the people of the province of Saskatchewan for your short-term gain. 
That is clear, Mr. Minister. That is clear. 
 
With respect to legal fees, you said you didn’t know what they were, for example, Mr. Minister. You said you 
would come forward with whatever information you could, as I understand, as soon as it was available. Well, 
Mr. Minister, I believe sitting around you there today is a member from one of the law firms who has been 
probably sending you bills on a monthly basis. Perhaps that member could not tell . . . perhaps that person 
could not tell you, Mr. Minister, what the extent of the legal fees from the Saskatoon law firm have been to 
day, Mr. Minister. Could you get me that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I have responded to that on numerous questions. You accuse me of stonewalling. I have 
had to answer questions six, seven, and eight times -- same question over and over and over again. I think the 
stonewalling, quite frankly, is the opposition trying to get this to 11 o’clock tonight. 
 
That’s all they’re doing. They’re filibustering today because they know full well that the questions asked by 
the hon. member from Riversdale and the member from Fairview yesterday were the insightful questions on 
the whole debate, were the legitimate questions on the whole debate, which were the questions which were 
germane to the debate. We disagree, but they were the two that articulated their party’s position, their 
concerns, the issues as they saw them, in a very rational and very strong and very forthright manner. So we 
went through that that debate yesterday. 
 
And now we get people seven, eight, and nine times, same question all over. And I know the hon. member 
from Saskatoon back there will ask the same questions all over and I know the press are just sitting waiting – 
same questions already, and I’ve answered them. I’ve answered them. 
 
So now the hon. member says there’s a slush fund. Maybe that’s the worry. Maybe that the sorry of the New 
Democratic Party that they stalled this debate and went through a four-month filibuster, stating that it was 
going to go on for another . . . indefinitely, not because of the principle, but because of an election timetable. 
And I think that’s a fair accusation that I can make to you. 
 
So what I suggest to the hon. member, fundamentally we believe that you do not have to won to control. 
We’ve been through that debate. We’ve gone through the reasons, and I have now told what the government 
intends to do with regard to the proceeds from the sale. You may not agree with it. You may not agree with it. 
 
(1030) 
 
You may not like the fact that there are proceeds and the government is going to consult with the people of 
this province. That’s your right. I’ve stated the position now several times today – several times today – of 
what we’re going to do with it. 
 



Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: – Mr. Minister, what we’ve seen today is the fact that what you’re prepared to do is engage in 
short-term policies, short-term policies that may have an immediate short-term gain, but do nothing for the 
people of Saskatchewan on a long-term basis. 
 
And we’ve seen that in the are of health. No long-term strategic planning by this government whatsoever, just 
ad hock decisions done on an ad hoc basis. And we’ve see that prevail throughout your entire government, 
decisions being made on an ad hoc basis, on a short-term basis, with no long-term planning. And that’s why, 
Mr. Minister, your policies aren’t working, and that’s why we have a $4 billion deficit in this province, 
because of your lack of long-term planning for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, was: how much has the Saskatoon law firm billed to date? Ask the lawyer; 
he’ll know. It’s a simple question, and a simple answer is all that’s required. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Now we went again through the debate yesterday with the Leader of the Opposition, and 
we talked about competing visions. And I indicated what the strategy was. Now, I’m quite happy to repeat 
that. We believe that we must use every economic lever that we possible can to create economic 
diversification. 
 
The difference, the fundamental differences between the NDP and us, is that, with the greatest respect, you 
are ideologically hidebound and only believe that the government had to buy assets. And you record was 
clear. Your record is irrefutable. The first thing you did was cancel the Meadow Lake pulp mill; the second 
thing you did was Intercon; the third thing you did was buy potash; the fourth thing you did was buy PAPCO. 
That’s the choice that you made in economic development. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And farm land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I never . . . no, I disagree with my colleagues on this side when they say farm land, the 
purchase was a matter of economic development. I believe it was an ideology and a philosophy as to dealing 
with agriculture that the NDP had, and I don’t attribute land bank to economic development. 
 
So I have said, we have taken every lever. We’ve had government involvement; we’ve had private sector 
involvement; we’ve worked with the co-op movement – we’ve done all of those, and we’ll continue to do so. 
But we took two new courses that the NDP rejected. The first one is the people themselves as individuals, 
they are getting the vehicles and the opportunities to invest in the economic development of this province. We 
believe that to be right, we believe it to be vital, and we believe that the people of this province believe it is a 
good idea 
 
And the other area that the NDP very pointedly missed and excluded, and that is the employees themselves of 
the various corporations having an ability and an option and a right to go out and take an ownership position 
in the very companies that they’re working for. 
 
So there is a difference. The Leader of the Opposition and I went through this debate yesterday. I’ve laid out 
the strategy. I’ve laid out the long-term strategy that we are going to have to use, every vehicle and every 
lever that we have, and that’s what we’re doing. I didn’t ask the repeating questions. Don’t accuse me of 
stonewalling. You’ve asked the same question that the leader of the Opposition asked yesterday. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: – Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’ve had the last two days, I guess, day and 
a half, to listen to some of the arguments that have taken place between yourself and members on our side of 
the House with regard to this privatization of PCS. And I want to remind you, Mr. Minister, that in March of 
1988, your privatization minister, Graham Taylor, the member from Wolseley, published what he called the 
objectives . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I just bring to the members’ attention that we’re not to refer to members by 
their name but by their seat. 
 



Ms. Atkinson: – Your minister of privatization published what he called the objectives and guide-lines of the 
PC privatization strategy. And I just wanted to repeat for the members opposite personal knowledge, some of 
those objectives. And there were three of them. The first objective was that privatization would lead to full 
benefit for the use of public assets to increase employment and create economic and investment opportunity. 
 
And if you look at what’s happened to date under your leadership, Mr. Minister, we have seen 200 workers at 
Cory get the heave ho under your privatization objective It has not meant increased employment for the 
workers at PCS. Under your leadership, Mr. Minister, as you’ve prepared to have this corporation privatized, 
the number of workers have fallen by 1,000 at PCS under your leadership. If you look at what’s happened in 
this province in terms of economic and investment opportunity, all of the economic indicators show us that 
the economy of our province is not thriving, and in fact, investments in this province are down substantially 
under your leadership. 
 
The second objective of your privatization strategy was to ensure that there would be increased opportunities 
for personal and employee ownership. And you’ve admitted it in this House in the last couple of days that you 
don’t anticipate that many Saskatchewan citizens having the opportunity to have shares or will have shares in 
this privatized PCS. Forty-five per cent of the shares will be owned by foreign investors. Most of the shares 
will go to people outside of Saskatchewan. You hope you’re hoping and hoping and praying that maybe 
50,000 people in Saskatchewan will take the opportunity to invest in this privatized PCS. So it won’t mean 
improved or increased personal ownership. 
 
And then the third objective of your privatization strategy is to ensure a more effective and efficient public 
services at good value for money and since you’ve gotten on this wavelength, we’ve seen what’s happened in 
this province in terms of public service. We have a horrendous crisis in the Department of Health. People in 
this province no longer have faith in that department or in the Minister of Health. We have horrendous line-
ups waiting to get into hospital. We have people waiting to get home care. We have children waiting to get 
rehabilitative services through occupational therapy and physical therapy. The health services in this province 
have never been so poor. 
 
All we have to do is look at other services like the Department of Highways, and we see those services 
deteriorating. 
 
So you’ve had three objectives and guide-lines, according to your minister of privatization, that we could 
judge privatization on. And in my view, Mr. Minister, you have failed, failed, failed through your sell, sell, 
sell mentality. You have absolutely failed on all counts, all counts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: – Now it’s interesting, you say that this privatization will lead to diversification in our 
province, but you don’t have any plans. You say that the privatization of PCS will mean an expansion in this 
province, but you don’t have any plans – you can’t give us any details. 
 
You say that this will mean more personal investment in the potash industry in Saskatchewan by 
Saskatchewan people, but when you look at your own figures and if you look at what’s happened in other 
privatization deals, that’s simply not been the case. Saskatchewan people have not come out in droves and 
bought up these shares. 
 
We know who has come out in droves. They’ve been people outside of Saskatchewan and they’ve been a few 
wealthy friends of the Tory Party. 
 
Then we ask you some questions that are simple and only require simply answers about what this is going to 
cost us: what’s it going to cost us in terms of advertising; what’s it going to cost us in terms of legal fees; 
what has it cost us in terms of accounting fees; because we know Pemberton Houston Willoughby has worked 
on this deal for the last year; we know that Robert Stromberg in Saskatoon has worked on this deal for the last 
several months, night and day; we know that – but you don’t have the courage to tell us what the figures are 
because, Mr. Minister, you want to stonewall the process. 
 



You’ve had the opportunity in this House to provide us with some answers I the last couple of days and 
you’ve failed to do that. You’ve failed to do that. And you’ve simply failed to provide the answers because 
you want to muzzle the opposition through closure, and then you want to sit twiddling your thumbs for the 
next few days until you get it over with, and you an go on to bigger and better things, and that’s rewarding 
your friends in the private sector. 
 
Now what I find extremely interesting, Mr. Minister, this morning is that you said up until 1986, IMC was the 
leader in the industry, and in 1986, PCS because the leader in the industry. And what I find so interesting, Mr. 
Minister, is that the time that Mr. Chuck Childers, your president of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
came over to PCS. That’s when he came over. And so the question that one has to ask themselves is now why 
would that be? Why would it be that chuck Childers is at IMC up until 1986 and they’re leading the industry, 
Chuck Childers comes over to PCS in 1986 and all of sudden PCS is leading the industry, and you say 
somehow this is good? This is due to miraculous management; that it’s due to good management. 
 
Well I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that this is a possible scenario. There is no question, there is no 
question that the private potash industry in this country and in North America has never liked the idea of a 
publicly owned potash company in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve simply not liked that idea. 
They’ve simply not liked it, and they have been waiting, they have been waiting for some time to get a 
minister of Finance like yourself to come along, and a government like yourself to come along so that they 
could go in there and get rid of it. And you know, Mr. Minister, you have provided them with the opportunity. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Elphinstone said early today that Mr. Childers is a smart man, and 
you’re right and he’s right. He’s a smart man. He knows a sucker when he sees him. This industry has been 
waiting for some time, Mr. Minister of finance, been waiting for some time to come in here and do in public 
enterprise. 
 
And I see Mr. Childers is kind of smiling and laughing, and I appreciate that, because, Mr. Minister, he knows 
a sucker when he sees him. He knows a sucker when he sees him, and you’ve been fooled. You’ve been 
fooled, and so what we will see, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan turned over to the large 
multinational corporations through the foreign ownership content – through the foreign ownership content, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, why it is, why is it that PCS all of a sudden turned around in 1986 when 
Mr. Childers came over from IMC, and up until 1986 IMC led the industry? Why would that be? And, Mr. 
Minister, were you taken in by a guy that had a lot of brains and knew a good deal when he saw it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I’ll quickly correct, and it was my error, it was ’87 not ’86. It’s okay, but that’s not 
germane to the debate or to the attack. 
 
But we have gone through a long dissertation repeating . . . and again, I’m the one being accused of 
stonewalling. Right? And yet the hon. member from Quill Lakes, the member from Prince Albert: we know 
we’ll get them from the member at the back. I’ll make a wager that we’ll get the same arguments. We’ll get 
them from the hon. member in Saskatoon Sutherland. I’ll predict, I got a little more confidence as I watched 
the development of the member from Regina Victoria that he won’t be totally repetitive, but he’s the only one 
over there. I know the hon. member from Saskatoon University will be quite repetitive, will be quite 
repetitive, and a few that I’m sure will join the debate. 
 
But in fact the hon. member’s made allegations in health care. The fact is that the public doesn’t by your 
argument. The public knows full well that waiting lists are dropping and dropping dramatically in Saskatoon. 
The number of surgeries are up since 1982, some 65 per cent. The number of more in-patient beds and patient 
care staff in Saskatoon, additional surgical procedures in Saskatoon, constructed special care home beds – and 
I think the hon. member in fairness will be there for the official opening of the new St. Paul’s Hospital, and 
I’m sure she will be, I’m sure she will be – new day surgery, new day surgery in Saskatoon; expanded day 
surgery at St. Paul’s Hospital; automated information system on waiting lists. 
 
(1045) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- This is the best stonewall I’ve ever seen here. 



 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Look, I’m responding to the attacks made by the hon. member opposite, and I think that 
that’s fair, that’s fair. What we saw is a restatement, and I am a bit surprised, a bit surprised of the 
ideologically hidebound ideology of the NDP from the hon. member. I’m somewhat disappointed; I’m 
somewhat disappointed. 
 
But I’m going to tell you why – and I had said this yesterday to the Leader of the Opposition – why someone 
of Mr. Childers’ talents and abilities is able to have an influence on the potash industry by virtue of this 
accession to the presidency of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And it didn’t happen before it didn’t 
happen before Mr. Childers’ arrival. 
 
And I said before and I said yesterday that the potash industry, notwithstanding the size of the capital 
investment or the amount of potash that’s sold, the potash industry worldwide is very small in number of the 
people that make decisions – very small. I would suspect when the fertilizer institute meets that they may 
have 2 or 300 people. We have cartels in Europe; we have Russia a major producer; Dead Sea producers 
tonne by countries – very few; great amount of tonnage, but very few influential decision-makers involved. 
 
Then we have the buyers. Major buyers tend to be countries except in the United States, and in the United 
States we have major farm organizations that will buy on behalf of farmers. So when we look at the size of 
the industry in terms of either sales or production or capital investment, if doesn’t reflect the fact that the 
number of decision-makers and influencers are relatively few. 
 
And so individuals within that number, that have personal integrity or influence, are influential and are 
respected, and so you have to recognize that. And that’s why, when someone of Mr. Childers’ abilities and 
talents becomes the president of the potash corporation – he has those skills, he has that credibility, as well as 
being president of the largest producer in the free world – so very quickly, and I say it’s a matter of months, 
that the potash corporation went from a position of having size on its side and that was it – the leader, the 
price influencer was IMC – then that changed over to the potash corporation, where it should be, in my 
opinion. But understand the reasons why it happened. It happened because it’s a very small number of people 
that make decisions in that industry. So they are related. I said it earlier, they are related. 
 
But I also say, and I don’t think I’m being unfair, if you want to make broad allegations, I think you expect 
me to reply. And that’s precisely what I’m doing. And I had a very short reply to the number of allegations 
made by the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: – Now, Mr. Minister, as you said, there’s a very small number of people in the industry, and it 
is possible – because it seems somewhat strange that PCS could make such a dramatic recovery and switch-
over in a matter of month – and it is possible, because of Mr. Childers’ connections to IMC, and IMC had 
been the leader, that it is possible that IMC gave it to Mr. Childers for a while, in preparation for the 
privatization of PCS. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my colleague from the Quill Lakes asked you who the winners and loser are in 
privatization, and it seems to me that we know some of the winners will be the lawyer, some of the winners 
will be the accountants, the brokers, the advertisers, many foreign interests, perhaps some of the large 
multinationals. Who else will be the winners in this, Mr. Minister? 
 
We know who the losers have been in the past. We know who the losers have been - -the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, the 400 highways workers that lost their jobs, the 25 per cent of the labour force over at 
Saskoil that lost their jobs, the 70 workers at SED Systems that lost their jobs, the 400 dental workers that lost 
their jobs when the dental plan was privatized – we know that. 
 
We know that the losers in the privatization of PAPCO were the people of Saskatchewan because we, in 
essence, gave our forests to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. We lost ownership. We know that the 
losers in the Sask Minerals privatization were the taxpayers of Saskatchewan because this company was 
undervalued and sold to Premier Cdn of Quebec and Kam-Kotia of Ontario for a song. We know that the 
losers when Manalta Coal, or when the coal-mine was sold to Manalta Coal from SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation) were the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And we know who the losers have been. 
 



But I want to know who the winners are going to be in this particular privatization. Will the winners be IMC 
or will the winners be the People’s Republic of China, or will the winners be some people in Tokyo or Japan 
or Korea or the United States? Who are the winners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well the hon. member is having a rather superficial look at the issue And I’m going to 
remind the hon. member, and I will acknowledge that she did not participate in the decisions, but certainly the 
member from Regina Centre was a vital cog in the machinery of government of the day, and let me tell you 
who a big loser was, and I think people will be quite interested. 
 
One of the companies bought out by the New Democratic Party under the then deputy premier was Alwinsal, 
a mine here in Saskatchewan. The moneys were paid to the French and German interests. Do you know what 
the French and German interests did with Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money? You know what they did? They 
took the money from the Saskatchewan people, given to them by the New Democratic Party, took their 
money, went down to New Brunswick, build a new mine in New Brunswick to compete with Saskatchewan 
potash – to compete with Saskatchewan potash. You talk about losing. You compounded the losses, you 
compounded the losses. Not only did you take Saskatchewan money from the people’ you turned it over and 
you gave it to the multinationals; the multinationals came back and built a new mine that took away market 
share from the very workers and the people of this province. That’s precisely what you did. And you have to 
admit, you have to admit that that decision was wrong. That decision was terribly, terribly wrong. 
 
And I believe that some of the people involved in making that decision did not anticipate that Alwinsal would 
take its money or the interest and build in New Brunswick. I think, if they had of thought that through, that 
they wouldn’t have bought that. I really believe that. But they didn’t think it through and it turned out to be a 
tragic mistake. 
 
So I’ve gone back through who would be the winners. The NDP say that the people of Prince Albert are 
losers because this government sold PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser. They believe that. The NDP believe that the 
new employees, 200-and-some more at Prince Albert in the paper mill, are losers. I don’t’ have to subscribe 
to that, but that’s your position. 
 
The NDP say that the employees of WESTBRIDGE – and we now are up to another, I think they’re up to 
1,300 employees. When SaskCOMP was around, it was 200-and-some, certainly not all in Saskatchewan, but 
a large percentage of them here. I don’t think that the employees of WESTBRIDGE are losers as the NDP say 
they are. I think that they’re benefitting by the privatization 
 
Your argument is no longer correct on Saskoil, wasn’t 25 per cent, first of all. But secondly, if you’ve been 
reading the papers over the last year, Saskoil in its expansion has moved its offices from Calgary back there. 
There, they were in Calgary under the NDP. They’ve been moved back here. 
 
Secondly, Saskoil with its expansion has been hiring more and more people, so that the numbers, I’m 
informed, are now higher . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, they did not. I will grant you, I will grant 
you this, that the potash corporation has had a substantial reduction in the number of employees, not due to 
privatization, although you can make your tie, but dealing with the state of the industry, the productive 
capacity, and the fact that Lanigan came on stream, which is a much more, as I think acknowledged by the 
member from Fairview, a much more technologically efficient shaft. So those factors did come into play. So 
they did come into play. 
 
And in fairness, the production of the corporation still maintained, the efficiency of the corporation’s been 
very much maintained, and some difficult decisions. And we’ve taken our criticism from the opposition, in 
many cases the employees, the unions, and those affected, we took those. We made difficult decisions. 
 
The argument that the NDP have made today that in the case, for example, of SED Systems, that the 
government should, in fact, subsidize to keep people working. There’s tremendous changes in technology. To 
blame that on privatization, again is not a fair argument. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh, stop trying to run out the clock. 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m just responding to the hon. member. I’m just responding. She talked about SED 
Systems, so I’m responding to her. She talked about hospitals, so “m responding to her. She talked about 
potash employees; I’m responding to her. She talked about Weyerhaeuser; I’m responding to her. She talked 
about WESTBRIDGE; I’m responding to her. 
 
So you want to repeat the same questions’ I’m going to respond to them. You’re the ones repeating. I’m not 
going beyond the bounds of the matters that you’re raising. So it’s your choice; don’t repeat the questions if 
you don’t want the same answers back. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thank the ministry of truth for giving me three minutes at the 
end of the morning to ask a question. 
 
Mr. Minister, we began the day by asking you want the amount of the commissions were. We heard it was 
$20 million. You’ve been embarrassed by the information and you’ve been stonewalling us ever since on 
every other subject. You won’t tell us how much you’re spending on advertising and promotion. We suspect 
it’s a very larger figure. You won’t tell us what you’re spending on legal fees. We also suspect that is also a 
very larger figure, and we suspect that many of the people of Saskatchewan think there’s a better use for such 
money than on advertising and legal fees. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask a question which perhaps might not embarrass you. There seems to be little about 
this subject which doesn’t embarrass you but let me try one area which might not. Is there, Mr. Minister, an 
intention that when the shares go on sale, small orders will be filled first? That was what was done, I believe, 
with some previous issues. Is there an intention, Mr. Minister, that small shares, say lots of 100, will be filled 
first in case there’s any over-subscription? 
 
And given the fact that you are selling these shares at a fraction of what they’re worth, it’s quite obvious, Mr. 
Minister . . . I shouldn’t say it’s quite obvious, but it’s quite possible that it will be over-subscribed. So I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, do you intend to repeat that? Will there be any restrictions . . . The question is: will there 
be any restrictions on the filling of orders? Are they to be filled on a first come, first service basis or is there 
some other intention here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m going to assume that you’re referring to the Saskatchewan market when you ask that 
question. Well the objective will be to have as many people buy shares as possible. I can’t give you exactly 
how that will be done, but obviously we will try and get the greatest number of Saskatchewan people 
investing. 
 
So whether there will be an allocation or not, I can’t say, because there may well be, depending on take-up, 
that everybody will be fully satisfied in Saskatchewan as to the number of shares that they can get. But our 
objective, as I said yesterday, was Saskatchewan people and workers first. We will try and make sure that 
they are satisfied and will get the shares that they are offering to purchase. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 


