


















































May 29, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 29, 1989 
 

1421 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of 
the Legislative Assembly, 55 grade 12 students from Robert 
Usher. These students, Mr. Speaker, are seated in your gallery. 
The teacher is Mr. Fred Steininger. Accompanying these students 
there is a Mai Salmenkangas, who is an exchange student from 
Finland who has been spending this entire year attending school 
at Robert Usher. 
 
I will be meeting with Mr. Steininger and the students following 
question period and will have pictures and a visit. I very much 
look forward to that, and I ask all hon. members to join me in 
welcoming this fine group of students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to the Assembly, Hon. Timothy 
Eggar, who is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. He is the British 
member of parliament and the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of 
State in British, Foreign, and Commonwealth Affairs. He is 
visiting in our province and has been discussing many issues with 
various people in the province, including the whole question of 
Europe, 1992, and Europe’s position at the current Uruguay 
round of the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
negotiation. Accompanying Mr. Eggar is his private secretary, 
Martin Hatfull, and the British Consul-General from Edmonton, 
Mr. John Doble. 
 
Perhaps the gentlemen could stand and introduce themselves to 
the legislature of the province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, 32 students from Mossbank. They are seated in the 
west gallery. Accompanying them are teachers Garth Ward and 
Dev Tauh, and a bus driver, Marlyn McKee. The students will be 
listening to question period. I’ll meet with them later for a 
photograph and a short visit. 
 
I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 21 grades 3 
and 4 students seated in the west gallery, from Millar School in 
Melville, Saskatchewan. They are here with their principal, Mr. 
Ted Starchuck; their bus driver, Perry Yelle. Chaperons Gordon 
Padar and Ron Niebergall are scheduled to be with them as well. 
 

These students are familiar to myself, as some of them play 
hockey with my son during the winter, and I can vouch that they 
are good students and are becoming good citizens. So I ask the 
members to welcome them to the Assembly here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you today, and to the other members of 
the Assembly, 58 grade 8 students who are attending Ruth M. 
Buck School in Regina. They are seated in the east gallery and 
are accompanied today by their teachers, Fred Chriest and Rena 
Flett. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome the 
students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleague, the member from Rosemont, in welcoming the 
guests from Ruth M. Buck School. Some of the students reside 
in Rosemont constituency and some in the constituency of 
Regina North West. I know the vice-principal, Mr. Chriest, quite 
well, and my daughter is in grade 3 in that school — we live down 
the street from Ruth M. Buck — and I enjoy going to that school 
very, very much the oftentimes I am there. So I bid you welcome 
on behalf of the people of Regina North West. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Fertilizer Plant at Belle Plaine 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Trade and Investment and it concerns the fertilizer 
plant that has been announced for construction at Belle Plaine in 
which the government plans to invest $175 million to help Cargill 
build a fertilizer plant. Cargill happens to be one of the largest 
corporations in North America. 
 
Now I want to make it clear, Minister, as I launch on this series 
of questions, that we believe that Saskatchewan needs all the 
industry it can possibly get, particularly to help us overcome the 
unacceptably high levels of unemployment that have grown up 
during the term of your government. 
 
My question is this, Mr. Minister: in the face of your 
government’s $4 billion deficit, how is it that you can find the 
money to help finance a plant to be built by one of the largest 
corporations in North America when private interests in 
Saskatchewan had planned to proceed with other plants with 
almost no government assistance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with regards to the 
Cargill project, I think when that particular project   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1422 
 

was announced, the hon. Deputy Premier and the Premier 
indicated that the Government of Saskatchewan and Cargill 
would involve and become involved in a joint venture operation. 
 
Now I assume from the philosophical rhetoric coming from the 
members opposite that they have no problem with a joint venture 
involving government and the private sector. And further stated 
was the government’s view that it wished to have this project 
commenced, and that any of its position hopefully would be able 
to be sold out to the various private sectors. 
 
With regards to your second point, that there is a private sector 
firm looking to develop a fertilizer plant without government 
involvement, I can advise the hon. member that the proposal by 
energy “88” required substantial amounts of money from WDO 
(western diversification office) and proposed substantial 
amounts of money from the provincial government, not by way 
of equity participation but by way of outright grants. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, in the most recent edition of The 
Rosetown Eagle, Mr. Noval, Greg Noval, who is the president of 
Canadian “88”, which I think is the company that you referred 
to, is quoted as saying the following. He says: 
 

Knowledge of the Cargill project was no surprise to our 
group; however, with all our dealings with the provincial 
government it was represented to us that there would be no 
government funding of any kind to Cargill. 
 

That’s what Mr. Noval told The Rosetown Eagle. Now could you 
tell us who in your government was dealing with Mr. Noval, and 
can you explain why that person made such a gross 
misrepresentation to Mr. Noval? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
that the energy “88” people were dealing primarily with the 
Deputy Premier. I was also involved in that particular negotiation 
and I can tell this Assembly, and I can tell the hon. member, that 
energy “88” came to the provincial government requesting 
sizeable amounts of provincial dollars to go into that project, not 
to go in by way of joint venture operation but to go in by way of 
contributions, grants if you like, from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the proposal and the project that is going forward by Cargill 
is a joint venture operation. It’s a joint venture operation that the 
members opposite, when they talk about their economic theories, 
seem to have no problem with joint ventures between the private 
sector and government. That’s exactly what it is, Mr. Speaker. It 
is not money forwarded to Cargill by way of grants or by way of 
non-payable loans or anything else; it’s a joint venture operation. 
 
The proposal of energy “88” involved a sizeable amount of 
money coming from the provincial government along with a 
sizeable amount of money coming from the federal government. 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 
extraordinary thing for you to say, Minister, that the government 
taking on the obligation to build half of the plant is not any kind 
of a financial contribution to Cargill. You’ll have to explain that 
very, very carefully to Mr. Noval because I’m afraid he doesn’t 
understand it. 
 
Now if all of this is true, Minister, then why can’t the two groups, 
the two companies, go into business in Saskatchewan on an equal 
footing? Why can’t they be on your famous level playing-field? 
If our local Saskatchewan business, so far as you’re concerned, 
practically had to finance themselves, how does it make sense not 
to require Cargill, one of the largest companies in North America, 
to finance itself? And further, Minister, did you make the kind of 
offer to the Canadian “88” group about government participation 
that you obviously made to Cargill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will explain to the hon. 
member the difference between becoming a joint venture partner, 
which is taking half of the project, or roughly half of the project, 
with our intention being as once the project is up and running, or 
once it is completed, that we simply then through public 
participation sell off our given share. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in doing so, what you end up with is a 
world-scale fertilizer plant in the province of Saskatchewan that 
can supply both Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and three or four states 
in the United States; at the same time use Saskatchewan natural 
gas, which we have plenty of. 
 
Now that’s the proposal. The proposal by energy “88”, Mr. 
Speaker, was that we would not participate in their project but 
that we would give a sizeable grant to that particular company; 
that we would supply certain expensive infrastructure costs to 
that proposal, along with the WDO advancing sizeable amounts 
of money to them. We indicated to them that we were not 
prepared to do that, and there is quite a difference between the 
two. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fertilizer Plant at Pincher Creek 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Trade and Investment. Minister, the Premier talks 
about the proven track record of Cargill, but Cargill’s size has 
not always guaranteed success. 
 
Are you aware that the last new fertilizer plant project Cargill 
was involved in was Pincher Creek Nitrogen Inc., which was 
started in 1985 in Alberta and today is in receivership? And can 
you tell us, Mr. Minister, how much money the Government of 
Alberta and other Alberta creditors lost as a result of this Cargill 
project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think that the hon. member, if he 
is suggesting somehow that Cargill owned the plant   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1423 
 

in Alberta, I believe the hon. member is not correct in his facts. 
Now that’s what the hon. indicated, that Cargill had built a plant 
in Alberta, and that that plant is now in receivership. Now I 
would suggest to the hon. member that he gets his facts straight 
on that particular question. 
 
Now the hon. member would somehow suggest that if Cargill is 
to be involved in any project in the province of Saskatchewan, 
that there is no way that we as a government should have any 
truck or trade with Cargill because they’re so large and because 
they are a multinational corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the hon. member, when 
they were in government, entered into a joint venture operation 
with Uranerz, which is a large international corporation, 
large-sized international corporation, to build, by way of joint 
venture, a uranium mine in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if the private investors are 
prepared to come to this province, if they’re prepared to 
spearhead a major economic development project in our 
province, creating numbers and numbers of jobs, Mr. Speaker, 
using our resources, that being natural gas to convert it into urea 
fertilizer to be used by our farmers in Saskatchewan, thereby 
reducing the price of fertilizer to the farmers of Saskatchewan, it 
seems to me that is a reasonable project to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite would have us believe that we should 
not do that because Cargill somehow has too big of a balance 
sheet, Mr. Speaker. And I think that is a foolish approach to take, 
to be against Cargill because of Cargill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
minister. Can you provide to this Assembly today, Minister, the 
guarantees to the farmers that they will have lower fertilizer 
prices as a result of this project proceeding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, to the hon. members, if you 
look at the cost of fertilizer, a significant price in the cost of 
fertilizer, Mr. Speaker, is the transportation component of that 
price. The price . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the 
members say that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. Farmers 
understand, Mr. Speaker, if they have to go to Moose Jaw to get 
their fertilizer from, let’s say, Weyburn, as opposed to going to 
Medicine Hat . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s no difference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member says there’s no 
difference. Well there is difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Number two thing, Mr. Speaker, is this fact: that when this 
project is built and is in production, Mr. Speaker, what you’re 
going to do is add a significant amount of product into the 
market. Now Economics 101 also says when you have more 
product in the market, Mr. Speaker, that 

means the price goes down. That is simple theory of 
supply-demand, Mr. Speaker, and that brings the price down. 
 
Now the members opposite would have us believe that when you 
go into any project that you should sign some document that says 
we guarantee the price will be like this for the next 25 years. They 
don’t understand how the private sector works, Mr. Speaker, and 
it doesn’t work that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, the last thing that people of Saskatchewan 
want to see at this time is another Pincher Creek. Reinie Janke, 
the president of the Rosetown and district chamber of commerce, 
told The Rosetown Eagle just recently, and I quote: 
 

If Cargill couldn’t find private sector people in the outset, 
where is the government going to find participants later? 
 

Will you table this afternoon the feasibility studies that prove this 
plant is a good deal, showing how it will return the taxpayers’ 
investment of $175 million, and how it will create the best 
possible long-term jobs? And if it’s such a good deal, Minister, 
can you explain why Cargill can’t go it on its own rather than 
with taxpayers’ backing of $175 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a stated 
position for some time now that what we should be attempting to 
do in diversifying the province of Saskatchewan and the 
economy of the province of Saskatchewan, is to produce product 
that is being used here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The hon. member would have us continue: (a) buying our 
fertilizer that is manufactured in Alberta and using, Mr. Speaker, 
natural gas that is produced in Alberta, not using natural gas that 
is produced in Saskatchewan, converting it into fertilizer in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they’re doing . . . creating 
economic diversification for the province using a source of 
natural gas that we have, and creating jobs and tax revenues here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve indicated many times 
that that is the intention and the strategy of this government, and 
we believe this one substantiates that particular policy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite, the members opposite, when we 
announced that we were going to sell PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company), or the pulp mill in Prince Albert, to Weyerhaeuser, 
they said, oh, Weyerhaeuser, one, will never pay you; number 
two, they will never build a paper plant, Mr. Speaker, and that 
they have taken you to the cleaners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser built a paper plant. It employs many, 
many more people in the city of Prince Albert. It manufactures 
paper, not simply kraft pulp. And that’s a higher value-added 
product, Mr. Speaker, sold   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1424 
 

around the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Concerns of Rosetown Developers 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a question to the 
Minister of Trade and Investment. And you may, Mr. Minister, 
have sold this to your caucus colleagues, but you haven’t sold it 
to some folks. 
 
And I want to quote from Mr. Janke, president of the Rosetown 
and district chamber of commerce when he told The Rosetown 
Eagle: your decision to finance the Belle Plain plant is at odds 
with your government stated goals to diversify the rural 
economy, and I quote, “It flies in the face of their stated policies 
at election time”. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, how you explain this betrayal to 
Mr. Janke and all of the other rural business operators who see 
that they can no longer trust you or your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the recent 
history of economic diversification. The Government of 
Saskatchewan participated in a joint venture with the co-op, with 
Federated Co-op and the refinery out here to build the heavy oil 
upgrader in the city of Regina. We did that, what? — three, four 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, a joint venture to create an additional 
process, Mr. Speaker, that can process our natural products here. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan participated in a joint venture 
with Husky Oil to build, and in the process now of building a 
heavy oil upgrader in the city of Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. We 
participated in that. 
 
The proposal with regards to Cargill, Mr. Speaker, is perfectly 
consistent with those other two projects. We believe it diversifies 
our economy, creates jobs, creates tax revenue, Mr. Speaker, and 
is a source for our natural resources to further upgrade it before 
it is sold to other products, other markets in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — A new question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’m sure you’ve betrayed all of . . . you’ve really made 
all of the folks in the small towns that were expecting some kind 
of an operation to be in their communities, you’ve really 
reassured them with this answer. And I want to know, Mr. 
Minister, if you’ve met with the mayors of Rosetown and Melfort 
and of Tisdale and of Yorkton and of Melville. And have they 
sought a meeting with you? And have you agreed to meet with 
them regarding their concerns for their communities, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I, or a member of our 
cabinet, is certainly prepared to meet with all of those various 
mayors in the province of Saskatchewan, in the towns around the 
cities around the province of 

Saskatchewan. I intend, Mr. Speaker, to meet with them, as I’m 
sure others do, to explore new ways that they can diversify the 
economy, because the one thing what the mayor, the various 
mayors talk about is a desire to, in fact, diversify the economy. 
 
They are not like the members opposite. Every time a proposal 
comes forward, they’re against it. They were against Meadow 
Lake; they were against Weyerhaeuser; they were against the 
Co-op upgrader; they were against Husky Oil; they were against 
Cargill, Mr. Speaker. If they’re always against everything, Mr. 
Speaker, which is what they are, against every proposal — 
Flexi-Coil was announced, almost doubling the capacity in 
Saskatoon, and the members were even against that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Advertising Costs for SaskPower 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, in this House 
on Friday last you took notice of a question pertaining to the cost 
of your ineffectual and illegal advertising campaign to promote 
the privatization of SaskPower. I wonder, sir, would you happen 
to have those figures with you here today, or have you been told 
not to release them to the public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I have not been told not to 
say anything by anyone, Mr. Speaker. I do not have the 
information available today. The hon. member, the Deputy 
Premier, minister responsible for SaskPower, has been aware that 
that notice on that question was taken, and that answer will be 
back tomorrow or the next day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, you obviously have discussed this matter 
with the Deputy Premier. Can you give us a date at which that 
information will be available to the House here? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
took notice of the question, and the question you just posed is 
essentially the same. It’s out of order. 
 

Participation Credit 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I took notice of a 
question dealing with the participation credit as recorded in the 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
financial statements. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to indicate to the 
House that the concept of a participation credit is not foreign to 
this province. Very simply, it is a credit applied to invoices that 
SPMC bills to its clients that are funded by the provincial 
treasury, such as government departments. 
 
The credit operates in the same way as the co-op and the wheat 
pool pay dividends to members based on the volume of goods 
that each member consumes. SPMC does not give the credit to 
private sector clients. The only difference is that SPMC deducts 
the credit from its   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1425 
 

monthly bills to the departments, while co-operatives pay similar 
credits out in dividends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no money that changes hands, and there is 
no fund somewhere with $42.7 million in it. The credit is simply 
an accounting procedure used to record credits given to 
government departments. The procedure has been approved by 
SPMC’s appointed auditors who are Deloitte Haskins & Sells, I 
think one of the second biggest auditing companies in Canada. 
And it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor 
is not saying in his report that there’s anything wrong with the 
credit, just a difference of opinion on how it is reported in the 
statements. 
 
As I said Friday, that many of these questions should be answered 
between the auditors, Deloitte Haskins & Sells, and the 
Provincial Auditor. And if they’d like to do that, I would arrange 
that type of a meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A new question to the minister. I find it 
absolutely amazing, Mr. Minister, that you would have to take 
notice on Friday last to get up and tell us that you have a dividend 
system in your department to pay back to the departments and 
agencies. 
 
My question to you is: Mr. Minister, why does the auditor of this 
province have such a problem in getting that detailed information 
from the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and 
will you from now on instruct that agency to fully co-operate 
with the Provincial Auditor that you’ve been trying to roast up 
until this time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, there is no problem in getting 
information from the property management corporation. The 
right place to go is to the auditors of the property management 
corporation, and you’ll have the Provincial Auditor dealing with 
the private sector auditors that audit the books of SPMC, and 
that’s the channels that should be undertaken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Collapse of Principal Trust 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Mr. Minister, I draw your 
attention to press reports coming out of Alberta today that the 
Alberta treasury is about to put up another $6 million in pay-outs 
to those who lost money in the collapse of Principal Trust. Now 
the only catch in this, Mr. Minister, is that that money is all going 
to Alberta investors, none of it to Saskatchewan investors. Mr. 
Minister, are you aware of these reports, and have you contacted 
your colleague in Alberta to register your displeasure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
question from the member opposite, and I am aware 

of the reports out of Alberta and became aware of them about an 
hour ago. I have not been in touch with him yet, but I certainly 
will be. 
 
We recognize the fact that the Code inquiry wrapped up just a 
short time ago, and that investors are receiving a set amount of 
money up to this point — I think around 50 to 56 cents, 
depending on which company it was. It wasn’t Principal Trust 
either; it was Associated Investors and First Investors that these 
people had invested in. So I will be checking with him. 
 
We still maintain the same stand that if the Code inquiry finds 
that the Alberta government was responsible or negligent in the 
regulation of these companies, that they should be reimbursing 
all investors, not just the investors in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
remind you that when your buddies over at Pioneer Trust failed, 
you went out of your way as a government to ensure that 
out-of-province investors were compensated and satisfied. Mr. 
Minister, are you telling the House this afternoon that you do not 
today have an agreement with the Alberta government that 
Saskatchewan residents should be compensated? Is that what 
you’re telling the House this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing that I 
would like to point out to the member opposite and his colleagues 
that, as I recall it, back in the Pioneer Trust days, that they were 
opposed to the Government of Saskatchewan making 
compensation to any of these people, so I find it really strange 
that today they have taken a different approach on this. 
 
We have raised this concern with the provincial treasurer in 
Alberta on many occasions. We certainly do not have a written 
agreement, if that’s what the member opposite is suggesting, but 
we will be continuing on with our efforts that if, in such time, the 
Code inquiry report comes down, at that point then we will 
proceed from there as to what position we’re going to take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Agricultural Credit 
Corporation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
beg to inform the Assembly that Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, 
recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly, and I move: 
 

That an Act to amend The Agricultural Credit Corporation 
of Saskatchewan Act be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1426 
 

time at the next sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Criticism of the Provincial Auditor 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Hagel: — The member from Moose Jaw North is pleased to 
enter into debate, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once again I 
hesitated before rising to provide opportunity for government 
members to rise and enter into this debate, and once again, Mr. 
Speaker, none did. 
 
I would like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by making the clearest 
statement possible as to what this motion is all about that’s before 
us, and that’s to read into the record again, Mr. Speaker, what it 
is that we’re debating here today. The motion before us is this: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor, that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council, and further, that this Assembly reaffirms 
the importance of the office of the Provincial Auditor as an 
officer of this legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these are very serious times in the debate before this 
Legislative Assembly in dealing with the conduct, and in 
particular the conduct not only of all of cabinet, the Executive 
Council, but particular the conduct of the Minister of Justice who 
has gone on the attack of an employee of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to just begin by taking a review of what has 
happened in terms of the very content of the debate before us 
because I think it’s revealing. I’ve taken the time to carefully 
review the record of the debate on this motion, and I find it very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that only four government members 
have chosen to even comment on this motion. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, well over a dozen — and by the 
time debate on this motion is completed, the number will be 
larger than that — well over a dozen opposition members have 
risen in their places to put on record their positions and their 
thoughts as to the impact of this scurrilous conduct of the 
Minister of Justice bringing his remarks and attack on the 
Provincial Auditor of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
If I may just review very briefly what the government members 
have said so far, Mr. Speaker, what they’ve said is this. The 
Deputy Premier has risen in his place to say that he opposes the 
motion; fair enough. The Minister of Justice, who is the subject 
of this motion before us, has risen, not to apologize as many had 
expected that he 

would do, but has risen to repeat his attack, his unjustified and 
supported attack on the Provincial Auditor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The third government member to speak, Mr. Speaker, was the 
minister of piratization, who rose to move an amendment 
referring this whole issue to the committee . . . the legislative’s 
committee on privileges, in the belief at that time that the claim 
of the Minister of Justice, that there was somehow a secret 
package that, if it was revealed, would document his point of 
view and would prove that his attacks on the Provincial Auditor 
were justified. 
 
And then the final government speaker, Mr. Speaker, was the 
House Leader and Minister of Highways, who rose then later that 
same day after you had tabled in this Legislative Assembly the 
Provincial Auditor’s report, providing in fact that very 
information to the people of this Assembly, to the public of 
Saskatchewan, information that as it was read and became 
revealed, made it very clear that in fact there was no secret 
surprise in that package. There was nothing more there to justify 
the Minister of Justice’s interpretation as to what the Provincial 
Auditor was asking when he provided his report to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, there have been, by my count, 12 
opposition members of the Legislative Assembly who have stood 
in our place and who have put our positions on record. The only 
other one to speak, of course, Mr. Speaker, was yourself, who 
ruled not that there was a breach of privilege but that there was a 
prima facie case for a breach of privilege, meaning, of course, to 
translate it into layman’s language for those of us who understand 
that a lot better than the legal lingo, that on the face of it, or on 
the surface, it appeared possible that there was a breach of 
privilege. 
 
And I recall you, Mr. Speaker, saying that you would refer it then 
. . . you would find that and refer it to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly to determine, as a matter of fact, whether 
there was or not. 
 
The only other government member who has chosen to comment, 
although not in debate on this motion, has been the Premier of 
Saskatchewan who stood in his place during question period and 
confirmed that he fully supported the Minister of Justice in his 
attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
We’ve seen, as I go over the record of debate on this, that there 
have been a good number of other government members who 
have entered their voice into record on this debate. But has it been 
to express an opinion? No, it’s been simply by rising in their 
places with points of order and in many cases, in fact the majority 
of cases, Mr. Speaker, silly points of order as their contribution 
to the debate on this very, very serious issue before us in the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
I notice again that there has been not a single non-cabinet 
member who has spoken, who has taken the opportunity provided 
in this Assembly with every one of the members on this side 
pausing before standing to speak to provide that opportunity to 
government members. Not a single non-cabinet minister has 
risen to express an opinion on   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1427 
 

this motion. 
 
And it would appear, if appearances are accurate, Mr. Speaker, 
that when this motion comes to a vote, that the back-benchers 
will simply follow the orders being dictated to them by those who 
sit on the front benches of the Executive Council, the front bench 
cabinet ministers who will be dictating, it appears, to the rest of 
the government caucus to simply vote against this motion, and to 
defend, in effect, to defend the actions of the Minister of Justice, 
and in effect, as well, to reinforce the attack on the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I very clearly stand in support of this motion. 
I rise today with a good deal of sensitivity to the gravity of the 
issue. What we are debating here today is not the kind of issue 
that those of us who are elected to the Legislative Assembly see 
as priorities or the things that we choose to deal with when we 
come into the people’s Chamber to do the people’s business. 
 
I would much prefer, Mr. Speaker, to be entering into debate with 
government members on matters such as unemployment, or the 
rising cost of interest, or home ownership, or out-migration, or 
the failure to protect the family farm, and on and on — a large 
number of very important issues that affect a large number of 
Saskatchewan people, defence of family business people in this 
province. But instead we find ourselves dealing with the conduct 
of the Minister of Justice. 
 
When I look back at what happened, the case does not seem to 
be terribly complicated, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite simple and 
straightforward, contrary to what has historically been the case. 
And members of this House will remember, Mr. Speaker, the 
days when the Provincial Auditor’s report came not in the form 
of a — what are we here, about a 200-page book — when it came 
in the form of what would be much more accurate to describe as 
a pamphlet with much smaller pages and many fewer pages, with 
always the Provincial Auditor putting forth his suggestions as to 
how government could better keep its records. 
 
With the tabling of the Provincial Auditor’s report this year, Mr. 
Speaker, as I say, we now have an approximately 200-page book 
with line after line of indicting, damning accusations about the 
record keeping practices of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
really the whole book is summarized on page 4 of the Provincial 
Auditor’s report when he says, and I quote: 
 

 I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. 
 

And those are very, very serious, significant words that the 
Provincial Auditor has chosen. He says two things. Number one, 
I can no longer “carry out my role to watch over the public purse 
. . .”; and number two, he says, “for my client, the Legislative 
Assembly.” It is for that reason, because the client is the 
Legislative Assembly, that we find this motion of breach of 
privilege before the legislature now. 
 
You see, the Minister of Justice in making his scurrilous 

comments — scurrilous, curious, and squirrelly, I think, could be 
not an unfair summary of what he said. In making his comments 
to attack the credibility of the Provincial Auditor, the Minister of 
Justice chose not to express the personal opinion of some 
member of the public, or the personal opinion of some back 
bench member of the government — in fact not just the personal 
opinion of a rank and file cabinet minister — but, as a matter of 
fact, Mr. Speaker, chose to express a point of view of a very 
senior, experienced member of the cabinet of the Government of 
Saskatchewan — uttered out of the mouth of the individual who, 
above all in our province . . . If we say there are a million people 
in Saskatchewan, then surely the one of those million who should 
be most dependable, who should be the most dependable to 
defend the law of the land and the application of the law of the 
land, should be the Minister of Justice. For surely, if there is any 
one person in the entire province of Saskatchewan who should 
be counted upon to protect the intention and the application of 
the law, it should be the member of cabinet who was assigned the 
noble title of Minister of Justice. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of sadness in my heart that I 
find myself standing today, being aware that to — in this motion 
to call for the minister to submit his resignation, not because I 
hold ill will to the Minister of Justice personally, but because, 
Mr. Speaker, it is simply inappropriate for the single individual 
most responsible for defending the laws of the land of our 
province, put there by the Government of Saskatchewan, for that 
person to be the one to attack, not only attack but lead the attack, 
on an employee of the Legislative Assembly who has said in his 
report that the government is breaking its own laws. That is 
reprehensible, Mr. Speaker. And surely when the Minister of 
Justice responds to a Provincial Auditor who says the 
government is breaking its laws, when a Minister of Justice in 
effect says, kill the messenger, can we expect that the people of 
our province will continue to have confidence, not only in the 
Minister of Justice but in the entire, not only cabinet but the 
government itself? 
 
It would be impossible. The only possible exception perhaps, and 
I’m not even certain that that would be the case, that would make 
this a more serious issue, would be for the Premier to have made 
those comments about the Provincial Auditor. However, we have 
here the sad case where the Minister of Justice made the 
comments and then was endorsed by the Premier. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the government is to 
have credibility in the carrying out of the wills of the people and 
the enforcement of the laws of the land that are crafted and passed 
in these Legislative Chambers, that the Minister of Justice must 
seriously, must give very serious consideration to withdrawing 
his comments, to issuing a public apology, and out of respect for 
the people of Saskatchewan and the tradition of the Assembly 
and the making of law, withdraw his services as a member of 
Executive Council. 
 
And I don’t say that lightly, Mr. Speaker, because I recognize 
that the Minister of Justice has had many years   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1428 
 

of service in the Legislative Assembly. We’ve had our 
differences of opinion, but there have been times when I think 
we’ve found, in my personal opinion, that he has acted in the best 
interests, in his view, and I respect that, and so the people of 
Saskatchewan. And so I don’t lightly or easily stand in my place 
and say that I support a motion calling for the hon. member to 
withdraw from the Executive Council and the cabinet of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
You see, when I look at it, Mr. Speaker, and I try to understand 
why is this happening, I have to admit that I don’t find a good 
reason. What can justify any of us in this Assembly placing under 
personal attack yourself, as a member of the Legislative 
Assembly carrying an impartial role, or legal counsel, or any of 
the Clerks at the Table, or the Provincial Auditor. That in fact can 
be construed as nothing more than an attack on the institution 
itself. When the minister expresses that view, Mr. Speaker, in a 
sense he attacks all of us in this Assembly, and the institution, the 
democratic institution of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And surely that is not something that was done without thought. 
I know the hon. member well enough to know that he understands 
the implications of political comment and has represented 
himself by and large with honour in this House. And so when I 
ask myself why in the world would this happen, I simply can’t 
accept that one member of this Assembly just got up, and without 
thinking, rambled off and that it happened, and that out came the 
scurrilous attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And so it seems to me when I look at, and I look at what the 
Provincial Auditor has said, when he said that he can’t function, 
provided the 200-page document of condemnation of the 
performance of the Government of Saskatchewan; also said that 
he was unable to even provide comment on about 50 per cent of 
the expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan. And I 
listened to the response of the Minister of Justice. And it says to 
me that it was a response made that was thought out ahead of 
time, and that was made intentionally. I just simply cannot think 
of a rationale by which it was made on the spur of the moment, 
and in fact the Minister of Justice, I think, confirmed that through 
his own entry into debate in this Assembly when he repeated his 
attack and his rationale for that. 
 
And so what it appears to me we have here before us now, Mr. 
Speaker, is the actions of a government which is attempting to 
cover up the cover-up. In effect, the Provincial Auditor has said, 
I can no longer be watch-dog for the public purse; I can’t get 
information for literally half of the government expenditures. 
 
The implication of that — these are not the auditor’s words; I 
assume responsibility for these words — another way of saying 
that is that the public watch-dog of the people is operating to 
provide information for the members of the Legislative 
Assembly so that all of us on both sides of this Assembly can 
perform our duties in respect of the obligations assigned to us, 
being sent here by our constituents and all the people of 
Saskatchewan collectively. 
 

When I look at what the Provincial Auditor said, he said there’s 
a cover-up going on. Can we give it any possible interpretation 
other than that? There is a cover-up going on. 
 
In my mind it fits, Mr. Speaker, with the whole privatization and 
patronage kind of scenario and strategy that’s been going on in 
this province for a long period of time, in which the claims are 
that privatization is the economic solution to all that ails us, 
despite the facts that taxes are up, services are down, the deficit 
is rising, unemployment is up, and people are fleeing the 
province. Those are the facts. 
 
And so it doesn’t surprise me that we have mixed in with that a 
government which is intentionally influencing the financial 
statement of this province. What other explanation is possible to 
give, Mr. Speaker, to the actions of a government which, contrary 
to its own laws — contrary to its own laws — deprives the 
Provincial Auditor, the employee of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, the opportunity, not to do the books — that’s not 
what he asked to do — but to confirm that the private auditors, 
those who work for each individual Crown corporation, that the 
private auditors’ figures are correct, so that when, through Public 
Accounts and Crown Corporations Committee and estimates 
within this House, we ask questions, those of us in these 
Chambers can ask those questions confident that what the 
government says are the facts, are the facts, because the 
Provincial Auditor has confirmed that. 
 
You see, if the Provincial Auditor cannot confirm to me as an 
individual member of this Assembly that the government 
statements are accurate, then I have no way other than the 
ridiculous possibility of attempting to go through a Crown 
corporation’s books myself, which I would never be entitled to 
do, but I would have no other way of confirming that what the 
government is saying is a fact, as a matter of fact, is the truth. 
 
So the Provincial Auditor becomes for all of us in this Assembly 
a very, very key individual to provide for us, not only information 
but the confidence that the information provided by the 
government is accurate. The Provincial Auditor has said, 
contrary to the government’s own law, I am being denied access 
to 50 per cent of the information. 
 
And so is it possible, Mr. Speaker, to conclude anything other 
than the response from the Minister of Justice is more than 
anything else an attempt, number one, to divert the issue from the 
real issue . . . to divert attention from the real issue, the real issue 
being this government’s performance; and secondly, to cover up 
the cover-up? In other words, an attempt to discredit the 
messenger, to discredit the man who, for, I believe, it’s 18 years, 
has served the people of Saskatchewan as auditor; has been the 
fear of, I think, cabinet ministers of governments of three 
different political stripes; has been diligent in his service to the 
people of Saskatchewan in his demands on the credibility of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to be dealing with this issue 
which I think is extremely crucial not only to the performance of 
the Provincial Auditor, but is crucial to all of us as individual 
members of the Assembly to carry out   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1429 
 

our roles as defenders of the public purse, both in opposition and 
in government; and also equally importantly and, perhaps, in the 
long run most importantly, the very credibility of the 
Government of Saskatchewan when the single individual who 
should be most counted on to defend the application of the law 
of Saskatchewan leads the attack on the employee of the 
Legislative Assembly who has said that the government is not 
following its own laws. 
 
And that is a sad day, Mr. Speaker, for anyone who defends the 
principles of democracy, the principles of the right to public 
speech, and the principle of accountability for government, that 
we should have to be debating this very motion before us here 
today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I won’t belabour the issue, and I will simply 
stop there. There are scads of information available on both the 
original report from the Provincial Auditor, as well as the 
subsequent report that was tabled in this Chamber a week ago, 
that have been referred to by colleagues previously. And I don’t 
believe it necessary for me to repeat those in documentation as to 
why I draw the conclusions today, but to put on record for my 
constituents, and for the people of Saskatchewan, my grave 
concerns, as an elected member of the Assembly, in dealing with 
this motion before us. 
 
It is also, before concluding, Mr. Speaker, out of concern for 
others that I raise this issue, because if it is okay for the Minister 
of Justice, or for that matter any member of the cabinet of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, to attack employees of the 
Legislative Assembly in the person of the Provincial Auditor, 
then it is just as easily justified to carry out that attack on legal 
counsel of the Legislative Assembly, on the Clerks of the 
Legislative Assembly, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, on you in your 
office as Speaker of the Assembly. I simply want to say that I 
consider any of those as equally reprehensible as I consider this 
attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
If we are to continue to function and to hope to have any respect 
from the most important people in Saskatchewan — that’s 
electors, the electors of this province — then surely we must 
conduct ourselves in a way that earns the right to that respect. We 
must conduct ourselves as defenders of the law, because none of 
us as individuals, nor the government as an entity, can be above 
the law in a free society. 
 
(1500) 
 
And for all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I shall be voting in 
favour of this motion which: 
 

. . . condemns the Minister of Justice for having breached 
the privileges of this legislature by his unacceptable and 
unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial Auditor, that this 
Assembly calls on the Premier to require that the minister 
apologize publicly and resign from the Executive Council, 
and further, that this Assembly (and in the long run, most 
important, Mr. Speaker) reaffirms the importance of the 
office of the Provincial Auditor as an officer of this 
legislature (and a defender of the Saskatchewan people). 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Like other of my 
colleagues before me, I hesitated in my seat, thinking that a 
government member may wish to stand and enter this debate; 
none have done so. We have been through this debate now for 
the better part of a week, and Mr. Speaker, not one of the 
back-benchers, not one, except from their seats, have chosen to 
enter this debate. That’s a disappointment, Mr. Speaker, and it 
must be a disappointment for the Minister of Finance, who I’m 
sure would have appreciated some support from his own back 
bench, but we’ve not seen it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Justice. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, over the past days and now a 
week, this debate over privilege in the House has become 
clouded in legislative technicality and terminology and jargon. 
We have the unprecedented situation of two motions of privilege, 
not just one, before this House. We have the situation of 
amendments and subamendments being made; some 
amendments being accepted by yourself in the Chair, others 
being turned down. We have the situation where one cabinet 
minister moves an amendment and another cabinet minister 
recommends voting against it. We have the unprecedented 
situation of the government voting against their own 
amendments and motions in this debate, and through all of that, 
Mr. Speaker, the central question can become very clouded. 
 
Now you and I and all members, I think, spent the weekend just 
past out of this legislature, and I took that opportunity to meet 
with some of my constituents and speak to as many as I could, 
and, Mr. Speaker, even though the debate in this House has 
become clouded in all this legislative terminology, the issue in 
the public mind is crystal clear. The issue is very simple in the 
public mind and it is very crystal clear. People of Saskatchewan 
understand what this debate is all about and what has been 
happening in this legislature in the past week and some days now, 
Mr. Speaker. They understand it simply as this: the Provincial 
Auditor, that servant of the legislature charged to be the 
watch-dog on government spending, the watch-dog on the public 
purse, the guardian of the taxpayers’ dollar, that Provincial 
Auditor, in this case a man who’s integrity is beyond question, a 
man who has served this province now almost 20 years through 
three separate administrations, a man who is clearly beyond the 
partisan politics of this Legislative Assembly, that Provincial 
Auditor, whose integrity is above question, presented his report 
not only to this Assembly but also to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This year’s annual report of the Provincial Auditor is highly 
critical, extremely critical of the government opposite. As others 
have indicated in this debate, perhaps unprecedented in its 
criticism of a duly elected government. Mr. Speaker, this is the 
report — others have quoted from it — I do not wish to quote 
extensively from it this afternoon in the debate, but clearly 
statements like this indicate the highly critical nature of the 
auditor’s   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1430 
 

report. He says in his very introduction: 
 

Saskatchewan’s parliamentary system of government is 
based on the principle of the rule of law. Compliance with 
the law is critical to the entire system. Because of the 
importance of this principle, much of this report is about 
instances where the laws have been contravened. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is a damning indictment of any duly elected 
government, that laws are being contravened. He concludes in 
his summary of current issues of importance, the auditor 
concludes: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he is not watching out simply for the Legislative 
Assembly; he is watching out for the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 
The auditor in this report concludes that he cannot be effective in 
that role. That’s the kind of report that was delivered to the 
government now almost two weeks ago. 
 
So the government is faced with a report of this nature, a highly 
critical report from an auditor whose integrity cannot be 
questioned. They have two options therefore, Mr. Speaker. 
People of Saskatchewan understand the options that were before 
the government. In the light of this report, the provincial 
government, the Premier and his cabinet, were left with two 
options. 
 
One was to accept the conclusions made and drawn by the 
Provincial Auditor, to accept those conclusions and to seek 
immediate remedy, to take those conclusions to heart in cabinet 
and in caucus to seek remedies for this situation. That was a real 
option for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only other option was to attempt to discredit the report. I 
mean, you either accept its conclusions and seek remedies based 
upon its conclusions, or you attempt to discredit the report. Those 
are the two options. And obviously the government opposite 
chose the latter — chose, rather than accepting the conclusions 
and accepting to try and deal with this situation, they chose rather 
to attempt — and a vain attempt, I might say — to discredit the 
report. 
 
Now in attempting to discredit the report, I submit, Mr. Speaker, 
they again had two options. Either they could challenge the 
finding of the report, the findings of the report, the conclusions 
of the auditor — they could challenge those findings with fact, 
they could take the auditor’s points on one at a time and challenge 
with that, or they could attempt to discredit the author of the 
report. 
 
They chose to attempt to discredit this report. They could do so 
either by challenging the facts of the report or by attempting to 
discredit its author, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, again they chose 
the latter. They chose to discredit the author of the report. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as others in this debate have so rightly 
pointed out, the government chose that ancient method when bad 
news is delivered, if you don’t like the 

message, then you shoot the messenger. That’s clearly what has 
happened with the comments of the Minister of Justice; it’s 
clearly what the Premier and the Executive Council decided must 
be done. If you don’t like the message, you shoot the messenger. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious now, it’s obvious now that in this 
case the messenger will not be silenced. The messenger will not 
be silenced and the message will not be killed. The messenger 
will not be silenced and the message will not be killed. 
 
And so it’s this deliberate attack of the Minister of Justice on the 
integrity of the Provincial Auditor in an effort to discredit the 
auditor’s report that has led to this question of privilege. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan understand that that’s 
the issue here. The government doesn’t like this report and its 
only out, or it seems its only out is to attempt to discredit the 
author of that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this whole debate, in this whole question of 
privilege, and in watching this strategy of the government unfold, 
I’ve been reminded of a certain goalie who plays in the National 
Hockey League, a certain goalie who has been newsworthy in the 
past few weeks. You see, there’s a certain goalie playing in the 
NHL who once before in his hockey career demonstrated an 
unwarranted attack on a player on another team. 
 
Now that same goalie in this season, when that goalie realizes 
that the end of the game is almost here and the team is beat and 
there’s no way out, what does that goalie do? Well he flies out of 
his net with an unprecedented attack on another player. 
Something similar to what we’ve seen here, the Minister of 
Justice flying off his seat was an unprecedented attack on the 
Provincial Auditor when he knows the team is beat and the game 
is over. 
 
Now the analogy here, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t completely fit 
because the Minister of Justice didn’t undertake an attack on a 
player here on the other team. It wasn’t a personal attack on a 
member of the opposition. In fact, what this minister did was to 
take an attack on a referee of this House, on a referee of the game. 
 
And he didn’t just do that, you know, on his own. He didn’t just 
on his own initiative fly out of the seat and attack the referee. The 
whole team was right behind him supporting it, and it seems now 
that he was doing it on the instructions of his captain. The captain 
of the team and the team together decided this was the route to 
go. 
 
Why did he do that? Because the referee of the spending of the 
provincial government blew the whistle, blew the whistle in this 
report. So the Minister of Justice flies off his bench and attacks 
the referee. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously if this were the National Hockey 
League, that minister would today be suspended. He’d be 
suspended to the back bench, and he’d sit out the rest of the 
season right there on the back bench if this were the NHL. And, 
Mr. Speaker, in essence that’s what we’re saying should happen. 
That’s what we’re saying should happen, that this minister should 
be suspended for his unwarranted, unprecedented attack on the 
referee of   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1431 
 

provincial spending in this province, the Provincial Auditor. 
 
This issue is as clear as a bell to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
provincial government is delivered a highly critical auditor’s 
report. Others in this debate have gone through the report, have 
demonstrated the criticisms that are contained in this report. The 
government is left with two options: either you listen to the 
recommendations and you seek remedies, or you attempt to 
discredit the report. They’ve attempted to do that, not by 
challenging the report with facts but by an attempt to discredit 
the author of the report, the referee of provincial spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, documentation provided to this House by the 
Provincial Auditor has made it crystal clear that this attack is 
completely unwarranted, that the integrity of this man is above 
question, that all he was seeking to do was to improve the 
conditions of financial reporting in our province, to improve the 
conditions of his office that his office might be more effective in 
protecting the public purse, that public purse that is funded by the 
tax dollars of residents of this province who want their money 
spent wisely and spent carefully. The auditor is only seeking that. 
He is seeking no personal gain. He is only seeking that which 
will benefit this Legislative Assembly as a whole, and therefore 
the province and the people of Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s attack on this civil servant, on this 
servant of the legislature, on this servant on the people of 
Saskatchewan, now clearly from the documentation we’ve 
received, are obviously unwarranted, unfounded, and those kinds 
of attacks have not only impaired the work of this auditor but 
indeed the office of the auditor itself. And on that basis, Mr. 
Speaker, I argue that the privilege of all members has been 
violated, and on that basis, the minister should resign, should 
apologize and should resign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is clearly understood by the people of 
Saskatchewan, clearly understood that this government is simply 
trying — this government, the Premier and his cabinet — they 
are simply trying to cover up and to hide their mismanagement, 
the kind of mismanagement that’s exposed in this Report of the 
Provincial Auditor. They have chosen the route. If you don’t like 
the news, if you don’t like the message, then shoot the messenger. 
 
Well I simply say again, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I say again 
that in this case the messenger will not be silenced, and the 
message will still be heard. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be 
supporting this motion of privilege. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes on 
the motion that is before us, and I had hoped that some of the 
members from the government side would come to the defence 
of the minister, but that is not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the case is that they know deep down in their 
hearts that what the Minister of Justice has done simply cannot 
be defended. What he has done, Mr. Speaker, is simply he has 
dishonoured this legislature and 

he has dishonoured every member in this legislature. 
 
(1515) 
 
But . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster says that he has not been dishonoured. Mr. 
Speaker, let me say to the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
that maybe if he had a little more respect for the traditions of this 
House and this legislature and the principles for which it stands 
in a democratic society, maybe he would, maybe he too would 
feel somewhat dishonoured and violated. 
 
I say to the member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, I’ve 
known him a long time, and when he was first elected in this 
House I had a lot of respect for him and the words that he spoke 
in this House and in committees. I have gone out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, from 1982 to 1986 when I was not re-elected, and have 
often defended the member from Kindersley. I have. I have, Mr. 
Speaker, because I felt he was an honourable individual, a 
person, Mr. Speaker, that had a high regard for this legislature — 
because he did. He did recommend, Mr. Speaker, he did 
recommend at that time many changes with which I could agree 
for this legislature and for public accounts — and for public 
accounts. But he has made a complete reversal, a complete 
reversal now that he sits on the treasury benches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to some of the members opposite, I’ve 
been elected to this legislature for a number of times. I was 
defeated, and for that I respect the people’s wishes. But one of 
the things that saddened me the most on my return to the 
legislature in 1986 was the lack of respect for this legislature, for 
the lack of respect for the rules and the laws of this legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, I get involved very 
emotionally in many of the debates in this House — I do, there 
is no doubt about it. But I always remember one thing. When I 
sat on the treasury benches — and I don’t think that he would 
mind if I revealed this to the legislature — I remember having a 
chat with the former premier of this province, the Hon. Allan 
Blakeney, and he often said to us, and said to me personally, that 
we must do whatever we can to uphold the traditions of this 
legislature. And he made it very clear to us, as members of the 
Executive Council, that if we didn’t know an answer to a question 
in question period, it would be much better — much, much better 
— to take notice of that question, rather than to scurry around the 
question and maybe be in contempt of the legislature by 
deceiving the legislature. 
 
And he held a very, very high regard, and those members who 
sat with him either on his treasury benches or the back benches 
or on this side of the House know how in high regard he held this 
legislature. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I was at a function at my church. One of 
the people came up to me and asked me — and I must admit, I 
was taken aback — he asked me if the members of the legislature 
were considered honourable people, whether they had the title of 
honourable. And I said, yes, in the legislature we do. 
Back-benchers outside the House don’t have the title of 
honourable, but in the House we consider each other as 
honourable. And his   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1432 
 

comment to me simply was, what has been going on in the 
legislature in the last couple of weeks, and particularly as referred 
to the Provincial Auditor and things that were going on, he found 
that really unacceptable — really unacceptable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say and you can . . . the 
members opposite can make light of, and maybe that is because 
they don’t hold this Assembly in high regard, but I’ll tell you, 
we’re not very far, Mr. Speaker, we’re not very far removed from 
a dictatorship if we don’t start taking very seriously some of the 
rules and regulations and laws of this legislature. We must take 
them very seriously. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was a time-honoured, it was a 
time-honoured tradition, a time-honoured tradition, not only in 
this legislature, but across Canada and across the 
Commonwealth, that if a minister either deceived the House, 
deceived the House, whether he did it intentionally or 
unintentionally, he automatically resigned his portfolio — 
automatically resigned. 
 
The minister did not, at that time or in the times in the past, then 
go and create or make an attack on an officer of the legislature. 
He simply apologized and in many instances resigned, noting full 
well that he had breached one of the time-honoured traditions of 
this House, and that is, in the decision of the House, he had 
deceived the members. Therefore, he or she simply resigned and 
took the consequences of their actions. 
 
What have we seen in the last couple of weeks? Rather than 
addressing the problems that the Provincial Auditor has made in 
his report for the last number of years, rather than addressing 
those problems and correcting them, what have the members 
done? They have made a personal attack — personal attack on 
the Provincial Auditor. And, Mr. Speaker, very disappointingly, 
supported by the first person in this House, the leader in this 
House, the Premier, when the Premier knew that his 
responsibility was twofold: one, to ask the member to resign from 
his cabinet and accept that resignation; and number two, to come 
out publicly and say that he does not agree with that member and 
will do what he can to correct those accusations made by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the action that the government 
opposite should have taken, and the member from Kindersley 
should have done the honourable thing. He should have come 
into this House and said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize for the 
statements that I have made; I have nothing to back them up; I 
apologize. And I think we would have accepted it at that time. 
The House would have accepted it, and he would have been 
thought of a much better person than what he is today. He has 
lost the trust, the confidence of the people, not only of this 
legislature, but the Minister of Justice has lost the confidence and 
trust of a lot of people out in Saskatchewan itself. The public out 
there are very disappointed, very disappointed that a senior 
member of the cabinet, particularly the Minister of Justice, would 
take this personal, this scurrilous attack on the Provincial Auditor 
who was only performing his duties as laid down by the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

The Provincial Auditor claimed very clearly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that his job was being interfered with by the cabinet 
opposite. That is very clear on page 11, when in the Crown 
Management Board . . . and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Crown 
Management Board, they wouldn’t allow the Provincial Auditor 
access to information, they denied him the minutes of the board. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and who was on that board? Why, one 
would have to ask, why did the Premier come to the defence of 
the Minister of Justice? It’s not so far stretched when one realized 
that both of them sat on the Crown Management Board in 1987 
when information was denied to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
On that board sat the Premier, the Deputy Premier, the member 
from Kindersley — the Minister of Justice now — the Finance 
minister, and the minister of privatization, or the Minister of 
Public Participation. Those five members sat on that board and 
they denied, they denied the information to the Provincial 
Auditor so that he could do his job. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said that, they did one 
dishonourable thing by denying the Provincial Auditor access to 
information. Why must they do the second dishonourable thing 
in defending the Minister of Justice who made that scurrilous 
attack on a public officer of this legislature? The honourable 
thing for the members to have done, and particularly the Premier, 
the honourable thing for him to have done is to say, Minister of 
Justice, I’m sorry, but you no longer have any place, you no 
longer have any place or any position in my cabinet; you have 
done a very dishonourable thing, and all I can ask you to do is to 
resign your position and be replaced by someone else. 
 
The mandate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the Provincial Auditor is 
to be the watch-dog, is to be the watch-dog of the expenditures 
of this government or of any government. And it has been said 
before — it has been said before, and I can well remember when 
I was a minister of the Crown, and when the Provincial Auditor 
made some remarks about my department, did I attack the 
Provincial Auditor? Of course not. I called in my deputy and my 
associate deputy and I said, look, I don’t want to see those same 
comments again next year, I want those corrected. And in many 
instances that’s exactly what happened. You didn’t see those 
same comments again from the Provincial Auditor. 
 
But what do the members do opposite? No, they personally attack 
the Provincial Auditor, they cover up, they disallow him to 
examine about 50 per cent, or almost three and a half billion 
dollars of provincial expenditures. And what does the Minister 
of Justice do? He attacks the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was bad enough, but what does 
he do further? He comes into this House, he reads parts of a letter, 
gives a totally wrong interpretation of that letter and what the 
Provincial Auditor has said, and then asks us to believe him that 
if only he could make public the package that he had knowledge 
of, we would all come running to his defence. When, that same 
afternoon, the Provincial Auditor made public and had tabled in 
this House that package, did we all come to the defence of the   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1433 
 

Minister of Justice like he said we should? Of course not. His 
whole, his accusations on the Provincial Auditor, his personal 
attacks on the Provincial Auditor were not borne out by that 
package, not at all. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have the time this afternoon, 
but in all the papers of Saskatchewan there are countless, 
countless invitations to the Premier and to the Minister of Justice 
to do the honourable thing, to do the honourable thing. And the 
Minister of Justice should resign from his position — resign from 
his position. 
 
But in the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I note here on May 
23 it says, “Devine must act:” 
 

It’s time for Premier Grant Devine to step forward and tell 
government ministers and officials to co-operate with 
Provincial Auditor Willard Lutz. 
 

I am not going to read the whole thing, but I want to read the last 
paragraph of this: 
 

The premier will have to make some attempt to temper the 
arrogance of government ministers and Crown officials. 
Otherwise, the public may well ask, “What has the 
government got to hide?” 
 

What have they got to hide? I think we’ve seen just the tip of the 
iceberg, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have seen the tip of the iceberg 
in answers to the questions by the Minister of Public 
Participation. When it comes to the dental equipment and the 
Provincial Auditor asks, where is the dental equipment, or where 
is the $2.2 million? — the Minister of Public Participation was 
unable to satisfy the legislature in his answers. 
 
Where is that money? Hundreds of millions of dollars have been 
wasted, and the Provincial Auditor points it out, and what does 
the government do? They make a personal attack on the 
Provincial Auditor, rather than to say to the Provincial Auditor, 
yes, we recognize that you have a job to perform, and we will 
back you up with staff and finances, and we will make sure that 
the officials will co-operate. Rather than doing that, what do we 
have? We have a senior cabinet minister, the Minister of Justice, 
making these unfounded, these groundless attacks on the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier, when I first met the 
Minister of Justice some years ago when he was elected to this 
House, I had a lot of respect for him, a lot of respect. I must admit, 
I must admit that I lost some respect for him in the past when he 
made a similar attack on the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly 
at that time — a similar attack. 
 
His attack at that time was groundless; he was cornered, Mr. 
Speaker. Rather than defending himself, he backed . . . Rather 
than refusing or admitting that he was wrong, he backed himself 
further into the corner, made some scurrilous attacks again. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he has done the same thing again in the 
House this year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as members on this side of the House have 
pointed out, what the Minister of Justice has 

done reflects on all members of the House. He has violated our 
rights. He has violated my rights. And from time to time there is 
no doubt that we put our own reflections on the materials that we 
present to this House, but there can be no doubt, there can be no 
doubt at all that the Minister of Justice had no grounds for his 
accusations, he had no materials to back up his accusations, and 
he simply lashed out at an officer of this Legislative Assembly. 
And now doesn’t have the audacity, the courage, to come into 
this House and say, yes, I made a mistake; I apologize and I will 
resign from the cabinet. That’s what he should be doing. 
 
But I guess what bothers me more than anything else too, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that the members opposite, the 
back-benchers, why are they putting up with this? Why are they 
accepting this? Why do they allow themselves to be 
dishonoured? Why do they allow themselves to be dishonoured? 
But there’s no one . . . no one has come to the defence of the 
Minister of Justice. Why? 
 
Is it because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they have been told 
exactly what not to say, or what to do? Are they afraid that 
somehow if they get up in this House and speak against a minister 
of the Executive Council that they will impair their own future? 
Is that it? What future, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What have they 
been promised if they simply sit there and take this dishonourable 
thing that the Minister of Justice has done? 
 
That does not reflect very well on this legislature at all. And is it 
any wonder, is it any wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
people out there have become very cynical of elected officials. 
 
We are not held in very high regard, and I must honestly admit 
that I don’t blame the people out there. When we have, when we 
have, for example . . . And this isn’t the only case. In Ottawa, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t need to list the number of times in the 
last session of parliament how many of the cabinet ministers and 
elected officials were up before the court or they had to resign 
from cabinet because of, I suppose, the dishonourable thing that 
they did to parliament. 
 
We have the very same thing in this House. You can only have it 
so often, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan 
will make their own judgement. But what bothers me the most, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that it reflects on you and it reflects on 
me, and it reflects on all members of this House — all members. 
 
We are supposed to be honourable people. That means that what 
we say in this House will be taken at its word. It is assumed that 
what we are saying is the truth. And when the Minster of Justice 
gets in this House and makes those scurrilous attacks, and when 
he says, if you could only see the package that I would like to 
make public, you would come to my defence. 
 
I can well remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I spoke on the 
other motion that is before us. That was immediately after the 
member from Kindersley made those comments in question 
period. I was speaking in this House, and I had said to myself, 
why am I defending the Provincial Auditor if what the member 
from Kindersley   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1434 
 

says is correct? 
 
And he had the letter; I didn’t. And he read parts from it. From 
that letter he gave me the indication that Mr. Lutz was vindictive; 
Mr. Lutz was unco-operative; Mr. Lutz was simply not a nice 
guy. And he had all the facts if only he could make them public. 
 
And when I stood before this House in defending the Provincial 
Auditor, I had some doubts about what I was doing, because I 
took the hon. member, the Minister of Justice, at his word that 
what he said was the truth. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was only 
about 10 minutes later when he had tabled the document and one 
of my members slipped me a note and said, what the Minister of 
Justice said in the House today is simply not the truth. I must 
admit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was disappointed, but at the same 
time I felt that I had to carry on with my motion and defend the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
But it is a sad day. This is a sad day in this legislature. And I still 
hope, I still hope, when all of this is over, the Minister of Justice 
will do the honourable thing. He might use some other pretence 
for resigning from cabinet, but he does not have — I want to say 
this to him — he does not have my confidence, he does not have 
my trust, and I know he does not have the trust of a lot of people 
out there. He does not have the trust. 
 
One of the things that should be done — and I address this to the 
Premier — one of the things that should be done, he should be 
removed as the Minister of Justice. He has no business being the 
Minister of Justice after what he has done in this legislature. He 
has no business being the Minister of Justice. If he wants to 
remove him to another portfolio, I don’t agree with that, I don’t 
think he has any position in the cabinet any longer — but at least 
he should not be the Minister of Justice. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said that, I ask the members 
opposite, when I take my place in this legislature, I ask the 
members, the back-benchers, please get up. If you feel so sure 
about your Minister of Justice that he is right in what he is doing, 
I ask the members opposite to get up and defend him, defend the 
Minister of Justice. And if you don’t agree with him, why don’t 
you get up in this House, tell the Minister of Justice that he has 
violated your rights and that he has no right — he has no right to 
reflect on all of us in the words, the groundless words that he used 
in this scurrilous attack on the Provincial Auditor. He has no 
right. 
 
And I want to repeat and close, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
disappointed — I am disappointed that the Minister of Justice has 
not done the honourable thing. I had thought that he would. I 
guess we have sunk to an all-time low in this legislature when the 
Minister of Justice not only attacked the Provincial Auditor once, 
but has attacked him on a number of times. And all of his 
arguments have been groundless. He has not provided any 
evidence to support his attacks; the Premier has no evidence to 
support his minister. But through all of this, we find not one 
back-bencher — not one — coming to the defence of the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
And all I can conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that in the 

heart of hearts the member opposite know that the Minister of 
Justice is guilty — is guilty — and he should resign his position. 
He has, in my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, lost the confidence 
of the people of Saskatchewan as the Minister of Justice. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I conclude by reading into the record the 
motion on which I have spoken: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of the legislature by his 
unacceptable, unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor; that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council; and further, that this Assembly reaffirms 
the importance of the Office of the Provincial Auditor as an 
officer of this legislature. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I support that motion, and I 
ask all members of this House, for the sake of this legislature, to 
support that motion. And I ask the member from Kindersley 
again, do the honourable thing, resign and get your status back, 
not only in this Assembly but in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:42 p.m. to 3:53 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 18 
 

 Romanow Simard 
 Prebble Kowalsky 
 Rolfes Solomon 
 Lingenfelter Atkinson 
 Tchorzewski Anguish 
 Koskie Hagel 
 Thompson Calvert 
 Mitchell Lautermilch 
 Upshall Trew 

 
Nays — 30 

 
 Muller Toth 
 Duncan Sauder 
 McLeod Johnson 
 Andrew McLaren 
 Lane Hopfner 
 Taylor Swenson 
 Smith Martens 
 Swan Baker 
 Schmidt Wolfe 
 Hodgins Gleim 
 Hepworth Neudorf 
 Klein Gardner 
 Meiklejohn Kopelchuk 
 Pickering Saxinger 
 Martin Britton 

 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1435 
 

Point of Privilege — Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week there was 
a very rare occurrence in this legislature in that the Speaker, 
yourself, sir, ruled that there were two prima facie cases of 
privilege. And in order to deal with that, of course, the rules state 
that this body, as having some judicial powers, or similar to a 
court of law, was to put forward a motion in each case of a prima 
facie case of privilege. 
 
The one that we just dealt with condemned the Minister of Justice 
for his outrageous attack on the auditor of the province. And 
we’ve now found that his colleagues, even though after 
substantial evidence was presented, if you want to look at it as a 
court of law, the back-benchers on the government side still 
chose, in their blind guidance, to follow the Minister of Justice 
down the barrel of a gun. And therefore in this case, after 
overwhelming evidence, we still find that the Minister of Justice 
has been placed above the law by this Assembly, and we accept 
that ruling. 
 
We’re now dealing with the second question of privilege, and it 
was raised by the hon. member from Saskatoon South, and it 
reads: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

Now we will deal with that motion today, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
unprecedented, one, that this House would have two prima facie 
cases of privilege before it, ruled within the matter of a short 
period of time, involving the Provincial Auditor and involving 
the attack that has been laid on his office and himself by the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan. The same minister, 
the Minister of Justice, the member from Kindersley, is not new 
at laying these attacks on officers of this Assembly. We can 
remember, going back in time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I must bring to the attention of 
the hon. member, citation 316, which reads that: 
 

Besides the prohibitions contained in S.O. 35 . . . that a 
Member . . . must not: 
 

(i) reflect upon the past acts and proceedings of the 
House; 

 
The motion we have just dealt with, the House has dealt with it, 
it becomes a past proceeding of the House, and the reflections on 
that motion are contrary to rule 316(i). 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I certainly agree with your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker, and I will continue my intervention into the motion 
which really censures the government for blocking the work of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 

Now I want to lay out today for those that may be watching, 
because it’s no use to lay it out to the members of the government 
because they blatantly overrule, change rules. Whenever 
anything goes against them, they say, well it’s not our fault; we 
won’t try and correct the situation; we’ll just shoot the 
messenger, or get rid of another public employee, or attack 
another officer of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Such is the case we have seen with the legal counsel in the past, 
Merrilee Rasmussen; such as we saw with the Ombudsman, the 
former Ombudsman, Dave Tickell. When he went to work for the 
John Howard Society, we found that this government, the day he 
went to work for the John Howard Society, they slashed the 
budget of that organization by 50 per cent. 
 
(1600) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, not given to anything new, but for those who 
may be watching today, I want to lay out what the definition of a 
question of privilege actually is, and I’m quoting from 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, the fifth edition. 
And under the definition on page 11, it states that: 
 

The distinctive mark of privilege is its ancillary character. 
The privileges of Parliament are rights which are 
“absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers”. 
They are enjoyed by individual Members, because the 
House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded use 
of the services of its Members; and by each House for the 
protection of its members and the vindication of its own 
authority and dignity. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on, in citation 17, that: 
 

A question of privilege ought rarely to come up in 
Parliament. It should be dealt with by a motion giving the 
House power to impose a reparation or apply a remedy. A 
genuine question of privilege is a most serious matter and 
should be taken seriously by the House. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what Beauchesne’s says, and we followed 
that procedure. And I would like the members of the government 
side to take this question seriously. Why has there been a 
question of privilege? You’ve ruled on that, sir, and the question 
of privilege is the impeding of the Provincial Auditor in which to 
perform his duties. His office can no longer perform the services 
required by members of the Legislative Assembly, and I’m not 
talking about the government or the opposition. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is an officer of this House who should be 
independent from the political interference of members of the 
government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would maintain that the 
duties that members of the Legislative Assembly have, while 
we’re assembled in this forum, could be put under three main 
topics. The first is one of a budgetary role where this Assembly 
sets down the budget for the operation of government in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The second role would be one of setting laws or changing   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1436 
 

laws, getting rid of obsolete laws, bringing new laws into place. 
So the second role is one of setting laws or statutes, as some 
people refer to them, for the province of Saskatchewan for the 
good conduct and operation of our law-abiding citizens and the 
people who we represent in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I would say though, Mr. Speaker, that there is a third area of 
responsibility that we have in this Legislative Assembly, and that 
is to preserve democracy. In the preservation of democracy it’s 
essential that this institution performs within the rules, by the 
laws, and under the regulations, the tradition, and the 
parliamentary procedures laid down in Erskine May and 
Beauchesne’s and the various parliamentary and legislative 
publications that have developed over the years. 
 
And I say that one of those greatest preservations of democracy 
in this Legislative Assembly is the freedom of speech which all 
members enjoy here. And it boggles my mind that members 
opposite don’t get up — and if they defend the actions of their 
government and some of their individual members, like the 
Minister of Justice, why they don’t stand in their place as 
back-benchers and show respect for this institution and present 
their case on this question of privilege, as we’re presenting the 
case. 
 
You may look at us as the prosecutors; their side should be the 
defendants. If they’re the defendants, why don’t they rise in their 
places and defend their government and defend the Minister of 
Justice who so blatantly has laid an attack on the office of the 
Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order, order. I must 
once more bring your attention to the rule which I have just 
stated. And to further expand on that rule, I might quote to you 
rule 315(2) which reads as follows: 
 

It is irregular to reflect upon, argue against, or in any manner 
call in question in debate the past acts or proceedings of the 
House, on the obvious ground that, besides tending to revive 
discussions upon questions which have already been once 
decided, such reflections are uncourteous to the House and 
irregular in principle inasmuch as the Member is himself 
included in and bound by a vote agreed to by a majority; and 
it seems that, reflecting upon or questioning the acts of the 
“majority” is equivalent to reflecting upon the House. 
 

And I know the hon. member wouldn’t want to do that, and I 
once more ask him to refrain from dealing with the matter we 
have just dealt with, and to deal with the matter under discussion 
now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — That was a wonderful ruling, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you for drawing it to my attention. 
 
I would say that the other responsibility to preserve democracy 
in this institution is whereby we have complete information to 
deal with items of a budgetary nature, and the servant of this 
Assembly that is in place to do that is the Provincial Auditor. And 
the Provincial Auditor just recently put forward his report for the 
year 

ending March 31, 1988. And in that report he outlines what his 
duties are. I’ll just quote the first section, Mr. Speaker, of the 
powers and duties from The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

The provincial auditor is the auditor of the accounts of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and shall examine all 
accounts related to public money and any accounts not 
related to public money that he is required by an Act to 
examine, and shall determine whether, in his opinion: 
 

(a) the accounts have been faithfully and properly kept; 
 
(b) public money has been fully accounted for and 
properly disposed of, and the rules and procedures applied 
are sufficient to ensure an effective check on the 
assessment, collection and proper allocation of public 
money; 
 
(c) public money expended has been applied to the 
purposes for which it was appropriated by the Legislature 
and the expenditures have adequate statutory authority; 
and 
 
(d) essential records are maintained and the rules and 
procedures applied are sufficient to safeguard and control 
public money. 
 

Now 11(2) under The Provincial Auditor Act states that: 
 

An appointed auditor is subject to the examination 
responsibilities prescribed in clauses (1)(a) to (d). 
 

Those that I’ve just outlined to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what is the government opposite saying? They’re saying, well 
we have private practice auditors in place to ensure that the 
money is being spent properly; that that money does not need to 
be examined by the Provincial Auditor because the private sector 
auditors are doing the job. But what they are not doing is 
allowing the auditor to examine the full impact of that authority. 
We’re talking about two different masters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the case of a private sector auditor, their master, or who the 
private sector auditor serves, are the board of directors or the 
management of that particular Crown corporation; or in private 
business, the management board or the board of directors 
representing the shareholders in many cases. 
 
And what the private sector auditors do, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
look at the financial picture of the corporation. They look at the 
financial picture to see if it reflects a true position of that 
company, of that corporation, over the year in which they’ve just 
gone through. 
 
When you’re dealing with public money, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
good enough because there is another master in terms of the 
auditor, and that’s the Legislative Assembly representing the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. And within the 
Legislative Assembly we need to look at not only whether it’s a 
true financial picture of the   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1437 
 

expenditures in any particular government department or Crown 
corporation or agency, we need to look at, through the Provincial 
Auditor, whether or not those funds were spent in accordance 
with the way they were appropriated from the legislature. And 
private sector auditors do not necessarily do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to look at what the auditor says. And I think we have to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that the current Provincial Auditor is a 
long-serving member of the Legislative Assembly of the 
province of Saskatchewan in terms of a servant. He’s not an 
elected member, but he’s a hired member, hired by the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
This individual worked during the years of the Liberal 
government in Saskatchewan in the provincial auditor’s office. 
He was appointed as the Provincial Auditor in 1971. Now I’m 
not sure today whether he was appointed by Ross Thatcher’s 
Liberals or Allan Blakeney’s New Democrats as the Provincial 
Auditor. But he was at least, under the Liberals, the assistant 
auditor, because as tradition holds, whoever is the assistant 
auditor becomes the auditor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So this individual, Willard Lutz, has served under a Liberal 
administration, he’s served under a New Democrat 
administration, and he now serves under a Conservative 
administration in the province of Saskatchewan. But he is an 
officer, again I repeat, of this Assembly — he is a servant of this 
Assembly — to ensure that members have full knowledge, full 
information of the financial activities of government 
departments, Crowns, and agencies, so that we in fact can 
perform our job in an adequate way and to make sure that it is 
democratic, Mr. Speaker. And democracy is, as I said earlier, a 
very important part of this institution. 
 
Now in the past when the auditor laid out a scathing report on the 
government, because it’s the government department and 
agencies and Crown corporations that he and his staff perform 
the audit on, the Liberals didn’t like it very much, but they at least 
honoured the auditor as an honourable person doing a job for the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. And deficiencies that 
were pointed out in the report each year, there was an attempt 
made to correct the deficiencies that were pointed out by the 
auditor. 
 
It happened the same way in New Democrats. I remember many 
of my colleagues, some who still sit today in this Assembly, 
being upset with the Provincial Auditor for uncovering 
something that a government department shouldn’t be doing. But 
what did they do? They didn’t attack the Provincial Auditor. 
What they did was they tried to remedy the situation that was 
deficient in terms of the opinion of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
But what does this government do? They try and hide 
information. They keep information from the Provincial Auditor. 
Rather than responding and making our system a better system 
in terms of public accountability for funds spent, they change the 
rules, they try and get rid, they attack. Every public employee in 
the province, and now officers of this Assembly, should fear for 
their jobs because of the blatant attacks that this government will 
lay on anyone who dares to criticize them, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I would want to look at page number 4 of the Provincial Auditor’s 
report, and in the second paragraph entitled “Provincial Auditor,” 
I quote: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. I 
recommend the process be repaired to require that appointed 
auditors and the Provincial Auditor work together on Crown 
corporation audits as joint auditors or with some similar 
arrangement. 
 
Also, there were a number of cases where I could not get 
information that, by law, I was entitled to receive. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the most revealing document of a 
government gone astray in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Provincial Auditor saying that, by law, 
information he’s entitled to he cannot receive from this 
government because the Executive Council, Crown Management 
Board, Crown investment corporation, many departmental . . . or 
I shouldn’t say departments, but many Crowns withhold 
information; they say, get it from the private sector auditor. The 
private sector auditor says they don’t have it. There’s every 
attempt and road-block made to hold information back from the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now what else does the Provincial Auditor say in here, Mr. 
Speaker? The Provincial Auditor says in here that . . . on page 9, 
2.20, and I quote: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because: 
 
he now sees the financial transactions for about 50 per cent 
of the public spending; 
 

Fifty per cent of public spending, Mr. Speaker. Fifty per cent of 
public spending isn’t good enough. By law, by the Act that 
governs the work of the Provincial Auditor, he must audit all 
funds and be satisfied that those funds are expended in a way that 
is within the law and within a way that is appropriated by this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
(1615) 
 
I don’t see any way that members, especially the back-benchers 
over there, can fly in the face of such a democratic right for us to 
have access to information. And it’s not a matter of Conservative 
versus New Democrat, it’s a matter of preserving democracy in 
this Legislative Assembly, a democracy that those back-benchers 
should honour as much as the members on this side of the 
Legislative Assembly. I think that the government would rather, 
though, lead their back-benchers to attack a Provincial Auditor, 
to deny that this is a blatant disregard on their part for democracy 
within this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I will be whole-heartedly supporting 
the resolution that was put forward by the member from 
Saskatoon South. I am happy to take part in this debate, but at the 
same time dismayed at the blatant   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1438 
 

failings of this government. And rather than trying to address the 
situation and correct the problems that exist today in government, 
they would rather attack and not disclose and hide facts from the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. And history will not 
treat this government kindly, Mr. Speaker. And I would say the 
back-benchers on the government side should join with us in 
supporting the resolution before us here today to show that they 
at least stand up for this institution, for the budgets we pass, for 
the laws we enact, and the democracy that we preserve here, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you for the opportunity in this debate today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I see no 
members on the other side of the House jumping to their feet to 
get involved in this debate, and little wonder why, I suppose, but 
we can get into that. 
 
As many of my colleagues have outlined before me, we know 
that Saskatchewan people know that this government has broken 
the laws of the land of Saskatchewan, broken the statute laws. 
That’s documented in many of the newspapers: Toronto Globe 
and Mail says, “Saskatchewan broke law, Auditor says”; 
Leader-Post says, “Auditor slams secrecy,” and he goes into all 
the many things that my colleagues before me have pointed out: 
“The auditor is denied access to information”; that’s May 16, for 
The Globe and Mail; and this one, the “Regina vs the auditor” — 
this is the Provincial Auditor — May 22 of The Globe and Mail, 
and I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan government appears to regard 
Saskatchewan’s auditor as a kind of Peeping Tom, a prowler 
in the backyard of its (financial) business and (the) rude 
intruder on its private affairs. 
 

Well the question that I have to ask, Mr. Speaker, in all this is, 
why? We have a government, elected by the people of this 
province with the assumption that they will run the affairs of this 
province to the best of their ability and in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan — that was what this government was 
elected on — and I ask them, the question I ask is: why have 
these members on the government side broken that trust, broken 
that silent code from the elected official to the people who elected 
them, the people of Saskatchewan? Why have they broken this 
trust? 
 
Is it because it’s a government out of control? Is that why the 
auditor has to come down hard, because he is denied access to 
information? Is that why these people break the laws? Is this 
government so far out of control that it is afraid to give the auditor 
all the documents from all the public departments? Or is it a 
government desperate for control? And I think the latter is 
probably as important as the former — a government out of 
control, but desperate for control, in order to self-preserve 
themselves in the capacity as the government of this province. 
 
That is the objective, I believe, that is behind . . . the motive 
behind stopping the auditor or attempting to stop the auditor, by 
denying him access for information, by denying him the 
information that he needs from all the 

Crown corporations and other departments in government; a 
government that is desperate for control because they know what 
the polls are saying in this province, they know what the people 
are saying, and they know what’s being said on coffee row — 
they know that they’re finished. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Then I have to ask myself, Mr. Speaker, if I put 
myself in the position of a back-bencher in that government, why 
would I allow this to happen, when in my constituents, who I 
know are talking to them and saying, look, why did you let this 
happen? What are they to say? Well I have nothing to do with it, 
because the cabinet and the inner circle makes all the decisions? 
Can’t say that because that puts them in a dim light in the eyes of 
their constituents. They could stand up and say, well I fought for 
this and publicly make a statement saying that I do not believe 
this is true; they could stand up and vote for this motion to ensure 
that the auditor gets all the information, but they’re not doing 
that. 
 
And I would say they’re not doing that, Mr. Speaker, for one 
reason, because this government is desperately clinging to 
power; they’re in a desperate mode to ensure themselves 
re-election when they have the courage to call an election. And 
the inner circle, the cabinet and those few power brokers in the 
front benches of this government, are telling them, listen, Mr. 
Back-bencher, if you have any hope, any hope of re-election in 
this province, then you’d better do it our way because there is no 
other hope. 
 
And isn’t that a sorry statement — doing it our way, breaking the 
laws; doing it our way, withholding information; doing it our 
way, slandering an auditor and making sure that the auditor 
cannot carry out his duties as a servant of this legislature. That’s 
the government’s way. And I’m sure that’s what they’re telling 
the back-benchers: boys, you’ve got to do it our way because it’s 
your only hope. 
 
And if I was the back bench, I would get together and I’d say, 
well look, there is a better way. There has to be a better way 
because we were put here by the people in a position of integrity. 
And, my friends, you have thrown that to the breeze, you’ve 
thrown that to the breeze because the desperation of your 
government, the advice of your cabinet and the power brokers of 
your government are saying it’s the only way. So you better listen 
to us. It’s the only possible way that you might win re-election. 
 
But what they don’t understand or what they fail to have the 
intestinal fortitude to come forward and say, no, this is wrong. 
They fail to understand they have a better chance of winning if 
they maintain their integrity, if they maintain their honesty . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And I would just stop for a moment, 
Mr. Speaker, for the member from Weyburn, seeing he hasn’t 
entered this debate, to carry on the debate from his seat, because 
that’s the only place he talks from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so they go along with it. They go along with 
breaking the laws. They go along with losing confidence.   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1439 
 

They go along with discrediting an officer of this Assembly. 
They go along with that for self-preservation. And that is why I 
say, as I said earlier, there is no control, or they’re desperate for 
control, or both. Because they cannot in their own heart of hearts 
justify that what they have done, what their cabinet . . . the 
decision by their cabinet, or maybe some other people by the 
Premier, that decision they’re going along with. They cannot 
justify that in their own heart of hearts, and I know that. 
 
But they’re so desperate because they know what the polls are 
saying, they know what coffee row is saying, and they know they 
have to have — and I think this is what’s called building up to — 
they have to have the money to try to buy another election. 
 
And involved in all of this, this major scheme to hide facts, to 
hide the documents, to withhold the documents, to not give all 
the spending to the auditor — I think it’s a slush fund or many 
slush funds — to try to cover the fact that they are hiding money 
in certain departments or certain areas of government that they 
can bring forward, come election time, because they know they 
have to have all their ducks lined up, they have to have the money 
in place so they’re trying to do this in order to build little slush 
funds. 
 
In property management, a little item of $42 million — $42 
million. And when the minister was asked, he had to take notice; 
he didn’t know what it was, the minister in charge. 
 
The dental equipment. The money was unaccountable for. And 
all these little — million, 2 million, $40 million — numbers are, 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, going into a slush fund because the 
Tory government needs money. Because they know that the only 
way that they can hope to preserve themselves in government is 
for advertising, for promoting themselves publicly through the 
media — do one fantastic sales job and maybe they can salvage 
themselves. Maybe, but I doubt it. 
 
And the other thing that’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, and it 
has been proven time and time again in this legislature, that the 
money being put forward or being brought through all the Crown 
corporations and all government departments, that money is 
hitting the pockets of a few people. But just think about that. 
They’re filling the pockets of people through patronage; they’re 
filling the pockets of people through blatant mismanagement and 
misappropriation of government funds. 
 
But then I ask again, why is this, when they know they’re going 
down the tubes, when the back-benchers know it’s not right, and 
probably the cabinet should too, why are they allowing it to 
happen? Why are they allowing the people’s money, the money 
of the taxpayers of this province, to be channelled into the 
pockets of a few people when they are cutting programs, when 
they are cutting and privatizing? 
 
But that is why, that is why we have to have the auditor in control 
of the public purse of Saskatchewan. But there’s a very important 
reason, as I have stated, Mr. Speaker, that these people do not 
want the public, the people who put 

them there, to know through the auditor how they spend their 
money; how they allocate; who the money’s going to; through 
which department it’s being channeled; through what department 
the slush funds are being built. They don’t want the people to 
know this, and that is the most incredible method for a 
government to deal with the people who put them there. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there aren’t many of those people 
left, because I know what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan and 
in urban Saskatchewan. The people are saying, this is not honest 
government. This is not what this government was put there for 
— to misappropriate; to mismanage; to squander; to fill the 
pockets of a few people; to use taxpayers’ money simply for 
self-preservation of government; and not using taxpayers’ money 
to ensure that the livelihood and the life-style of the people of 
Saskatchewan is maintained at a certain level; that all the funds 
are used in a manner that creates jobs for the best return of the 
money involved; to make sure that all the money that the 
taxpayers are paying to this government is used to ensure that 
unemployment stays down; to ensure that we don’t lose people 
from the province of Saskatchewan. That is why. That’s the 
reason. 
 
This government says, no, we don’t have to do that. We can do 
whatever we want, whenever we want. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re above the law. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — As my colleague says, they think they’re above 
the law. But that is not what they were put there to think; they 
were put there to do good for the people. But it’s self-gratifying 
for them to fill their pockets and their friends’ pockets. 
 
And we cannot allow, and the people will not allow, this 
government to continue in this manner. They will not allow them 
to continue in a manner of breaking the laws, of misappropriating 
funds, of wasteful patronage, of waste and mismanagement, and 
above all, being totally unaccountable to the taxpayers of this 
province, the people’s money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Why, Mr. Speaker, is there no support from that 
government for the right way to do things? I mean, I don’t like to 
repeat myself, but why is there not an utterance for the right way, 
for the right way to manage the affairs of government, to be 
accountable? 
 
We have here in the auditor’s report a document that is a scathing 
report of the mismanagement and the cover-ups and the 
corruption and mismanagement and patronage of this 
government. And yet we see not one, or very few, who are 
willing to stand up and do what’s right. 
 
And I think that that is a sad statement for any elected official, 
when they can allow the Provincial Auditor . . . when they can 
allow themselves, rather, to sit quiet when the Provincial Auditor 
says he cannot effectively carry out his role as the watch-dog 
over the public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly, 
because the Public Accounts are not complete, correct, or timely. 
A number of cases where the tabling of reports was not on time. 
 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1440 
 

And it goes on. It goes on to say: 
 

In my opinion I have been interfered with in the execution 
of my duties. 
 

(1630) 
 
Why would any self-respecting persons elected by the people of 
this province allow . . . sit in their seats and not stand up for what 
is right and condemn what is wrong, as members on this side of 
the House are doing, condemning what is wrong on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Because the government, who was elected to 
carry out what is right, will not do it. 
 
Not one person is standing up to defend what’s right, to defend 
the auditor, to defend, actually, the people of Saskatchewan who 
have the right — who have the right through the democratic 
process, to know exactly what is being spent by this government. 
 
What a damning document. What a statement for democracy in 
Saskatchewan. A government . . . or rather a province who has 
come through many, many hard times, who through very, very 
cautious buying and spending and good management has brought 
this province from a sparsely populated, wide-open, large area to 
a province where we have nearly a million people until this 
government took over. And now because of their way, the wrong 
way, people are leaving. And can you wonder why? Because of 
the method of control by this government, because of the method 
they control their agenda, not the agenda of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The agenda of the people of Saskatchewan is what the auditor 
says it is, for him to lay on the Table all the documents — he 
should have been given those documents by the government — 
for him to lay on the Table all the accountability, the spending of 
this government. But this is simply not happening. It’s not 
happening because this government is denying the auditor that 
access; it’s denying the people of Saskatchewan that access. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, this document tells many tales, not only 
what is written in this document, but it tells many tales of what 
is written in between the lines. That is a government who’s out 
of control; a government who has succumbed to 
self-preservation; a government who is so enveloped in 
patronage to ensure that some day when they may not be here 
that they will have a very good life-style, because what comes 
around goes around. If they help somebody else out, they’re sure 
to get help back; a government who through their wasteful 
tactics, through their what I would call blind-eyed unloyalty to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s really the opposite of what it should be. Any 
government should be blind-eyed loyal to the people of this 
province, because it is they, those people — those people who 
are on the unemployment rolls, those people 

who are on the welfare rolls, those people who are the working 
poor, those people who are living in the province — who depend, 
because of the situation they’re put in, they depend on this 
government to spend money wisely to try to create jobs, to spend 
money wisely to try to ensure that they can get off of the welfare 
rolls. 
 
But what’s happening? Those people have lost faith in this 
government. And that is documented, the proof is documented 
by the thousands and thousands of people who are leaving 
Saskatchewan because they simply have lost faith in a 
government to use taxpayers’ money to ensure that they will get 
a job in the future, to ensure that they will be able to get off those 
welfare rolls; to ensure that the small-business people of this 
province will be able to build and maintain their business. 
 
But what’s happening? The foreclosures, the bankruptcies are 
sky-rocketing simply because the government’s agenda is not 
that of the people. The government’s agenda is that of the 
government, and they are on a road of self-preservation. 
 
But what’s happened? Because from 1982, when they were 
elected, to 1986, they squandered, they paid off, they did not 
operate this government in such a manner that the future would 
be able to be maintained, that we could maintain the future of this 
province. And so what’s happening? It’s coming back to haunt 
them from 1986 till now. Their actions are coming back to haunt 
them because they’re out of control. And when you’re out of 
control, when you’re desperate, what do you do? You operate in 
secrecy; you don’t let people know. They don’t want the people 
of this province to know they’re out of control, so what do they 
do? They don’t let anybody know what’s going on, and that is 
why this government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise 
a point of order, please. 
 
The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I think if you were to listen 
carefully to the member opposite and know that the issue that we 
are debating is the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of 
Mr. Koskie — it’s a privilege motion. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition today continue to filibuster; the opposition today in 
not talking on the subject whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. And I ask 
you to rule on the relevancy of the comments by the member 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to make the point that it is not 
our problem that the unprecedented situation that we have here, 
where we had two privilege motions at the same time — a record 
in this Assembly — that was not our doing. That was the 
members opposite who in fact were involved in the infraction. 
 
I want to say as well that the member from Humboldt, who is 
now on his feet, has been spending a total of six minutes in this 
so-called filibuster that he’s been involved   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1441 
 

in. And I would just advise the member to wait more than six 
minutes before he accuses someone of being involved in a 
filibuster. I think the points you were making were very germane 
to the motion before us and I would ask you to rule in that 
manner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Of course, relevancy is always an issue 
when members are on their feet, and it’s an issue now with the 
point of order from the member for Melfort. I would just like to 
bring to the attention of the member for Humboldt that he realizes 
the motion before the House, and I am sure that he is going to 
make his comments very, very relevant to the motion. If his 
comments aren’t very, very relevant, then of course they’re out 
of order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate and accept 
your ruling, because it is very important through this motion that 
this government be accountable. And the only way it can be 
accountable is for the auditor to have full access in information. 
 
And what I was just saying a few minutes ago is that because of 
the method of operation of this government for the last number 
of years, they have got themselves into a position where they can 
no longer be accountable, because if they put all the facts on the 
table, they would be thrown out of this government as quick as 
anybody could see them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So, Mr. Speaker, the auditor has been denied 
the access to information. He’s been denied that access because 
the government is not willing to fulfil its role to present all the 
documents, to present all the figures for spending that this 
government carries out, thereby not allowing him to fulfil his 
role. And why are they doing that? They’re doing that because 
they no longer have control of the province. And if they put out 
all the information, if they showed exactly where they spent or 
where they misspent, or where they managed or where they 
mismanaged, this document, Mr. Speaker, would be 10 times as 
bad. It’s bad enough with the auditor saying he only has access 
to half the information. Can you imagine what he would be 
saying if he had the access to all the information. The way this 
government has carried on, and the searing indictment from the 
auditor with half the information, and a culmination of years of 
mismanagement and corruption and patronage has led to this. 
 
And this is why it is important, Mr. Speaker, in the light of this 
motion which urges: 
 

That the Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information and the necessary 
co-operation in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

Isn’t this is a sad motion to have to put forward. We’re asking 
that the government don’t break the law. An 

opposition in the legislature of Saskatchewan has to stand up and 
make a motion to plead with the government to ask them to vote 
on a motion so that they won’t continue to break the law. 
 
And I’ll be very curious to see whether the government members 
stand up and vote saying that no they’re not going to continue to 
break the law, or vote yes that they are going to continue to break 
the law. It’ll be very interesting to see how the vote comes down, 
because as I said — when I just read this motion: 
 

. . . Provincial Auditor to fulfil his legislative 
responsibilities as specified in the statutes of Saskatchewan 
(the statute laws). 
 

The question I have to ask, Mr. Minister, is if this government 
votes yes, that they will continue to break the laws, the question 
I have to ask is: what do the people of this province have in store 
for them for the duration of their government? I don’t think it’s a 
very happy thought. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:43 p.m. to 4:48 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 18 
 

 Romanow Simard 
 Rolfes Kowalsky 
 Lingenfelter Solomon 
 Tchorzewski Atkinson 
 Koskie Anguish 
 Thompson Lyons 
 Brockelbank Calvert 
 Mitchell Lautermilch 
 Upshall Trew 

 
Nays — 30 

 
 Muller Toth 
 Duncan Sauder 
 McLeod Johnson 
 Andrew McLaren 
 Lane Hopfner 
 Taylor Swenson 
 Smith Martens 
 Swan Baker 
 Schmidt Wolfe 
 Hodgins Gleim 
 Hepworth Neudorf 
 Klein Gardner 
 Meiklejohn Kopelchuk 
 Pickering Saxinger 
 Martin Britton 

 
  



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1442 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on 
this motion, the motion introduced by the Minister of Justice 
opposite, which is a motion to limit one of the basic democratic 
rights of this institution, and that is to limit the effectiveness of 
the opposition, Mr. Speaker, because that is exactly what this 
motion will do. 
 
The minister has brought forth a motion which will bring 
bell-ringing to a limited time period of one hour, Mr. Speaker. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that instead of doing that, instead of 
bringing some kind of a motion here, the government ought to be 
thankful, thankful that this opposition brought them and is 
bringing them to their senses on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — You ought to be thankful for that. You ought 
to be thankful for this procedure which is in place in this 
legislature. Democracy is not that easy to hang on to, and there 
are many examples around the world where things are going the 
wrong way. And this is one example where you’re just adding to 
it by removing something, removing a very basic democratic 
method that has been used in this legislature and other 
legislatures when the time was correct to do it. 
 
But what do you do? You choose out of spite, or out of pique, 
you choose to come right back and instead of dealing with 
government business as the people would like you to do, instead 
of going home and listening to the people, you come back and 
you say, I’m going to try to teach these members on the opposite 
a lesson of some sort. They’re going to try and teach them a 
lesson. 
 
What we should be dealing with in this House at this very 
moment, Mr. Speaker — and we would give leave to do so at this 
time — is this Bill which you introduced to the House today, Bill 
41. We would give leave to you to go on to debate this in second 
reading today because this is an important piece of legislation, 
and it should be before the House. At least we’d be dealing with 
something other than procedural matters. 
 
In the case of this motion, what should be happening is you . . . 
if you really want to change the rules of the House, you should 
be appointing a committee as you were requested to do several 
times by our leader, by other members in our front benches, and 
as tradition requires, so that the committee can go deal with the 
matters before it that are given to it by both sides, away from the 
heat of battle, and come back with the report to the legislature. 
 
Now I know you’re hurting a little bit, and I guess maybe 

it’s natural for you to be hurting a little bit. That’s fine, you know, 
take it for what it’s worth, but look at the positive side of it. Look 
at what’s happening. If you listen to the people, you will save the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Not only that. And if you really believe in a 
democracy and you really believe in representing the people . . . 
they were talking to us not only about the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, they were also talking about the privatization that 
you’ve put forward and you’re proposing to put forward, and 
they’re opposing it. They’re opposing it. 
 
So what you should be doing at this time is you should be 
dropping that legislation. You should be dropping the debate on 
this legislation. You should be coming forward with estimates. 
We haven’t passed any but one yet. You haven’t done any but 
one yet. Why? Because you haven’t brought it forward. You are 
the people that bring forward the agenda. Day in and day out you 
bring forward the agenda. 
 
What have we got here? How many days have we been here for? 
Forty-five days you haven’t brought in a second estimate — 45 
days and you haven’t brought one in. That’s unbelievable, 
unbelievable that here we’ve gone this far into the session and 
there hasn’t been anything accomplished whatsoever. Why? 
Because you choose to deal with this that the people of 
Saskatchewan soundly rejected. 
 
You choose to deal only with privatization — privatization of 
SaskTel, privatization of SGI, privatization of SaskPower, 
privatization of potash, privatization of the highway equipment, 
privatization of the health care system, privatization of the dental 
plan. That’s all that’s happening. 
 
What ought to happen here is the minister of privatization ought 
to go on holiday. Send him on holiday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Bring out the Minister of Agriculture. Let’s 
deal with this agriculture Bill. Let’s deal with it. I have a lady, a 
widow in my constituency, who would dearly love to see a 
portion of this passed. She’s in the situation right now where 
she’s already lost six quarters of land. If there’s no other way that 
she can get any money . . . she can’t get money to finance her 
loan which is being called now by the defunct Northland Bank, 
recalled because . . . which is none of her fault. It needs to be 
done. So that’s why I’m saying, bring forth some legislation. 
That’s what we need to deal with. 
 
Let me get back to this particular Bill now, Mr. Speaker, the Bill 
which is before us which is to limit bell-ringing. I want to give 
some background as to exactly what happened and how this came 
about. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been long-standing in this 
legislature, longer than I would have been able to research. And 
I suppose it’s been here perhaps since the   



 
May 29, 1989 

 

1443 
 

beginning of when this whole legislature was built and first came 
into place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the object of the bell-ringing is really twofold. 
Now the minister opposite, when he was making his remarks, 
really indicated that it was only onefold, that there was really 
only one reason. And I quote from Hansard on page 1080 where 
the minister opposite, when he introduced the legislation, said 
that the purpose of that rule, meaning the bell-ringing rule: 
 

. . . was to allow members who were not in their place to 
have an opportunity to come and cast their vote (and he 
says) — number one — and number two, (to) be able to 
come to this Assembly and cast their vote and have that 
recorded in the Journals of this Assembly 
 

Well I maintain that’s one reason — one reason — and that’s one 
good reason. But there is another very, very good reason to have 
this type of rule. And that reason, Mr. Speaker, is to provide an 
opportunity to be sure that the public can become advised and 
informed of what really is going on in here; to be sure that it can 
be brought to the attention of everybody in the province of 
Saskatchewan. You see, it’s not very easy to tune in on your 
television set or read the Star-Phoenix, or the Hansard, or the 
Leader-Post if you’re driving a tractor seeding in the spring in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’ve got to have some way, some way of communicating. The 
bell procedure provides an opportunity and provides a bit of time 
to be sure that the people of Saskatchewan are able to hear 
exactly what’s going on. And you know, it wasn’t such a bad . . . 
it didn’t turn out to be such a bad thing for the people to find out 
what this government was trying to do with the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. In the first place there was a promise that 
was about to be broken. And secondly, they were going to do it 
quietly, as quickly as possible, and pass the thing away . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being near 5 o’clock, this House now stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


