


















































May 4, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 4, 1989 
 

521 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before adjournment for supper I was making a few remarks, 
and I had followed, just to refresh the members on the other 
side, the member from Redberry and his remarks regarding his 
analysis of this particular budget speech, which he spoke of in 
very glowing terms. 
 
He spoke of this budget as being one that has the deficit under 
control. He spoke of how the people in the Redberry 
constituency are in total acceptance, and feel so very 
comfortable with the administration of this Premier and of this 
government on this side. 
 
And I, on the other hand, in my remarks before supper, was 
indicating to the member that not all people in Saskatchewan 
have the feelings towards this government, and can stand up 
and speak in the glowing terms of this divine administration. 
And I am not referring to the Premier by name; it was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Divine administration sounds very much like 
the Premier’s name. I’d just like to bring that to the attention of 
the member. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I understand, Mr. Speaker. I would 
perhaps then spell it d-i-v-i-n-e. But at any rate, there is a 
difference of how people perceive this particular government 
and this administration, and tonight, in the course of my 
remarks, I would like to explain, on behalf of those who no 
longer believe that this government is sincere in delivering 
honest and fair government to this province, I would like to 
deliver their feelings to this House. 
 
When we look at the promises that this administration made in 
1982 and what has in actual fact happened, we find two totally 
separate and different pictures. I recall the open-for-business 
slogan that we no longer hear because people simply don’t 
believe that. I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and it didn’t work, 
as my colleague says. I recall the open-for-business slogan that 
people no longer believe because it didn’t work. 
 
And I recall many of the one-liners, the business-like 
government that was to be delivered by members opposite. I 
recall the Premier, the then aspiring premier, indicating that 
they were inviting all of the young people back to 
Saskatchewan. I recall all of those one-liners, and I also know 
that people no longer believe that this government can deliver, 
if they even have the intention to deliver on those promises. 

I can recall, Mr. Speaker, the promise of fiscal management that 
would bring this province into a new era, a new era of 
prosperity. I can recall this government, this party talking about 
how their party was going to deliver a small, efficient, effective 
government on behalf of these people. And I also recall the 
term, there is so much more we can be. 
 
Well I guess since 1982 we’ve had a chance to see this 
government’s vision of how much more we can be. We’ve had 
a chance to see how much longer we can be unemployed, we’ve 
had a chance to see how many businesses can be closing their 
doors, we’ve had a chance to see how much young people can 
pay in order to get a post-secondary education. We’ve had a 
chance to see how young people have had to leave this province 
in order to get a job. And we’ve had a chance to see how 
working men and women of this province, who used to have a 
reasonable level of income, have had to survive on the $4.50 an 
hour minimum wage society that this government seems bent 
on delivering. We’ve had a chance to see hundreds of our 
farmers forced off of their land. We’ve had a chance to see their 
young families, who no longer have a hope that there is a future 
for them in agriculture, we’ve seen these young people leave 
Saskatchewan. We’ve seen 6,000 people leave Saskatchewan in 
February of this year, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen what this 
government is all about. 
 
The people of this province no longer believe in the 
pipe-dreams and what was to be the vision of so much more we 
can be and open for business. That’s all gone, Mr. Speaker. No 
longer do people believe a Premier, a cabinet, and a caucus, a 
government, that has been deceitful, that has been totally 
betraying their promises of that particular time of the 1982 era. 
People now understand what the agenda of this PC government 
is. It’s an agenda of destruction. It’s an agenda of betrayal. It’s 
an agenda that is taking this province apart piece by piece. 
They’ve deceived us in terms of the economic management and 
the way they’ve promised to balance budgets and put more 
money into the hands of people. They’ve betrayed us on that. 
They’ve betrayed us when they told us that they could manage 
this province, and that there was room for everyone in this 
province to make a reasonable standard of living. In all of these 
things they’ve betrayed us. 
 
They used to talk to the small-business people in glowing terms, 
suggesting that this government, this party, is friends of small 
business. But small business understands who their real friends 
are. Small business understands that unless you’re a Peter 
Pocklington, or unless you’re a card carrying member of that 
particular party that governs, that you don’t exist for these 
people. 
 
And they’re asking questions, and they want to know what it 
takes to qualify to be one of the friends of this government. 
They want to know how long you have to carry your PC 
membership card. They want to know how closely connected 
you have to be to one particular cabinet minister or the other. 
Those are the kinds of questions they’re asking now. 
 
They’re no longer asking, what kind of opportunities are 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

522 
 

there going to be for me in terms of tendering on this particular 
contract or other. The question they’re asking now is, how 
much do I have to put in a paper bag and deliver to some 
unknown name in order to get a contract? Those are the 
questions. Those are the questions that the business community 
are asking now. 
 
And a member across said, that’s really low. Well I want to tell 
you that the business people that I talk to figure it’s really low 
as well. Because what they’re asking for is a fair opportunity to 
tender and to bid on any government expenditure or anything 
involved with this government. But they don’t see that. And I 
say to you that there’s a feeling of discontent out there; I would 
go as far as to say anger, but mostly there’s a feeling of distrust. 
 
And there’s another understanding that I think is happening in 
Saskatchewan — the business community, and the working 
people. There’s an understanding that our economy can’t 
function when you’re putting all your eggs in one basket. 
 
There’s an understanding, I believe, that you can’t develop a 
sound and a solid economy in Saskatchewan when you’ve 
destroyed the middle-income people; when you’ve put 
minimum wage workers in the position where all they can 
afford is a roof over their head in some cases, and groceries to 
feed their family. There’s an understanding that you can’t have 
a buoyant economy in Saskatchewan without a middle class. 
And that’s what this government has been attacking. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe any longer — I may have at 
one time — that it happened by accident. But I no longer 
believe that. I believe this is an agenda that maybe not even 
members on that side of the House understand. Because I don’t 
even believe that they understand who’s in control of this 
government any longer. 
 
I don’t believe that they have the feeling that I do, that it’s 
people from the Fraser Institute who are dictating how this 
government operates, and the kinds of programs that this 
government delivers. It’s an agenda that’s been imported from 
the Maggie Thatcher government in Great Britain and the 
Fraser Institute and the Ronald Reagans. That’s what this 
government’s about. 
 
It’s no longer about governing for Saskatchewan people by 
Saskatchewan people. It’s a right wing agenda that is leading 
this province on a very slippery slope, that I believe the people 
of the province will be stopping when they get a chance, come 
the next election. 
 
I talked about what was happening in sort of the global sense, to 
the people of this province. And in the course of my remarks 
tonight, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak in a little more detail 
in terms of what that means to small business; in terms of what 
it means to Saskatchewan families; in terms of what it means to 
the future of this province. And I said before that I’m not sure 
that small business in Saskatchewan feels that there’s a place 
for them — and I believe that to be the case — and I’m not sure 
that average men and women in this province who’ve worked 
for decades in Saskatchewan, on Saskatchewan projects, any 
longer feel that there’s a place for them in Saskatchewan, either. 
And they’re 

worried, Mr. Speaker, about the future. 
 
Let me talk a bit about the future and what’s been happening 
with the future, not only in this budget but in every budget that 
this government has delivered since 1982. Not one time, not 
one budget, that this PC government has delivered in this 
province, have their expenses been equal to their revenue. 
They’ve always been a little bit more. They started with about a 
quarter of a billion dollars — the first budget — and I want to 
talk a little bit about how that happened. How did that first 
deficit happen? This government campaigned in 1982 — and I 
would suggest that that was one of the major reasons it was 
elected — on the removal of the gas tax in Saskatchewan, and 
as I recall that figure was around some $140 million directly 
into the government’s coffers. Well I also recall the Premier 
standing up after he was elected and he wiped that gas tax out 
the day he was elected or a couple of days later. And what did 
this Premier tell us? He told us that never again, as long as 
there’s a PC government in Saskatchewan, will the people of 
this province be subjected to a gas tax. 
 
(1915) 
 
Well now what’s happened since then? Now what’s happened 
to this Premier’s thinking, to his feelings in terms of that gas 
tax; the strong feelings he had in terms of removing that gas 
tax? Let’s have a look at what’s happened. 
 
In this year’s budget, I see on the revenue side, under fuel, 
$204,000,100 expected in revenue — estimated revenue. Well, 
now we’re not talking 140 million; we’re talking 204 million — 
but what changed? What’s changed? This from the same 
Premier who was determined he could rid himself of the gas 
tax, rid the people of this province of the gas tax. He could go 
down to New York, indicate to financial people in the 
international banking system that Saskatchewan was such a 
wealthy place, such a healthy economy, such a great place that 
you could mismanage the place — which he has done — and 
you could still break even. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province no longer 
believe in what this government has done. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, the people don’t trust this government any longer. 
 
They inherited in 1981-82 a surplus of $139 million. Elected in 
’82. First deficit they bring in, how much was it? It was $227 
million. But they didn’t stop there — no, no. There was so 
much more we could be. Well what could we be? We could be 
more in debt. And this Premier has got a track record of proving 
that second to any government in North America: the fastest 
growing debt; the most farm foreclosures; the most businesses 
closed down in the history of this province; the most decent 
province’s programs scrapped; and the more people leaving this 
province than ever before. The PC government of the 1930s 
can’t even compare with what this Premier has done. 
 
But we were talking about his deficit. So ’82-83, what did he 
have? Well $227 million he spent more than he took in. Well 
that wasn’t enough, so he tried again a little 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

523 
 

harder; ’83-84, he said, we can do better. There’s a lot more we 
can be — there’s so much more we can be. We can be further in 
debt. So he laid on another $331 million. But he wasn’t to be 
stopped there, because this is the Premier that says, never say 
whoa in a mud hole, and he didn’t. He’s got us in a mud hole 
that is longer and deeper than the people of this province ever 
dreamt or ever hoped it would be. In ’84-85, this 
overexpenditure came to 379 million — not enough, not for this 
Premier, not for the Minister of Education, not for the Minister 
of Highways. No, no. Never mind that we don’t know how to 
gain the revenue, how to bring the revenue into this province. 
We know how to spend, that’s what we know. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Free trade, that’s the answer. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And one member across says, free trade 
— sure, free trade. Saskatchewan people, Mr. Minister, know 
where you guys are at. I still want to explain just exactly what 
this Premier has done in terms of the deficit — 379 wasn’t 
enough, so the next year he brought in a deficit of 584 million. 
 
Well now I haven’t added any of this up yet, but I will. I will, 
it’ll come. But ’84-85 — or ’85-86, 584 million for that 
particular year, we’ve spent more than we’ve made. But ah, 
election year, the Minister of Finance, the same minister that’s 
delivered this budget that we’re looking at now, the budget that 
he tells us is going to be a deficit of $226 million — which isn’t 
the truth, by the way — in ’86, election year, tells us it’s going 
to be 389 million. He’s bringing the deficit down from 584. 
 
Well we have our election. People still had some faith in this 
Finance minister and in this Premier. But what did it end up 
being? Mr. Speaker, the deficit in ’86-87 election year was 
$1.235 billion. Now how much was he out? Only 800 million, 
you may say. Well, now this business-like government that my 
business colleagues look upon with a little bit of disdain . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Aghast. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . are aghast at what’s happened, my 
colleague from Rosemont says, and that’s exactly what’s 
happened. But they’re not done; ’87-88 they project $328 
million in deficits. 
 
But now we come to this year. We come to the same Finance 
minister who has misled, consistently, the people of this 
province. And all his colleagues over there speak glowingly in 
terms of the way he’s . . . the ability he has to give financial 
direction to the people of this province and to this government. 
 
And he tells us the other day that, by golly, he’s got spending 
under control, and we are projecting a deficit in this province of 
only $226 million. What he’s done is projected the same 
amount that he started with in 1982-83. So what he’s done is 
he’s just about come full circle. He’s gone from 227 million 
deficit to 1.2 billion, and now he’s predicting down to 226. But 
do you believe him? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s pot-belly curve. 

Mr. Lautermilch: — My colleague from The Battlefords says 
it’s a pot-belly curve, and it is. And I’d like to be able to show 
you this, but we can’t use graphics in this House. 
 
What I can do, Mr. Speaker, I can look through his book of 
Estimates and I can tell you, as anybody who can read numbers 
can tell you, that the $226 million that he’s projecting in terms 
of this year’s deficit is nothing but an absolute unmitigated 
falsehood, another one perpetrated by this same Finance 
minister and the same Premier who mislead us in 1986, and let 
me tell you why. 
 
On page 10 of the estimate book you’ll find a little item here — 
it’s a 2 and there’s a whole bunch of zeros behind it. Like a 
whole bunch of zeros, like $200 million. And in front of that it 
says Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
that’s under budgetary revenue. Well now, I say to this Finance 
minister, that’s quite an initiative. You find $200 million in 
revenue, you put it on the revenue side of your budget, and you 
balance that with your expenditures and yes, indeed, it comes to 
a deficit of $226 million. But what, Mr. Finance Minister, about 
the 200 million that you brought in from Crown corporations? 
Where does that come from? And where does that money come 
from and why is it there? And how can you then say when you 
borrow 200 million and put it into revenue under the guise of an 
investment for Crown Investments Corporation, can you still 
then stand before the people of this province and say that your 
projected deficit is only $226 million? 
 
I would suggest to you that there is some numerical wizardry 
going on over there. It may be called creative financing, it may 
be called deception, and there are other terms that I can’t use in 
this House, and you can call them all of those. But there’s more, 
there’s more. There’s projected income here, and I’m going to 
talk about this in the course of my remarks tonight as well. 
 
The federal government is about to bring down a new budget. 
And when I look on the revenue side of this budget, this 
government tells us that through equalization payments this 
year they’re going to bring in $440 million as a gift from the 
federal government — equalization payments. Equalization 
payments are payments that go to provinces that are deemed to 
be have-not provinces, for whatever reasons. 
 
Now, Saskatchewan . . . That is relatively new to us. We’ve had 
it for the last couple of years, but certainly not under a New 
Democrat administration because we didn’t need them. But 
under this government we need equalization payments. 
 
Now this same Prime Minister, the friend of the Premier, is 
talking about cut-backs to his budget because, you see, the right 
wing Liberal and Tory governments in Ottawa have had the 
same expenditure problems that this government has been 
having since 1982, in that they know how to spend, but they 
don’t know how to raise the money. So he’s got to cut back on 
his expenditures. 
 
Now we ask: has this government had any guarantees that those 
equalization payments aren’t going to be cut back? The answer 
is no. We’ve asked if there is going to be money in the 
federal-provincial cost-share agreements 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

524 
 

in terms of forestry and northern economic development. And 
the answer is no, they don’t know. But, ah, they can come up 
with a figure, and the figure happens to be more than what was 
projected for last year. 
 
Now in light of the fact that the federal government is talking 
about cutting their deficit and their expenditures, this 
government can budget for an increase. And now I wonder, 
when those actual dollars start flowing into this province, and if 
we were to find out that in fact there isn’t as many dollars as 
what this Finance minister is projecting, what will be the 
excuse? Will there be an explanation that because this 
government’s run this province into money, we’ve had to 
depend on the federal government to balance our budgets, and 
because of their cut-backs, we can’t balance? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That sentence doesn’t make sense. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well neither does your budgeting. He 
says the sentence doesn’t make sense. Well let me take it 
through step by step. This Finance minister, through 
equalization payments, budgets $400 million for this year. The 
federal government says that they don’t have the money; 
they’re going to be cutting back, Mr. Education Minister. And 
that’s probably . . . You’re one of the reasons we’ve got this 
kind of problem, because you can’t understand. You’ve got no 
guarantee that there’s going to be an increase of equalization 
payments from last year to this year. 
 
So the next step will be . . . The excuse for an increased deficit 
will be because of revenue-sharing cut-backs. Now if I haven’t 
made that clear, we can talk behind the rail when I’m done my 
remarks, and I can take you through it dollar by dollar and line 
by line, and even you might be able to understand it — but I’m 
not convinced. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve gone through a couple of 
fallacies here, and I don’t want to dwell on them. But what I 
want to do is talk about some of the problems that the people of 
this province are facing because of the jiggery-pokery that these 
guys have been using since 1982. 
 
So maybe we want to talk a little bit tonight about the gas tax 
and the effects upon the people of this province and what’s been 
happening to the business community. And I’d like to speak a 
little bit about what it’s costing school boards and local 
taxpayers at a time when school boards are paring their budgets 
to the bone, cutting back on capital expenditures because this 
government hasn’t been putting the revenue into those 
governments. They’re hit again with another increase in the gas 
tax. Every time the school bus runs down between Lafleche and 
Kincaid, or between Gravelbourg and Lafleche, or between 
Duck Lake and Prince Albert, or between my home town 
Woodrow and my neighbouring town Meyronne, they’re paying 
a little bit more. And does that money go back to the school 
boards in the form of a rebate? No. And the people in this 
province might ask how much, in fact, that’s costing them. Well 
if you add every school board in this province and you look at 
the total cost in terms of this fuel tax, it’s an amount of $2.7 
million a year. This 3 cents a litre increase is costing roughly 
$700 million in this budget. 

I would ask any one of the members opposite to go back to his 
riding and ask any of those school boards if they can afford 
their share of that. And I know what the answer is from the 
Prince Albert area because I’ve met with them. And some of the 
government members from that area have met with them as 
well and know full well they can’t afford it. They’ve cut back 
the number of new school buses they’ve bought. They’ve cut 
back on roof repairs. They’ve cut back on all of those 
expenditures, and the minister sits back and knows full well 
what’s going on, knows full well that the amount that this 
government is putting into education has been decreasing. But 
he’s building for the year 2000 and those school boards are 
trying to deal with the politics of this government’s cut-backs in 
terms of the funding to them. 
 
(1930) 
 
But what do we see in this budget? We see an increase of 3 
cents a litre. What about the small-business people who don’t 
get a rebate? We’ve been talking with a cab driver who last year 
worked . . . or indicates to us that on 246 working days, he’ll 
end up paying an extra $1,000 a year because of this tax. Now I 
want to ask you: is that the kind of government that should be 
delivered by people who are talking about open for business 
and there’s so much more you can be? I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s not. 
 
What about a bus company in this province that maybe runs 12 
buses? Our understanding is that that’s going to cost that 
company about $20,000 a year. And where’s it going? Is it 
being turned back into this economy? No, it’s not. It’s being 
turned into the companies whom this government borrowed 
money from in order to build that deficit, in order to feed the 
pockets of their friends. It’s money that’s coming from 
small-business operators so that Peter Pocklington can gain 
some 10 or some however many million dollars he did. It’s 
going into the pockets of the people who picked up Manalta 
Coal, and it’s going into the pockets of the John Remais of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But is it being moved around in this province so that we can 
have this economy in a buoyant state? Is it going to people, to 
families so that they can build new houses and get the 
construction industry going in this province? We’ve got the 
lowest number of housing starts, Mr. Speaker, in this province; 
the second lowest retail sales in this country; and it’s all 
because we’ve got a government that doesn’t understand — or 
if they understand, they don’t care and they’ve got different 
priorities. 
 
And they talk in glowing terms about how much they care for 
the people of this province. Well it didn’t manifest itself in this 
budget. It didn’t show; it isn’t there. You’ve got a hypocritical 
throne speech which had no relation to what’s really happening 
in this province. 
 
I recall a couple of months ago the Premier put out a statement 
regarding the economy of this province, and he was speaking on 
how wonderful it was and how the economy was growing and 
how they’d been building and how they’d be diversifying. Well 
nobody out there sees that, Mr. Speaker. The working people 
don’t see it, the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

525 
 

small-business community doesn’t see it, and I’m going to tell 
you that those that are forced off of their family farms don’t see 
it. 
 
Those that are for the last time closing the door on their homes, 
on their home quarter, and getting into their truck with their 
furniture and moving to whoever knows where — maybe the 
city, maybe out of the province — they don’t see it. They can’t 
speak of the economy of this province in the glowing terms that 
the Premier does. There are a few that can, and I’ll grant you 
that — friends of this party. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government has to understand one thing, 
that when you’re government of a province you don’t govern 
for a select few; you govern for all of the people. That’s your 
mandate and that’s your job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I said before that this budget is a piece of 
. . . It’s been orchestrated and it’s nothing but deceit. I don’t 
know really how to explain it in very polite terms. And it’s not 
going to cure the problems of this province. 
 
The government’s embarked upon privatization now. This is 
going to be solving all of our problems. They’ve started the 
privatization of SaskPower, which is a betrayal, because they 
promised they would never privatize the utilities. They’ve 
started the privatization of SaskTel, which is another betrayal. 
They promised they would never do that. 
 
They’re moving to the privatization of the potash corporation, 
which showed over $100 million in profits last year. They’re 
moving to privatize SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). I believe they’re moving to privatize the Liquor 
Board and the Liquor Commission, the liquor stores. And I 
have to ask myself why. For what reason? 
 
We talked a few minutes ago about the $200 million that 
they’ve taken from the Crown corporations and put into this 
budget in order to decrease the amount of the deficit for this 
year. Well I say to the Premier and to the Finance minister, you 
can’t have it both ways. You can’t have Crown corporations 
that generate revenues to decrease deficit budgeting — that 
even an incompetent government like this embarks upon — and 
then, at the same time, sell off that goose that’s laying this 
golden egg. 
 
Now which is it? Are these Crown corporations so ineffective, 
so inefficient, so irrelevant to the economy of this province that 
they’re worthless? If they are, then members on that side of the 
House would have to explain to me how the $200 million came 
into this budget for 1989-90, because, you see, I can’t 
understand that and nor can anyone who understands what 
you’ve done. It doesn’t work. 
 
So they’re moving to privatization, betraying the promise that 
they make never to privatize a utility company — SGI, SaskTel 
— we’ve talked about. And why? And what has been the gain 
by the privatization that they’ve embarked upon? 

Well let’s maybe have a look at their past record and what’s 
really happened under privatization so far, and maybe what we 
can expect in the future. 
 
One of the first moves that this government moved upon in 
terms of privatization was highways. Now at that time we had a 
Highways minister by the name of Mr. Garner. Well this 
government gets into power and one of the first things they did 
was fired 157 people. That’s one of the first moves to 
privatization. And he was telling these people that he’s giving 
them an opportunity to work for the private sector. 
 
Well now all of those folks and all of their families were really 
quite impressed. And I don’t think that it really upset them the 
fact that they might be asked to work in the private sector as 
opposed to the government — really what they wanted was 
work. But unemployment increases after this first move of 
privatization. And then after he gave these first round of 
employees the opportunity to work in the private sector, he 
decides that he might get rid of the equipment that we use to 
build highways in this province, so he assembled some 400 
pieces of equipment from all throughout the province. I can 
remember there were semi-trailers driving through Prince 
Albert at this time, loaded with highway equipment, some of it 
brand-new, never used; scrapers and cats, those kinds of 
equipment, and they assembled these all in Saskatoon. 
 
And instead of saying, look, we’re getting out of the highway 
business; we’re going to give the municipalities a chance to buy 
some equipment that they might want to upgrade to build 
municipal roads, they went to the United States and invited all 
of the large contractors in from the United States. They went to 
other provinces and invited all these people in and they said, 
hey guys, we’ve got a deal for you. We’re embarking on one of 
the first privatization moves that this province has seen. We’re 
open for business, your business, and we’re going to give you a 
deal. In Saskatoon we’ve got some $40 million worth of 
equipment sitting there, some of it not even used. And because, 
you know, you’re kind of like us, you’re decent folks — I mean 
you might not live in this province, but you don’t feel, as we do, 
that the people of this province own this equipment, so what 
we’re going to do is we’re going to offer you a real deal. 
 
So they held a little auction sale there and got some of their 
friends together with their auctioneer’s hats on, and they sold it. 
And they sold it for $6 million. Forty million dollars worth of 
equipment; two days, $6 million is all we net. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province clearly understand 
what privatization means. It’s meant lost jobs, it’s meant lost 
equity, and it’s meant lost control. And as we talk about 
highways, maybe it might be a good idea to speak a little bit 
about why the Department of Highways got into the 
construction business. When the Department of Highways made 
the decision, under a New Democrat government or CCF 
(Canadian Commonwealth Confederation) government at the 
time, to get into the construction business, what they wanted to 
do was have an understanding of what it would cost to build a 
mile of 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

526 
 

highways. And how better to do that than to be directly 
involved? 
 
They wanted a window on the industry. They wanted to work 
together with the private sector in developing a highways 
network in this province that was second to anywhere — a 
province that’s sparsely populated, large in area. And, Mr. 
Speaker, with the co-operation of the private sector and the 
public sector, the Department of Highways we were able to 
build one of the finest highways networks anywhere in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — But why then did this government move 
to privatization of the Department of Highways? Why would 
they give that equipment away? I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s totally ideological. It’s not based on sound business 
practice, not based on common sense. It’s based on a right wing 
philosophy. So what did we gain? Have we seen a better 
highway system built for less dollars? No we haven’t. Have we 
seen our highways upgraded on a regular basis, or do we see 
pot-holes? 
 
I just drove back, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon last night on a 
road that was almost beyond belief. Washboards, holes — one 
of our major highways that’s been neglected. 
 
And I talked about the gas tax and what it’s going to be costing 
the people of this province. It’s not just the 1,000 dollars that 
it’s going to cost the cab driver in the increase in gas tax. It’s 
not just what it’s going to cost Saskatchewan’s trucking 
industry for gas, driving over these pot-holed roads. It’s not 
what it’s going to cost the travelling salesman in just the 
increase in gas tax. It’s what it’s going to cost them in repairs to 
those vehicles. 
 
The trucking industry in this province is taking a fairly severe 
beating under the hands of this government. The deregulation of 
their routes has meant lost opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people — and opportunities, I agree, for many, but certainly no 
type of a uniform, know-where-you’re-at type industry any 
longer. The privatization of the highways and of the trucking 
industry, and the increases to the taxi-driver who spends an 
extra $1,000 a year are all things that are causing mistrust in 
your government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are so many different numbers of privatization that have 
been embarked upon that have been poor business deals. 
Manalta Coal, just as an example, had assets worth $129 
million. Well we sold that operation for $102 million which, if 
you had to get rid of it in a hurry, may not have been a bad deal. 
But then we lend them $89 to ensure the deal. This, Mr. 
Speaker, is not good business sense but another example of this 
government’s privatization, another example of why people no 
longer trust you. 
 
(1945) 
 
They promised us that the utilities wouldn’t be touched, but 
they have. SaskPower is being privatized. The lucrative portion, 
the utility portion . . . or the resource portion is being sold. We 
keep control of the utility 

portion which is basically a costing proposition, and it’s going 
to mean, once we lose our source of revenue for that 
corporation, it’s going to mean higher power rates. And people 
have already experienced the results of that form of 
privatization. They see the two bills come in the mail every 
month, one on utilities, one on the energy portion. And they 
know what privatization is costing and what it’s meaning to 
them. 
 
But why would you want to sell it? I think it would be 
interesting to look back to why SaskPower is there in the first 
place. It was there to deliver a service. And what was that 
service? The service was to ensure that there would be power to 
rural homes and families in Saskatchewan, power to small 
towns, and that all would share. The people of this province 
would share in developing a first-class service for all of the 
people of the province. And the people of this province did it. It 
wasn’t any particular government. It was the people of 
Saskatchewan that decided, firstly, that they wanted that 
service; and then secondly, decided how they wanted to ensure 
that that service was there. And it served its purpose; it’s kept 
utility rates down for the most part. 
 
But why sell it? In whose pockets do the assets of this particular 
Crown go? Are these assets back into the hands of the people of 
Saskatchewan? I say to you, they’re not. Are we going to get 
any better service by privatizing it? I say to you, not. Are we 
going to get cheaper power rates? The answer is clear. No. But 
then why do we privatize it? 
 
And the same thing with SaskTel. We were told that was one 
utility that wasn’t going to be tampered with, wasn’t going to be 
touched. It’s a direct parallel to SaskPower. Why was it there? 
The people wanted a service; the people demanded that service; 
so the people got together and built that service. It’s delivered 
very good service, reasonable rates. It’s serving the purpose for 
which it was intended. Why do we sell it? 
 
Well this government’s decided that yellow pages, which is one 
of the most lucrative portions of SaskTel, a consistent money 
raiser, that that has to go. Well who does it go to? It goes to the 
friends of this government, to serve the purposes of this 
government, that’s where it goes. . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And the member from Saskatoon indicates that they’ve got 
a lot of friends out there. Well I want to suggest that if that 
minister was true and, in fact, there were a lot of friends out 
there, then everybody would be sharing in the graft and 
corruption that’s been going on under this government instead 
of a select few. 
 
But they unloaded that. And on the agenda I understand, now, is 
SGI — well they want to privatize SGI. It’s the same old story. 
What was the purpose for SGI? We wanted to deliver a 
universal, reasonably costed insurance service to the people of 
the province. So the people did that. It’s done that consistently 
over the years. We’ve had the lowest rates for car insurance in 
Canada. And we were able to do that because we worked 
together in order to ensure that that would happen. 
 
There was room for private industry in the insurance industry in 
Saskatchewan. They flourish; they’ve been doing well. And 
SGI was there to deliver the service that 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

527 
 

we knew the people of this province wanted. So why would you 
sell it? It doesn’t make sense. 
 
And in each one of these cases of privatization, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has never got fair value for what they’ve 
privatized. And now they want to move to privatization of the 
liquor stores. And I’ll go back to the estimate book. On the 
revenue page it indicates this year that from the Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board, some $215 million will be . . . or 215 million on 
the revenue side. Last year was estimated 150 million. So why 
do you want to sell it? 
 
And as a business person I try to go through this and rationalize 
what they’re doing, and I’m having a very difficult time to. 
Governments don’t own because they want to own. 
Governments own because there’s a reason; there’s a service 
that otherwise may not be delivered. And that’s why Crown 
corporations have started. That’s why the people of this 
province have used Crowns as a tool — a tool to build the kind 
of a province that they wanted. 
 
But this government has decided that they’re going to neutralize 
that sector of our economy, that it will no longer be around, it 
will no longer be something that we can use. And people don’t 
understand why, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this 
government’s been spending hundreds of thousands of dollars 
of public money trying to sell their concept, this concept of 
privatization, or piratization, as the member from Moose Jaw 
says. 
 
But if you go through this whole thing, what’s happened? In ’83 
they privatized SaskPower assets. Power rates are increasing. In 
’84 the highways go. So what happens? Taxes increase. The 
quality of those roads decrease. In ’86, PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) is gone, taxes increase, the deficit increase; ’87, 
the dental plan is privatized. Did service to those children 
increase? Did it improve? Of course it didn’t. If they cut 
expenditures in that area and if they save the people of this 
province lots of dollars by privatizing the dental plan, did taxes 
go down? Did the deficit go down? Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that 
never happened. 
 
In ’88 they privatized Sask Minerals and SaskCOMP. Did taxes 
go down? Did the deficit go down? Of course it didn’t. And 
now they’re moving on some major forms of privatization. The 
one example would be the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
that they’re moving towards. They indicate . . . The Premier 
goes off to Asia for . . . to China for a month, communist China, 
one of our better customers for potash. And what does this 
genius do? He promises to sell to those folks, our best 
customers, a portion of a company that made a lot of revenue in 
this province over the years. Now any business man that I know 
would say, if you’ve got an industry, if you’ve got a revenue 
that can deliver profits like potash corporation did last year of 
$106 million, why in the world would you sell it to your 
customer? I have a difficult time to understand that. It’s hard to 
rationalize that, and I’ve still yet to hear the Premier be able to 
explain that in terms that anybody would believe would make 
good business sense. 
 
But that’s part of why we’ve got a problem, Mr. Speaker, 

in this province with the deficit. That’s why we’ve got a 
problem with our economy, and that’s why we’re losing 
thousands of people every month to other provinces and other 
areas of Canada. And that’s why we can’t deliver the services 
that we do because we’re spending millions of dollars every 
year just paying interest on the lavish and foolish spending of 
this government since 1982. 
 
But it’s not enough, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve mismanaged this 
province; they know that already. And now they fear for their 
political future. 
 
So what do we see in this budget, or in this particular session of 
the legislature? We see a new electoral boundaries Act 
introduced. Now I understand that this government was 
speaking about fairness, and about the desire to have all folks 
equally represented in this legislature, whether they be urban or 
rural. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe it and the people of this 
province don’t believe it. 
 
The agenda was a gerrymander. The agenda was to maintain 
political control of this province, no matter how few the number 
of votes. And it’s been said by some who’ve done some figures, 
that with 37 per cent of the popular vote this government may 
be able to maintain power. But I would suggest to you that 
people see through it. And I would suggest to you as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that they aren’t going to get the 37 per cent, or if it’s 
30 per cent, they’re not going to get the required vote in order 
to maintain power, because people are fed up with the kind of 
government that they’ve been delivering. 
 
You see a riding like the riding of Morse, with some 7,700 
people in it, represented of course by a PC member — 7,700 
people have the ability to send one member to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Well now, we look at the riding of Humboldt, represented by a 
New Democrat. And it’s my understanding that we’ve got 
12,500 voters in that particular riding. Now is their vote any 
less relevant? Is their vote any less important, the people from 
the Humboldt riding, than those from Morse? Of course it’s not. 
Of course it’s not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this government will do anything they can to maintain 
control and to maintain power, whether it means running over 
democracy roughshod. It means little. Power’s the game; 
power’s their aim. But the people understand that. And I would 
suggest to you that they’re not going to get away with it. 
 
I represent, Mr. Speaker, a riding that comprises roughly 
two-thirds of the population in urban Prince Albert and 
one-third in the rural. And the people of that riding have an 
awful lot in common with each other. They have a common 
shopping area. They have a lot in common in terms of where 
their kids play hockey and where their kids play ball. They have 
a lot in common in terms of coming to social events together, 
the Prince Albert Exhibition. They go to church together. All of 
these things, Mr. Speaker, they have in common. It’s one 
community. And whether it be urban or whether it be rural, it’s 
one community. They have a common school board, they have 
common aspirations, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

528 
 

they have a lot of common beliefs. 
 
But what has this government done? This government, in 
legislation, dictated that no longer can urban and rural people 
have the same MLA. They’re saying that you can’t represent 
the interests of people in an urban community and still represent 
the interests of people in the rural. Or that you can’t represent 
the interests of people in the rural and still represent the 
interests of the people in the urban. What they’re saying and 
what this government said in that legislation, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the people in my community are wrong, that they’re 
different, and that they shouldn’t have the same representative. 
That’s what they’re saying. 
 
This government has been working unmercifully hard to 
develop an urban-rural split in this province. And I want to say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is one political party in this 
province who doesn’t believe that that’s the direction for 
Saskatchewan, and who is going to work and fight very, very 
hard to ensure that Saskatchewan people are Saskatchewan 
whether they’re urban or rural. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — But it’s more than just an urban-rural 
split, Mr. Speaker. It’s more than that. My colleague from 
Humboldt says it’s democracy out the window, and that’s 
exactly what it is. 
 
This PC Party and this government doesn’t believe in the idea 
of one person, one vote. They don’t believe in fairness, in 
democracy. And it’s easy to tell when you have a look, Mr. 
Speaker, at what they introduced for legislation in this House. 
 
There’s no longer a piece of legislation that comes before this 
legislature that dictates that when there’s changes to be made 
that the elected representatives from all over Saskatchewan 
come to this forum and debate changes. Oh no, not any more. 
There’s very little in statute in any legislation that this 
government produces; it’s all regulation. And regulation means 
that the cabinet ministers sit down around their table and 
determine changes to legislation without bringing it before the 
people of this province. They do it behind closed doors, and I 
would suggest to you, in the dead of night, and it’s not healthy 
for a democracy. 
 
But it’s part of what this government does, and it’s part of what 
this government does. A Bill to create a vicious gerrymander in 
Saskatchewan; that we’ve seen. Legislation that pulls 
democracy from this forum to closed cabinet doors — and 
they’re yapping now; it’s bothering them a little. I see the 
member from Regina South yipping. But that’s what’s 
happened, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the kind of government that 
the people of this province have been subjected to. And I 
wouldn’t suggest to you that it will last much longer. 
 
I’ve spent a while talking about this government’s direction in 
terms of fairness, in terms of competence, and we could go on 
for hours and hours and hours, because there’s so much more 
that can be said about the incompetence and the 
mismanagement that this government has embarked upon. 

(2000) 
 
But I’d like to talk specifically, if I could, about what they’ve 
done to the small-business community in Saskatchewan. I had a 
meeting just the other evening with about 20 people in a city in 
this province — people who have, over the period of time of 
their political lives or of their adult lives, looked objectively at 
different political parties and at different governments, and 
people who have not been tied particularly to any political party 
but who are so fed up with this government and so disillusioned 
with what this operation has been doing since 1982 that they’re 
looking for a change. They’re looking for a government that 
will be open, a government that will listen to them, and a 
government that understands their aspirations and cares about 
what they want to be as small-business people. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that they’re starting to look 
very closely. Many of them have indicated that they feel that 
would be the direction if they had a chance to vote, and they’re 
starting to look very closely at what a New Democrat 
government would do after the next election. 
 
They know, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got an awful job in terms 
of, first of all, cleaning up the mess that this government’s 
created, and they understand that. And they understand that 
people on this side of the House don’t pretend to have all of the 
answers. But what they do know is that the New Democratic 
Party, and that this caucus is willing to try, is willing to do it 
with fairness, with honesty, with openness, and with their 
involvement. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why this government is 
on a slippery slope that has no bends. 
 
It’s little things I would suggest to you, that have been 
bothering them as well as the deficit and the fiscal 
mismanagement. All of those . . . there’s just a number of little 
things that are burs in their side. 
 
I recall this government saying they were going to do away with 
all the red tape, that government would be streamlined, and all 
the forms that would come to the good folks in the business 
community would be simplified so you wouldn’t have to deal 
with all this government bureaucracy. Well what have you 
seen? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Patronage. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — You’ve seen patronage, my colleague 
says. You’ve seen an increase in every fee that you can think of. 
And I should give you just an example, the pettiness of this 
government — fees to inspect a boiler in a little bakery. 
 
In 1982 . . . I’ll go back right to 1982 just so the member, the 
Minister of Education can have a little understanding of why 
people are upset with his government and his colleagues. A 
boiler inspection fee in 1982, I look through the receipt here 
and I don’t see a fee paid at all. It says nothing under fee paid; 
’83 the same. And lo and behold, ’84, this government wants 
$19 to send someone over to inspect that boiler, which is fair, I 
suppose. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

529 
 

That was just the beginning, because then in ’85 the $19 turned 
into $30. So this small-business person isn’t asked to pay $19 
any longer, he’s asked to pay $30. But then that’s not enough, 
because this government is really tightening down and they’re 
going to put these small-business people in their place where 
they should be. The next year they come in and they say, well 
I’ll tell you what, our fee is $60. In 1986 our fee is $60, but if 
you pay before a certain date, it will only be the same as it was 
the last year, $30. 
 
That’s why the people are getting upset with these guys. That’s 
why there’s problems within the business community, and these 
people know it. Every fee, as I said, Mr. Speaker, has been 
increasing. Car dealer licence fees up from $50 to $250 — 250 
per cent increase. That’s in the rural; 500 from $150, the urban. 
 
And auction companies. The Minister of Highways would 
probably understand clearly what this is about, being an 
auctioneer. They now have to pay $300 as opposed to the 
hundred dollars they were paying before. This government has 
been nickel and diming small business to death. 
 
But they don’t stop there; they get even a little more petty. And 
I really had to laugh at this one. It’s dated ’87 but it’s maybe old 
news. But I think it tells a little bit about what this 
government’s done. And it’s a memo to all marriage licence 
issuers, and it says: 
 

In accordance with the new governmental fiscal restraint 
policy (fiscal restraint now, get this), the practice of 
supplying prepaid returned addressed envelopes has been 
discontinued. 
 

Now these marriage licence issuers now have to put a stamp on 
their envelope to send to the government, at a time when this 
government increases a deficit to a 1.2-some billion dollars. 
They talk about fiscal restraint to the small business 
community; at the same time they’re blowing up a billion-two 
that they don’t have. I mean, there’s a double standard here. 
And at the same time when they’re hiring defeated cabinet 
ministers all over this province, and former party presidents, 
they go to a little marriage licence issuer and they want him to 
put a stamp on the envelope. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, this is the mentality of this 
government, and this is why the government’s in a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government no longer deserves to govern. 
They no longer have the respect of the people of Saskatchewan, 
and I will give you another example why. At a time when 
they’re going to small licence, marriage licence issuers to put a 
stamp on their envelope, they’re leasing $34,000 a day worth of 
empty office space. Now does that make sense? Is there a 
double standard here? I would suggest to you that there is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They’ve got the money to spend $34,000 a day to rent office 
space from their friends, but they haven’t got the money to 
maintain the school-based dental program. They haven’t got the 
money to send a stamped envelope to a marriage licence issuer. 
They’ve got to increase every 

fee that a small-business man faces. I would suggest to you that 
they’re a disgrace, and probably will go on record as being the 
worst government that ever operated in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s an awful lot 
that can be said about this government; there’s an awful lot that 
should be said about this government; and I’m afraid to say that 
there isn’t an awful lot of it that can be said that is good. 
 
But I would ask them, in the last years of their government, to 
change direction, to change the direction in which they’ve been 
going; to start listening to the middle- and lower-income people 
and the small-business people in Saskatchewan; to stop hurting 
those families that they’ve been inflicting the pain upon; and to 
try and do what this province needs, to deliver an economy that 
all of Saskatchewan’s residents can be proud of and work with 
and work under. That’s what the direction of this government 
should be. 
 
But I’d want to say that it’s a sad commentary that that isn’t 
what this government’s been doing. 
 
This budget didn’t offer any direction for the small-business 
people. The most positive thing they could say for business was 
that they’re spending a billion-one on capital works projects. 
Well they’ve been spending on capital projects in this province, 
as every government does, for years and years, but it hasn’t 
stopped those small businesses from closing their doors. It 
hasn’t stopped the receiver from moving in on businesses who 
can no longer operate under the economic conditions that this 
government has thrust upon them. Those things haven’t 
changed. They’re still dealing with the interest rates that their 
friend in Ottawa, Brian Mulroney, is perpetrating upon them. 
 
And maybe I want to talk a little bit about what’s happened 
with interest rates in this province, and perhaps why it’s 
happened. Their friends in Ottawa fuelled the southern Ontario 
economy, injected hundreds of millions of dollars into that part 
of the economy to the point where inflation was starting to scare 
them. So the next move, of course, you’ve got to cool that 
economy down in southern Ontario. So how do you do it? You 
raise interest rates. Well what happens to the good folks out 
west here? Well the bankers don’t want to deal with them any 
more, so they’re closing their doors and they’re moving out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier tells us time after time and day after 
day how he works with the Prime Minister, and how they’ve 
built this team, and how the federal operation listens to what’s 
happening in Saskatchewan and listens to this Premier. 
 
But what happens in terms of interest rates? The interest rates 
go up; this Premier sits on his hands and businesses go 
bankrupt. The interest rate goes up; farmers lose their farms; 
this Premier sits on his hands and not a word is said. He 
promised us, Mr. Speaker, in the election of 1988 — in the 
federal election — he promised the farmers that 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

530 
 

there would be a drought payment, and that it would be in the 
area of 40 to $45 an acre. 
 
Well now, what happened to that promise? We ask in the 
legislature on question period day after day after day, and what 
do we have for an answer? This Premier will talk about 
anything but the question. I can honestly say that I don’t recall a 
question period in this legislature since I have been here in 1986 
when one of those ministers would respond to an answer. 
They’ll talk about the weather, they’ll talk about cutting their 
grass, or they’ll talk about anything, but they don’t want to talk 
about what the issues are. 
 
We’ll ask them about the wheat board and the demise of the 
wheat board — and the Minister of Education who hasn’t shut 
his mouth since I stood to speak — but we’ll talk about the 
wheat board and what is happening with the wheat board. But 
does this government ever stand up to defend the wheat board? 
Not on your life. Day after day after day you question on behalf 
of the farmers whether this government is willing to stand up on 
behalf of the farmers and support the wheat board, and to lobby 
the federal government to ensure that that wheat board isn’t 
destroyed, as it is being done. Not a word. So whose side are 
they on? 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this is a government 
that speaks for multinationals, for Cargill. This isn’t a 
government that speaks for farmers. This is a government that 
speaks for Peter Pocklington as opposed to small meat-packing 
operations n Saskatchewan. This is a government that has 
forgotten about middle-income people. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is trying to build an economy 
based on $4.50 an hour minimum wage. Their goal is cheap 
labour and the wealth polarized into the hands of a few. We 
don’t have reasonably well paying construction jobs as we used 
to have. Families that were supporting themselves on $15, $16 
an hour prior to this government’s election now find themselves 
working on $6 and $7 an hour jobs — and part-time at that. We 
see families who are supporting themselves with two and three 
jobs at $4.50 an hour — a subsistence living. 
 
And what’s been the result of all of this? The whole economy 
has been pulled to the bottom. There’s no longer any disposable 
income. Families don’t have the money to buy fridges or stoves, 
to go out and buy a new car, or to buy homes. 
 
(2015) 
 
But this government tells us free trade will solve all that. And 
they don’t have the money to go out to a dinner and a 
restaurant. They’re struggling just to pay their rent and to pay 
the increases in power that they’ve had since 1982, and they’re 
struggling to pay telephone bills that have increased. They’re 
struggling to pay taxes, municipal taxes that have increased — 
and not, as these people would suggest, because of urban 
government mismanagement in the cities in this province. It’s 
because of the cut-backs to programs that used to keep those 
taxes down in cities like Regina and Saskatoon and in Prince 
Albert. 

These families, Mr. Speaker, can’t be fuelling this economy as 
they used to because that middle-class dollar is disappearing. 
And it’s moving into the hands of a select few — a select few 
friends of the PC government. 
 
And I want to say that if there is one suggestion that members 
on this side would want to leave with this government or if 
there is one idea that they’d want to share with this government, 
it would be the idea that if you have money in the hands of 
working people, that money revolves in the communities and it 
keeps small business vibrant. And if you let that money revolve 
in those communities, you’re going to have healthy 
communities. 
 
And if there is one message I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government should have and members of this side would 
want to share with you, it would be that the direction you’ve 
been going is just totally the wrong direction, and that we want 
to work with you to see a healthy Saskatchewan. But in order to 
have a healthy Saskatchewan, you’re going to have to start 
listening to the people who you are hurting. And the people 
you’re hurting right now, Mr. Speaker, the people that this 
government are hurting, are not only the farming community — 
because you’re hurting them; I note in this year’s expenditures, 
I note in this year’s expenditures that this government has 
budgeted a $50 million bill less than what was spent in 
agriculture last year. 
 
And let me say a few words on that, Mr. Speaker. The problems 
in agriculture haven’t disappeared. There’s no less a problem 
out there now than there was last year. And there may not be. 
Now we may be blessed with good weather and good crops. 
That may be the case, but we don’t know that. And this 
government budgets for $50 million less than what it spent last 
year for the agricultural community. 
 
Small town Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, depends upon 
agriculture. And it depends upon decent paying jobs, whether 
they be government or whether they be in the private sector. 
Small town Saskatchewan depends on those types of things to 
survive. And we on this side of the House understand that, and I 
think all of the people in this province understand that. 
 
But you’ve been taking part of that away from those 
communities. They’re dealing now with extended store hours 
that are polarizing what expenditures there are. Those dollars 
are now being spent in the cities, and this government caused 
that. They caused that by a piece of legislation that put the 
responsibility on the shoulders of municipal governments who 
are having a very difficult time to deal with it. There’s going to 
be competition between the different jurisdictions, which may, 
in the end, cause wide-open store hours. 
 
This government was lobbied long and hard by small-business 
people, small-business people who asked this government to 
take a stand on store hours and say that, yes, we need some 
protection for the small business community in rural 
Saskatchewan. And yes, we, as people in this province, demand 
a common day of rest. They weren’t asking for a lot. They were 
asking for 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

531 
 

leadership. But instead, what did this government deliver? This 
government did as it’s been doing; it shirked its responsibilities, 
passed on to the municipal governments the need to pass 
legislation to regulate store hours. And it’s not a responsibility 
that they wanted. They were expecting leadership from a senior 
government, but the senior government wasn’t there. 
 
And they’re going to be fighting court cases in jurisdictions 
throughout this province. They’re going to be fighting court 
cases with money that they can ill afford. They’re going to have 
to go to the taxpayers and say, because this government has 
abrogated responsibility to implement store hours legislation 
and passed it on to us, we’ve got to come to you. We need some 
more money because we’ve got to go to court, we’ve got to hire 
lawyers. Put your tax dollars into the hands of lawyers while 
your provincial government sits on its hands. 
 
And that’s been, Mr. Speaker, the problem with this 
government. They’ve shirked their responsibility. They’ve 
shirked it when it came to ensuring that there was some 
adequate financial resources for a drought payment. They 
shirked their responsibility when it came to legislation to 
control store hours. 
 
But they have taken responsibility in other areas, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve taken responsibility away from municipal governments 
where it came to the ward system, where people demanded a 
ward system of electing civic officials that they were very 
comfortable with. But without consultation, this minister pulled 
that ability and that responsibility from them. And they didn’t 
ask for that, but there it was gone by the stroke of a pen from 
this minister. And that’s not what they were looking for. 
 
They weren’t looking for an electoral boundaries Act that 
would mean that their neighbour’s vote meant less than what 
theirs did. People in Saskatchewan understand fairness. They 
understand what the role of government could be or what the 
role of government should be. They understand what this 
government has done in terms of those responsibilities. They 
were waiting, Mr. Speaker, for a drought payment. They were 
waiting for some long-term planning in terms of drought and 
disaster in agricultural Saskatchewan. They’ve been waiting for 
that for a long time. 
 
The federal government and this government, both PC 
governments, promised that there would be a long-term plan to 
serve the needs of agricultural Saskatchewan. But that 
long-term plan hasn’t come. It’s long overdue, everyone agrees. 
But has this government moved? Mr. Speaker, they have not. 
 
And if there is a plan . . . They’ve had an advance on their 
drought payment. Agreed. But how can they do some financial 
planning when they don’t know what the details of that program 
are going to be? They don’t know how much they’re going to 
get from it. Oh yes, they’ve got half-phrases from the Premier 
and from his cabinet. And they’ve got the back-benchers 
scurrying around the province telling the agricultural 
community, oh don’t worry; we’ve got matters in hand; things 
will be fine. 

But you know what they don’t have? They don’t have any idea 
of how much they’re going to get in terms of a drought 
payment. And they can’t go to their bankers with a promise 
from this Premier and the Prime Minister because, Mr. Speaker, 
the bankers don’t believe this government any more than the 
rest of the people of this province. 
 
This Premier promised he would participate in a drought 
pay-out during the federal election. What did we see after the 
election in 1988? No payment, because he’s got no money. 
He’s got money to pay for $34,000 a day in empty office space, 
but he hasn’t got the money to put into a drought payment for 
the farming community in this province. 
 
At a time when farmers are being forced off of their land, when 
their children are forced out of this province to seek 
employment other places because the agricultural community is 
in a very tough state — and it’s causing the small communities 
to be devastated as well, and the business people — this 
Premier promised to participate in this drought payment. But 
what did he do? He broke his word. 
 
People expect honesty from their politicians. But I want to say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s a quality that is becoming very 
apparently sadly lacking in the prime minister of our province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I will be working with my 
caucus colleagues, as you will be, I hope, to ensure that we 
don’t lose another 16,000 people this year to other provinces 
and other jurisdictions. People on this side of the House are 
going to work with the business community and with the 
agricultural community and with the working men and women 
of this province, to ensure that we don’t lose 6,200 people in 
one month. People on this side of the legislature are going to be 
working to ensure that we don’t have a 50 per cent drop-out rate 
of our high school students. And we’re going to be working to 
ensure that people of all income levels can get into 
post-secondary educational facilities. 
 
We’re going to be working to ensure that those facilities are 
funded adequately so that the average enrolment qualifications 
don’t exceed what most people can obtain. Because you see, 
Mr. Speaker, people on this side of the House believe in 
opportunity for all regardless of your income, or regardless of 
your political stripe. 
 
And we understand that when you govern you can’t govern for 
one particular political party, nor can you govern for one 
income level. You have to govern for the advantaged, for the 
disadvantaged, for those that believe in your political 
philosophy and for those that don’t believe in your political 
philosophy, because all of the people have a right to decent 
government regardless of your political stripe. 
 
I want to say that I find it sad to see in this province that we 
have a minister of privatization but that we don’t have a 
minister of co-ops. We’ve built this province using the 
co-operative sector and the private sector and the public sector, 
and that’s no secret to anyone. But what’s happening? What 
have we lost? Why have we lost this 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

532 
 

vision of working together? We’ve lost this vision of working 
together, Mr. Minister, because we’ve lost a government that 
cares. We’ve inherited a selfish, self-centred, incompetent 
government, and this year’s estimates clearly show that that’s 
the case. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, before I close, that I want to move 
an amendment, and the amendment will be seconded by the 
MLA from The Battlefords who wants to speak to this motion. 
 
The reason we’re moving this amendment, Mr. Speaker, is 
because people of this province are dissatisfied with what’s 
been happening. So, Mr. Speaker, I will move: 
 

That all the words after the word “that” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
This Assembly regrets that the provincial budget imposes 
unfair tax increases on ordinary families, reduces funding 
for youth job creation and agriculture, fails to restore the 
damage caused by provincial government cut-backs in 
health, education, and other social programs, and 
completely fails to address the cause of Saskatchewan’s 
population loss to other parts of Canada. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s been happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
I therefore move this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies to the 
member from Shellbrook-Torch River. I was just a little too fast 
for him getting to my feet here this evening. 
 
I am pleased to be able to enter into the debate on the budget. I 
didn’t have an opportunity to speak to the throne speech debate. 
It seemed to me that the members of the government side were 
trying to filibuster the throne speech debate, which I find very 
strange. They laid several attacks on New Democrats on the 
opposition side of the House. And they look back years ago, 
trying to blame history for their problems of the current day. 
 
We don’t believe that, Mr. Speaker. We know that this 
Assembly does not believe it, and we know the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan do not believe that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The people in the province of Saskatchewan 
will lay the blame where the blame is due. And it’s on that 
government opposite, under the leadership of the farmer from 
Albert Street south. 
 
When the budget came down, Mr. Speaker, on March 30, the 
Premier’s government announced their plans to spend 
approximately $4.2 billion between April 1, 1989 and March 
31, 1990. Now assuming, Mr. Speaker, that there are a million 
people in the province . . . Actually 

there are not because our population is now below that figure 
since over 6,000 people left the province in the month of 
February, and our population is now declining at a very rapid 
rate. But anyway, assuming that there are a thousand people, 
this means that for every man, woman, and child in 
Saskatchewan, this government wants to spend $4,266. So if 
you have a family like I do — four children and my spouse and 
myself — we’re looking at the government wanting to spend on 
our behalf over $24,000 in the fiscal year 1989-1990. 
 
The Premier’s government also announced that they would 
collect approximately $4.025 billion in revenue during that 
same time period, and this leaves us with a deficit, according to 
my figures at least, of some $241 million by the government’s 
own figures. That’s an increasing problem, Mr. Speaker. We 
seem to keep adding to the total provincial debt. It’s perpetual 
deficit financing. I don’t see the sense of the members opposite. 
 
When New Democrats left office in the 1981-82 fiscal year — 
right around that time — there was a surplus left, Mr. Speaker, 
of some $139 million. And since that time, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
From the $139 million surplus, all of these red bars represent 
the increasing deficit that the government has brought in. That’s 
very unfortunate, not only for the government, because they’ll 
have their day of reckoning when people of Saskatchewan get a 
hold of them at the next provincial election, but it’s also 
unfortunate for those same people, because we have a debt 
burden now in the province of Saskatchewan that will take 
many generations — not just years, many generations — to 
recover from. 
 
We look at 1982-83 fiscal year, $227 million; ’83-84 fiscal 
year, 331 million deficit; ’84-85, $379 million deficit; ’85-86, 
$584 million deficit; ’86-87, election year, they projected a 
deficit of $389 million, but what was it? It was $1.235 billion. 
Year after the election they said, well we got to try and get 
things under control, Mr. Speaker. And so they got under 
control to the extent that, well the deficit that year was only 
$328 million — which is an estimate — because that brings up 
another point: we still don’t have the public accounts for the 
fiscal year ending March 31, 1988. 
 
That’s over a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and we still don’t have the 
public accounts from this negligent, mismanaged government 
opposite. 
 
So this year now they’re going to tell us, well according to their 
figures they say they’re going to have a deficit of $226 million. 
The Minister of Finance says he’s getting things under control. 
Well we’ll see how much we can believe him, because he has in 
the budget documents, revenue of some, oh, $200 million from 
Crown investment corporation, sort of the banker for the Crown 
corporations that generate revenue in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But these people want to sell off all the Crown corporations. 
They want to privatize. If it moves, privatize it. So if they 
privatize it all, where’s Crown investment corporation going to 
continue to come up with this money to help reduce the deficit? 
It’s going to be non-existent. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

533 
 

They pump in a larger than usual sum of money according to 
their past tradition, if they do have any tradition, from the 
Liquor Board. And then they pump in a larger amount from 
what they’re going to get from the federal government. 
 
So we say, Mr. Speaker, and we predict that the deficit for this 
current fiscal year is going to be closer to 500 million than it is 
to the 200 million that the Minister of Finance is telling us. 
 
So every year since this government’s come into place, we’ve 
got a deficit. And I call it the beer-belly curve, Mr. Speaker, 
because as you can see, it starts out smaller and gets bigger and 
bigger and bigger, and then the public perception is so bad, Mr. 
Speaker, that it starts going back down. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I’m afraid that the 
reference material the hon. member is using is being used in a 
fashion that is interpreted as an exhibit, and I ask him to refrain 
from that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I was getting 
carried away with my enthusiasm about the problem with the 
deficit, and I’ll try not to do that. I hope I can use some of these 
charts like this, because it refreshes my memory so I can be 
more exact as to the horrendous problem that’s been created by 
the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, where is this going to end? Deficit financing 
is not necessarily a problem if you’re borrowing the money to 
invest in some future venture, or if you have some way of 
recovering that deficit and paying off the debt. But there’s no 
debt repayment schedule by the government. They aren’t 
investing in anything to bring back a return. It’s perpetual 
deficit financing. I’ve said this in other addresses to this 
legislature, and it’ll have to be said many, many more times, 
because the problem is going to last for a long, long time in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that when you borrow money 
you’re going to be paying back more than you borrow. And the 
reason for that is known as interest. And interest is a very 
interesting thing when we look at the deficit that we have. The 
budget has estimated that there will be $380 million spent on 
interest fees and commissions to service the debt. 
 
Well we should look at the Finance documents here, Mr. 
Speaker. If we look here on page 44 of the budget, Department 
of Finance, servicing the public debt . . . And I’ll read it. This is 
just interest. Item 1, debt servicing, interest on public debt, 
government share, $373,346,800. Just interest — just interest 
on the debt. 
 
So those families out there in Saskatchewan, when they sit 
down at the breakfast table in the morning, before they eat 
breakfast, if it’s a family of four, they have to take and set aside 
$4 just to pay the interest on the debt — $4 just to pay the 
interest on the debt. Every single day of the year — Monday, 
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. 
Even before they go to church, they have to take their $4 for 
that family of four, set it out on the table, and if they left it there 
for a year it would 

accumulate and that would represent . . . They could see in a 
visual effect how much money is being paid on interest by the 
debt that’s been created by this mismanaged, gone-astray 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on. I said it was 380 million. Item number 
2, fees and commissions on public debt, government share — 
7,500,000. Total for Finance, servicing the public debt, 
government share, ordinary expenditure — I find it 
extraordinary — $380,846,800. That’s the effect of having 
perpetual deficit financing, Mr. Speaker, and I think that people 
should take a very careful look at that and question the financial 
management of this current government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another way to look at this money that has to be 
set aside to service the debt is that in the entire government, all 
the government departments, there are only two government 
departments that have a higher budget than the money set aside 
to service interest on the debt; those are the Department of 
Health and the Department of Education. Every other 
department in government has a lesser budget to provide their 
programs and services than the amount set aside to pay interest 
on the debt. We think that’s shameful, we think that’s 
mismanagement of the economy, and there is so much more, 
Mr. Speaker, we could do with $380 million in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A second major problem, Mr. Speaker, that 
has received little attention during the budget debate are 
payments made to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A slush fund. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Some of our members refer to it as the slush 
fund, and they may be accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Until 1987 there used to be a department of supply and service, 
and the department of supply and service had the mandate to 
provide office and services to all the government departments, 
Mr. Speaker, all the government departments. And so the 
departments weren’t charged. You could see it very plainly; it 
was all there to see in supply and services in that one 
department. 
 
Now after 1987 the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation came along, Mr. Speaker, and the problem arises in 
that it would appear that a department may be receiving a 
substantial increase in their budget, but the money does not go 
into programs and services, the increase in some instances goes 
to Saskatchewan Property Management services for rent. This 
year the departments will pay to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation well in excess of $150 million, Mr. 
Speaker, according to my calculations. 
 
Let’s look at some of these, how much they are. If you look, for 
example . . . I see the Minister of Education would make special 
note of this. In this budget document the Estimates, as it’s 
called, Mr. Speaker, for the fiscal year ’89-1990, payments 
from the Department of Education to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

534 
 

what do you think they total? They total $45,698,500. Some 
members sort of cock their head to the side a little bit. Well 
maybe we should look at the document then, Mr. Speaker, 
because it’s a document put out by the government, and we’ll 
look up the Department of Education. 
 
(2045) 
 
Here we have the Department of Education, Mr. Speaker, page 
29, payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation — $4,712,900. Turn over the page, on page 30, 
grants to Saskatchewan universities, repayment of principal and 
interest on capital loans from the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, amount — $19,500,000. On the 
same page, item 23, grant to Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology, payments to Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, amount — $21,485,600. 
 
Well according to my figures, Mr. Speaker, if you added each 
of those three figures together, you would have $45,698,500 
paid by that minister’s department to another department in 
government, and they’re trying to snooker the people of 
Saskatchewan by saying they’ve increased the budget that 
much. False, Mr. Speaker. It’s an internal juggling of figures 
and it’s deceptive to people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the only department. The other 
major department I want to look at is the Department of Health, 
in terms of what they pay to the property management 
corporation. Because it’s Health and Education, the two I’m 
going to use for an example, the only two that have a higher 
budget than the amount set aside to pay interest on the debt. 
 
What have we got through the Department of Health? Well the 
government’s document again, Mr. Speaker, Estimates, 
Government of Saskatchewan, 1989-90. What have we got 
here? Department of Health, page 46, item 17, payments to 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, $12,957,800. 
Is that it? No, no. Next page, Mr. Speaker, page 47, grants to 
hospitals. 
 
But read on. Repayment of principal and interest on capital 
loans from the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. How much? — $16,042,000. 
 
We’re not done yet, Mr. Speaker. Hold on. Item 30 on the same 
page, grants to special care facilities — repayment of principal 
and interest on capital loans from the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. How much? Oh, $1,657,000. My 
goodness, it’s not as much as the Department of Education. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I did add these up, and the total payments 
from the Department of Health to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation worked out to $30,656,800. My 
goodness, that’s a large amount of money, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 
if you add the amount paid to Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation from the largest two departments in 
government, it’s over 75 — over 76, I should say — over $76 
million. 

Well Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation is going 
to have a lot of funds to play with, Mr. Speaker. And the thing 
that’s a shame about it is that they’re not accountable for it. 
They don’t . . . Sask Property Management doesn’t reveal what 
they do. They’re a Crown corporation, and as I said before, 
many of our members maintain it’s a slush fund. That may be 
true, and we’ll be attempting to prove that over the coming 
months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sort of in summarizing the budget, Mr. Speaker, it’s a budget 
with a bleak financial forecast for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and there’s a lot of smoke and mirrors in there. 
As to the smoke and mirrors, there is two where money is 
actually spent and where the government is trying to say that 
they’re increasing the amounts of revenue put into various 
government departments. 
 
The other thing they don’t take into consideration, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think that the public should know in Saskatchewan, is that 
when they say a certain percentage increase, they’re not 
including supplementary amounts that were put into the 
particular departments the year before. They go from raw 
figures last year to raw estimates this year. And still estimates, I 
remind you again, from last year because the Public Accounts 
over a year ago, still are not tabled in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I like the words of this individual, a Morris 
Shumiatcher, a lawyer from Regina. I found this quote the other 
day as I was doing some reading. And he once said that: 
 

The only thing that governments today print more of than 
laws is money, and because there is much of each, the 
value of both our laws and our money is fast declining. 
 

Now I think that applies more particularly to the federal 
government because they can crank up the printing press and 
cause or reduce inflation pretty well at will. If they want to print 
more money, they print more money. But the point for this 
provincial government is, they’ve totally abused money. They 
have no respect for the public purse. They just take money 
wherever they can get it. They project more money than they 
can actually receive, and they spend more money than they 
budget. And that’s substantiated in every single budget that this 
government has brought down through their Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker, and I think people in Saskatchewan are 
getting sick and tired of the deception and deceit that is spread 
by the government of this Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before . . . just before I leave the topic of 
payments to property management corporation, I’d like to put 
into perspective what it is, is a comparison between what Health 
and Education pay to property management corporation versus 
budgets of other important government departments. 
 
The Minister of Education knows very well that his department, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to pay in excess of $45 million this year 
to the property management corporation. That’s just payments 
to property management corporation. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

535 
 

What is the budget of the Department of Environment and 
Public Safety? Total budget of the entire department is $11.5 
million — $11.5 million — about less than a third of what his 
department pays to rent buildings. 
 
Energy and Mines, what’s their total budget? Total budget $12 
million. 
 
Economic Development and Tourism, what’s their total budget? 
Sixteen point eight million dollars, Mr. Speaker. Remember 
how much he’s paying to the property management 
corporation? Forty-five million he’s paying, just to rent 
buildings. 
 
What about the budget of Trade and Investment? The great 
saviour, according to that government over there, was going to 
be free trade. Now, Mr. Speaker, has your life been better since 
free trade? Have any of the members over there . . . Has the 
Minister of Science and Technology had a great boom in 
science and technology in Saskatchewan since free trade came 
along? Is the oil industry any better in the Cut Knife-Lloyd 
constituency? Is Arm River booming with their fertilizer plant? 
No, you’re not getting the fertilizer plant. 
 
Trade and Investment, the total budget, Mr. Speaker, is $9.6 
million. That’s what great importance these people put on free 
trade. All the rhetoric they had before, and now they put less 
than $10 million into the department that has to deal with such a 
vitally important part of our financial picture in the province of 
Saskatchewan — $9.6 million, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister 
of Education can spend $45 million renting buildings from the 
property management corporation. Lots of smoke and mirrors, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Are people being given the true goods? Well, 
let’s look back to fiscal year 1981-82. The provincial revenue 
picture received $120 million from fuel tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the Conservative government, under the 
current Premier, said to people in the province, you’re paying 
too much. We’ll give you cheap gas; we’ll give you almost free 
gas or remove all the tax on it. By gosh, you know, they got 
elected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the first year that the Conservatives were in, the revenue 
from fuel tax went from 120 million down to 13 million — 13.5 
million, to be more exact. And then we move on a couple of 
years to ’85-86 fiscal year. Well it’s creeping back up — 30.7 
million they made in revenue. What about ’87-88, Mr. Speaker; 
’87-88, betrayal of a promise. The Conservative government 
receives $142 million in revenue from fuel tax. Oh, that’s more 
than the people were paying in 1981-82. And what does the 
government project in this current budget in the fiscal year 
’89-90? They project to bring in $204 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish I could show you this, but I can’t; it would 
be an exhibit, I guess. But it does go from ’81-82 to an increase 
in ’88-90 . . . or ’89-90, I should say, to $204 million — getting 
pretty close to double. 
 
So who’s paying for all these deficits and interests? It’s the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Because we’d have to look at the corporation income tax in the 
province — ’84-85, it was 156 million. Well what’s happening? 
The Globe and Mail said last year that corporate profits for big 
business in Canada were up 56 per cent. That’s from The Globe 
and Mail; that’s not some Saskatchewan NDP rhetoric, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s from The Globe and Mail. But what happens, 
this government drops corporate tax. So we went from 156 
million and now we’re down in ’88-89 to 134 million — holy 
cow! — lost another $22 million. 
 
But what about individual income tax revenue, Mr. Speaker, 
individual income tax. In ’85-86, that fiscal year, $626 million, 
Mr. Speaker, was collected from individual income tax. In 
’88-89, the year that we’ve just been through, Mr. Speaker, this 
government collected $831 million in individual income tax. 
And it’s not, Mr. Speaker, because more people are working — 
there are less people working — but the income tax, with your 
flat tax of the government, has driven up personal taxation in 
the province of Saskatchewan from $626 million to $831 
million. Corporate tax comes down, individual income tax goes 
up. People in the province, Mr. Speaker, are getting sick and 
tired of paying more than their fair share of the deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: —What else do average individuals pay? Well 
they pay sales tax, Mr. Speaker. And what did this government 
say at election time? What would they do? They were going to 
eliminate the provincial sales tax. The 5 per cent provincial 
sales tax wasn’t eliminated; it went up by 40 per cent. It went 
from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, a 40 per cent increase. 
 
What a betrayal of a political promise by a government that is 
now bankrupt of ideas. They’re so bankrupt of ideas that they 
have to break all the election promises they made. And so 
people are becoming more and more sceptical in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what happened in the sales tax revenue? In ’84-85 there was 
$372 million raised by sales tax — ’88-89 this amount had gone 
up to $476 million in sales tax revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And many people still remember the used car sales tax that 
came in for six months, and the reaction was so harsh by the 
people in the province that they dropped it. Never before in the 
history of the province has a government brought in a tax in a 
budget, and before the end of that fiscal year dropped it because 
it was so devastatingly unpopular in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s no plan there, there’s no consistency. No one knows 
what they’re going to do from day one to day two, let alone into 
next week or next month or next year. 
 
(2100) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t going to dwell any more on the 
Department of Education, but I just have one more graph here 
that I want to use. In 1980, 56.7 million provincial grant school 
boards expenditures . . . or sorry, $56.7 million. By 1988, what 
are they down to? — 49.4 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

536 
 

million. Do you know why those grants to school boards are 
dropping? Well, it’s because the Department of Education is 
paying that money to property management corporation instead 
of school boards in the province. If you look at the amounts, 
there’s a very good correlation there between what they have to 
pay as a financial move within their own government as 
opposed to what they’re taking away from school boards in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s happening with the property 
management corporation money? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well some of the members, Mr. Speaker, are 
asking what happens to the property management corporation 
money. We don’t know. Why don’t we know? Because they are 
not accountable to this Legislature, other than providing an 
annual report which has no detail of finances. They appear 
before the Public Accounts Committee and give very little 
information, none to determine whether or not people in the 
province are getting economy, efficiency, and effectiveness for 
the tax dollars that they are paying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan have been used to 
receiving a lot of benefits from their government, whoever has 
represented them in government — formerly Liberal, CCF, 
New Democrats — and they thought they’d receive a fair deal 
also under a Progressive Conservative government. But since 
this government was re-elected in 1986, people have seen a true 
picture of Progressive Conservatives in action in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It has devastated this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it brings to me a quote that I recall from Thomas Paine, 
who was involved in some of the writing of the American 
constitution just after the Americans ran the British out of the 
United States of America. And Thomas Paine said that the tree 
of liberty must be periodically bathed in the blood of patriots. 
And I couldn’t understand what he meant for a long time, and I 
really only understood it when I saw a Conservative 
government in action in the province of Saskatchewan since 
1986, and the devastation that they’ve done to people’s 
programs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What Thomas Paine said was a very futuristic kind of 
statement. At that time it was revolution because they’d just 
come through a revolution. We don’t want revolution in 
Saskatchewan; we don’t need revolution, because the people of 
the province are going to throw the Progressive Conservative 
government of the farmer from Albert Street South out when it 
comes to the next election. I don’t think there’s any question 
about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And, Mr. Speaker, I maintain to you that this 
government not only shows disrespect for the people of 
Saskatchewan, it shows disrespect for this institution as well. 
 
I just want to quote something, Mr. Speaker. I want to put it 
into the record. It’s from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dated 
today, of this date, and it’s an article, “Filming in 

legislature denied.” 
 

Television crews won’t be allowed inside the legislature 
after all, Speaker (blank blank) has decided. 
 

I say “blank blank,” Mr. Speaker, because the name of the 
Speaker is actually here and you can’t say the name of the 
Speaker, so I just said, “blank blank.” 
I continue the quote: 
 

Monday, (blank) confirmed that he has formally denied a 
request from the CBC to film several scenes of Love and 
Hate, the story of the 1983 murder of Colin Thatcher’s 
ex-wife, JoAnn Wilson, inside the Legislative Chamber. 
 
As Speaker, I have to be concerned with ensuring the 
Chamber is treated with the respect it deserves,” he said. 
 

Respect. I’ve seen nothing but disrespect for this Chamber from 
the government ever since I’ve sat in this legislature. I can’t 
believe the disrespect shown. Quite often on Tuesday nights, 
especially at the start of the session, the government doesn’t 
want to sit; they stand up and adjourn the House. It wasn’t only 
a week ago we voted against an adjournment of them calling off 
the evening session of the legislature. We didn’t have any 
problem sitting that particular evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that I formerly sat in the House of 
Commons, and I was defeated in 1984 by a well-respected 
personality in Saskatchewan who, in turn, was defeated by 
another well-respected personality in Saskatchewan in the last 
federal election. But my experience in the federal House taught 
me to have respect for the institution, Mr. Speaker. And here, 
when I compare the disrespect here for the respect of the 
parliament in Ottawa, there is no comparison, Mr. Speaker. I 
would go on with this quotation: 
 

In making his decision, he gave careful consideration to 
the historical uses of the chamber, which has been limited 
to parliamentary functions, such as the youth parliament, 
he said. 
 

History, this activity, the filming of the story, Love and Hate, 
will likely be remembered in Saskatchewan history as one of 
the most dramatic events that ever happened in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And much of that history happened in this 
Chamber, happened in this very legislature, Mr. Speaker. I go 
on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Although the producers of the six-hour, $6 million 
program had managed to persuade the government of the 
economic benefits of the shoot, the decision to allow the 
filming or not was entirely his, (blank) said. 
 

I always thought, Mr. Speaker, that the Speaker, who has said 
on many occasions is a servant of this legislature, the honest 
broker between the government and the opposition members 
and third-party members, if there were any in this legislature — 
now I don’t see how some 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

537 
 

person arbitrarily, who is a servant of this legislature, can just 
make a decision that they can’t shoot in this legislature a film of 
a shooting and the life and a very important part of the history 
of this province and this legislature. I remember watching the 
member who is the focus of this film debate and sit and act as a 
minister of the Crown in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatchewan (I go on, Mr. Speaker, the article, 
Saskatchewan) people expect him “to be a responsible 
custodian” of the legislature. “Most people wouldn’t agree 
with the commercialization of the legislature,” no matter 
what the short-term benefits might be. 
 

Commercialization of the legislature — I can’t think of any 
other event that would be appropriate to have done in this 
Chamber. Commercialization? Was somebody offered money 
so they could film in the legislature? Who was offered money? 
How was that commercialization? Is CBC going to sell this film 
to their own network? Boy, I think not, Mr. Speaker. So 
commercialization of the legislature — I don’t comprehend 
that, Mr. Speaker. I go back to the article. 
 

If it was opened to one commercial venture, “where 
would we draw the line?” 
 
Last month, deputy premier (blank blank) said the 
government and opposition had agreed to shoot after 
lobbying by the CBC and ACTRA (that’s the Association 
of Cinema, Television and Radio Artists). 
 

We agreed many, many weeks ago to allowing this event to be 
filmed in the legislature so long as it didn’t interfere with the 
daily functioning of this House. And according to the Deputy 
Premier, the Deputy Premier also agreed to that. I go back to 
the article, Mr. Speaker. 
 

About 150 extras would have been hired — at $100 apiece 
— and the film crew would have spent another $35,000 in 
the city on hotel rooms and vehicle rentals. Love and Hate 
is scheduled to be shown sometime this fall. 
 
Thatcher, a former PC cabinet minister, and son of former 
premier Ross Thatcher, is now serving a life sentence in 
Edmonton for the 1983 murder of Wilson. 
 
He was first elected to the legislature as a Liberal MLA in 
1975, (and) later abandoned the Liberals to join the 
Progressive Conservatives. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think it was a sad event that that had happened, 
but nevertheless it happened. The point I make is that, where 
has the respect gone for this institution, this legislature? Maybe 
when people see things like that happen, they lose respect in all 
politicians. I suspect some of the things that other politicians on 
that side of the House have done have drawn disrespect not only 
on themselves, but ourselves, because the majority of the 
general public look at all politicians as politicians. 
 
And we have a mission, Mr. Speaker, to get out and 

educate people in the province of Saskatchewan that a politician 
is not necessarily just a politician. There are politicians that 
have some integrity, and there are some politicians that don’t 
have integrity, and they are not exclusive to any one political 
party. I would not want to say that there are no members with 
integrity over there. I believe in my own heart, Mr. Speaker, 
that there must be. 
 
What else happens, Mr. Speaker? The dental plan, Mr. Speaker, 
is something that was devastated by this particular government. 
And the article, the headline in the article, Mr. Speaker, “Dental 
plan, drug program, surpass cost estimates.” 
 
So what’s happening? They privatized a program that operated 
very well as a school-based dental program, and now we’re 
finding it costs us more as a privatized program than it did as a 
public program, as a school-based dental program. And children 
were getting better service to more people under the 
school-based program than they are under a privatized program, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did members of the government say? The member from 
Regina South . . . I have an article here, and he says, we have to 
ensure that the government has its own house in order before 
asking the public to contribute to deficit reduction, he said. 
Well how long are we going to wait for your government, Mr. 
Minister, to get its house in order? 
 
I pointed out to you earlier the problem with the perpetual 
deficit financing. Many of our members want the election to be 
called so that the people of the province can decide. We don’t 
have to continue debating this issue in the legislature any 
longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the budget 
for a few moments. The first item in the budget is agriculture. 
It’s number one in order of the departments. It’s number one in 
terms of our economy in the province, but it certainly doesn’t 
seem to be a number one priority of the government. Some 
members say that agriculture is the number one priority, but it’s 
not. The department has added responsibilities this year — it’s 
called Agriculture and food now — but the budget was reduced. 
The budget was reduced. 
 
I think everyone in the province of Saskatchewan today would 
acknowledge that farmers are in serious trouble in the province. 
And what does the government hold out as an answer to those 
serious problems? Well, a few years ago they threw out the 
farm production loan. Hassle-free cash; come and get it 
farmers! Twenty-five dollars an acre; step right up. So almost 
all of the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan took the 
$25-an-acre, hassle-free cash at 6 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Then what did they do? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What did they do? Well let me tell you. The 
farm economy was getting worse. The three-year plan to pay it 
back wasn’t working out so well because farmers didn’t have 
the money. The hassle-free cash in tough times wasn’t able to 
come back, because the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

538 
 

hassle-free cash was not replenishing itself because farmers 
were in dire straits. So what do they do? They jack the interest 
rate up. What was it? They jacked it up to 10 per cent, or nine 
and three-quarters. 
 
(2115) 
 
Many of the government’s friends in big business have a more 
preferred interest rate than the nine and three-quarters that they 
wanted to charge the farmers. And they said, well okay, we’ll 
let you pay it back over 10 years at nine and three-quarters. 
Well, big favour. 
 
And now what’s happening in the province of Saskatchewan? 
Foreclosures in greater numbers than we’ve ever had before in 
the province. Regardless of what the members on the 
government side say, farmers know, small communities know, 
people in Saskatchewan know that there are more foreclosures 
going on, initiated by the Minister of Agriculture — who also 
happens to be the Premier — by the government sitting in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Ag credit corporation is foreclosing 
in record numbers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess the farm production loan wasn’t the 
answer. They’ve tried at other times to get the federal 
government to throw their deficiency . . . so they throw out a 
deficiency payment. They did that. Things aren’t any better yet. 
Free trade hasn’t helped. Privatization of anything hasn’t 
helped. Things are continually getting worse on the farm, and 
every single one of the rural members opposite knows that. You 
cannot deny that things are getting worse on farms in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they decided, well there’s a drought last 
year so we’re going to give a drought payment. So during the 
federal election, all the Conservative MP’s ran around the 
province, with the MLA’s from the Conservative government 
following behind them, carrying their bags, saying, yes sir, no 
sir, yes ma’am, no ma’am. And so the MP’s from the 
Conservative side said, well, we’re going to give you a drought 
payment. More hassle-free cash. Well we all know that the 
drought was last year, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the Minister of 
Education — he seems to have lots of wisdom here this evening 
— have they got their cheques yet for the drought payment? 
Oh, the minister says that the cheque is in the mail. One of the 
biggest lies in mankind’s history. One of the big lies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I want to tell you that the drought payment was promised. 
We know very well that the federal government said to the 
Minister of Agriculture, who also happens to be the Premier, 
look it, you share it, we’ll share it; we’ll go 50-50; put the 
money into a pot, the provincial government administer the 
money, and we will give it out as a drought payment. Well, the 
election got over . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re in dream-land. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — . . . the election . . . well, just listen, the 
member from Arm River, just listen. I’m not reading this; I 
know this. Mr. Speaker, what happened? Well, the federal 
election was over and most of their MPs got 

defeated, so the hassle-free cash for drought all of a sudden 
doesn’t come — no more hassle-free. 
 
And so negotiations go on between the Minister of Agriculture, 
who is also the Premier, and the federal government. The 
federal government says, you put in your share. Our 
government, the Conservative government, says no, we’re not 
putting in our share, you pay it all. We only promised to 
administer the program. The federal government says, well, will 
you pay for administering the program? And the provincial 
government cares so much about farmers, says no, we won’t 
pay for administering the program, you pay us for administering 
it. We’ll just administer the program, you put in all the money. 
 
Well, that’s a good deal and good work if you can get it, but it 
ain’t working out, boys and girls. It just isn’t working out. 
 
So the farm problem is increasing. The farm problem is 
increasing. What are the indications now? The drought payment 
might come in July with the balance of it maybe in the fall. 
Looks like it will come now. Must have been some agreement 
reached between the province and the federal government. Yes, 
the money is coming; they assure us now the money is coming 
for drought in the province. 
 
Well the money won’t come when it’s needed. A number of 
farmers are saying to me that, boy, I could sure use that cash 
now, you know, because pretty soon we’ve got to put the crop 
in. But the money isn’t coming till July, and I know if I plant 
my crop in July it won’t come up in time to harvest it. Well, son 
of a gun, I thought that with all those rural members on the 
government side, Mr. Speaker, they would have been able to 
figure out that you can’t give money in July to help for seeding 
in the spring; it just doesn’t work. 
 
What’s the government going to say? What’s the suppliers 
going to say? Go to the bank; go to the credit union; go 
somewhere and borrow it. Well I don’t know if the 
government’s heard or not, but they’re not very anxious at the 
financial institutions right now to lend farmers money because 
of the uncertainty in agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So the drought payment is coming, but it’s not coming in time, 
and the government realizes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Promised 40; what are they going to get? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — One of the members reminded me — the 
promise of $40 an acre. What’s it going to be? Maybe 12 now. 
How much? That’s right; the farmers are very anxious to find 
out when, how much, why did you deceive us? They’re going to 
be thinking, aha, it was federal election time. Yes. 
 
But the government at least, to their credit, the agricultural 
economist who is the Minister of Agriculture and also the 
Premier in the province knows that there’s still a problem there. 
So all indications are that they’re going to set up a system of 
equity financing in the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

539 
 

province of Saskatchewan — equity financing. 
 
And I can remember some of the members opposite going 
around the province last year, having this little travelling band 
that went around putting on their road show — nice banner 
there — and alternatives to farm financing. But what came out 
at every meeting? What came out at every meeting? Equity 
financing is what was being proposed by the government 
members. And the farmers that were at these meetings . . . I 
remember the meeting at the Elk’s Hall in North Battleford. It 
was packed; there was standing room only. The farmers 
soundly said no to equity financing. What are the indications 
now? Throne Speech, budget, talk from the members opposite 
on the government side — we’re going to have equity 
financing. 
 
And how will that work out? Well with free trade and removing 
of ownership, foreign ownership of property to what we used to 
know it, freedom more so for foreign investment in country, 
we’ll have foreign investors, certainly from outside the province 
of Saskatchewan, buying up farm land and then hiring people 
back to farm megafarms in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well it isn’t going to work; it isn’t going to work. One of the 
members opposite said I didn’t know what I was talking about, 
Mr. Speaker. I invite him to join in the debate. I invite him to 
debate outside the legislature, because your government doesn’t 
know what you’re talking about. You never have. People are 
only just starting to realize it. 
 
So there was a problem also, Mr. Speaker, with this equity 
financing because they know that it didn’t fly with the farmers 
last year, the ones who are suffering the brunt of what’s 
happening in the agricultural sector. 
 
So what did they say in the throne speech? I was astounded. 
The farmers should have paid particular attention to what was 
said in the throne speech, that there will be provisions made by 
the Government of Saskatchewan so that farmers can own their 
home quarter. Well isn’t that wonderful? Anybody who 
homesteaded in Saskatchewan got their home quarter then. 
Other people bought their home quarters after that. 
 
It was very important, Mr. Speaker, for farmers to own their 
land. I’ve always assumed that farmers should own their own 
land. And now this government has thrown up its hands in 
frustration and said the only way to go is bigger and bigger 
farms, foreign investment, equity financing, venture capital 
farms in the province of Saskatchewan, huge agri-business, 
going back to the serf system — serfs in their own land. That is 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now this government is going to allow farmers to own their 
home quarter. That is a disgrace, it’s a denial of family heritage 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and this government has done 
more to destroy farm families than any government in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, what does the government 

give for the reasons as to why this is happening? They say to a 
large extent it’s because of things that have happened beyond 
our own boundaries; that we’re caught up in a world, a 
shrinking world that’s getting smaller and smaller because of 
the media and the communications and satellites and rapid 
travel and education of people; that the world is shrinking so 
much that we can no longer exist on our own in the province of 
Saskatchewan; we’re caught up in a world trend and this cycle 
that we’re on; we can’t get off it; we just have to ride it out as 
best we can. My leader referred to it as a surf-board rider riding 
the surf-board out in the ocean, not having any option to get off. 
 
The global village, Mr. Speaker, does affect everyone. But in 
Saskatchewan, in the province of Saskatchewan, where people 
are politically aware, they’re politically active, they’re 
concerned, they love their province. People can stand for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not some global village that’s out 
there. The global village is certainly a reality. 
 
But if Saskatchewan people had said back in the 1960s and 
prior to the 1960s that, well, we can’t have medicare here 
because they don’t have it anywhere else; we can’t have 
medicare here because they don’t have it anywhere else, do you 
think that we would have had medicare today? 
 
There were some great leaders, Mr. Speaker, during the time 
that medicare came into place in the province of Saskatchewan. 
There were people like Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd 
and Allan Blakeney, and many people who worked behind the 
scenes. There were opposing forces, the Keep Our Doctors 
committees that were scaring people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, saying if medicare came in, doctors would 
leave; doctors will leave; hospitals will close; your family will 
get sick; they’ll die because you can’t get medical treatment. 
They scared people. There was money that came from the 
American Medical Association to the Keep Our Doctors 
committee to squash medicare. 
 
And why do we have medicare today? Not because of leaders 
like Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney 
and others that fought for that alone; it’s because of the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan fought for what they believed 
was their hereditary right. They won then, Mr. Speaker. They 
won the medicare issue. Medicare came into reality and is now 
commonly accepted in every province in Canada. It is accepted 
in every province in Canada. 
 
And watch the government that destroys medicare. They will 
never get re-elected in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. But that’s what Thomas Paine meant when he talked 
about the tree of liberty must be periodically bathed in the blood 
of patriots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medicare is sacred. People should not have to 
worry because of their financial status as to whether or not they 
live or they die. People in Saskatchewan, during that time, 
fought for what they believed in. People believed that the 
private sector alone had taken too much. People don’t mind the 
private sector having their fair share. I don’t think anyone 
minds that. 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

540 
 

Responsible corporate citizens are welcome in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but they have to pay their way just like everyone 
else in the province of Saskatchewan. They have to be willing 
to work with co-operatives. They have to be willing to work 
with public ownership. They have to be willing to work with 
public participation, because the public have always 
participated in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2130) 
 
Saskatchewan is to a large extent alone in this, not only alone in 
the world, in that global village, but even in Canada. And for an 
example what I would point to, Mr. Speaker, is turn-out at 
election time. In the last provincial election in the province of 
Saskatchewan where your government, Mr. Speaker, formed a 
majority government in the province of Saskatchewan, even 
though they actually got less votes, but because of the 
distribution of those votes they formed a government — I don’t 
complain about that; that’s the way the democratic system 
works. I believe that over 80 per cent of the people in the 
province, or very close to — I don’t have the figure before me 
— either over or very close to 80 per cent of the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan participated in the last provincial 
election because people in Saskatchewan care. 
 
Let’s look to our neighbour to the West. Alberta just went 
through a federal election . . . pardon me, Mr. Speaker, they 
went through a federal election, but they just went through a 
provincial election in which unfortunately their leader was 
defeated, the member from Whitemud. His party formed a 
majority government, there were some Liberals elected, there 
were a respectable number of New Democrats. New Democrats 
got 25 per cent of the vote in the province of Alberta. That is 
very respectable. One in four people in Alberta vote New 
Democrat. And do you know how New Democrats are going to 
form the government in the province of Alberta? Because only 
50 per cent — and that’s giving the benefit of the doubt — I 
should say less than 50 per cent of the people in Alberta voted 
in the last provincial election in Alberta, less than 50 per cent. 
Compare that to Saskatchewan: 80 per cent of the people vote 
in Saskatchewan elections. That is not uncommon because 
people here care. 
 
And as soon as the 16, I believe it is — we have 16 New 
Democrats in Alberta — as soon as the 16 New Democrats that 
we have elected in the provincial legislature in the province of 
Alberta are able to get out and talk to enough people to 
convince them that not all politicians are the same and that we 
don’t have to be caught up in this global village and world 
economy, you’re all of a sudden dealing with at least 30 per 
cent more people voting. New Democrats in Alberta will bring 
that other 30 per cent to vote and they will not be voting 
Conservative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well one of the members mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that there’d 
be an NDP sweep next time in Alberta. I don’t want to be too 
optimistic. I’m not going to go out on a limb and predict that, 
but I do predict that an NDP government will come to power in 
the province of Alberta, and the reason they will is what I’ve 
stated. They 

will talk to that other 30 per cent of the people who should be 
voting but don’t vote. You’re actually dealing with in Alberta 
. . . The majority of the people don’t vote in the province of 
Alberta. 
 
So I guess the point I was trying to make, Mr. Speaker — in 
case you lost it; I was a bit long-winded in that, and I see some 
of the members opposite have lost it as well — is that we do not 
have to be caught up in things that are happening in the rest of 
the world. Some of them affect us, yes, but Saskatchewan 
people have the desire, as long as their government has the 
desire to do something constructive for Saskatchewan, for 
Saskatchewan people, for all our betterment, Saskatchewan 
people will follow that. Saskatchewan people will not follow 
scare tactics. They will not follow devastation of programs that 
they have come to enjoy. Saskatchewan people will not support 
paying into their children’s and grandchildren’s future for debts 
that have been needlessly, needlessly created by this 
Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to Saskatchewan families for a 
while. Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, I think are 
worrying about society’s social fabric. They worry about how 
they’ll afford post-secondary education for their children and, if 
they retire, will they ever be able to maintain the standard of 
living that they currently enjoy. Families are being caused a lot 
of distress, and I think that families in the province of 
Saskatchewan have to see some vision for the future. You look 
at the people that have the greatest concern right now about 
things like the environment, which this government only wants 
to spend $9 million on, when they’re willing to spend $45 
million from the Department of Education budget to pay to 
another government Crown corporation, property management, 
to rent space. 
 
They’re so concerned about the future, the young people lose 
hope within their families, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I know in 
our own situation at home, we have four children. And the 
chances are if they were all to go on to post-secondary 
education, that at some point there may be three of them in 
post-secondary education at the same time. I wonder where I 
would get $21,000 a year to be able to afford to send those three 
children at one time to post-secondary education. 
 
That causes me concern, Mr. Speaker, and I have likely more 
means than a number of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan that have families of 1, 2, 3, 4 and maybe 5 
children. Is it fair in a province like Saskatchewan that because 
someone is on low income or because they’ve been put on to 
the ranks of the unemployed and unemployment insurance and 
when that runs out face the Saskatchewan assistance plan to 
support their families, is it fair that their children can no longer 
afford or attain the right to go to university or to trade school? 
 
The Minister of Education will say everyone has that right in a 
province like Saskatchewan. But it’s becoming beyond the 
reach, beyond the reach of people. We have a preferred 
education system now, Mr. Speaker, where young people are 
being wasted in terms of their ability to develop the best that 
they can possibly be, and they should have that right. Everyone 
should have that right to 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

541 
 

education in a province like Saskatchewan. 
 
Wage earners worry about how they’re going to make ends 
meet, Mr. Speaker, after the government has ravaged social 
programs and increased the tax burden, as I pointed out earlier 
this evening, by such innovative ideas as the flat tax, which is 
one of the most unfair and unprogressive taxes that has ever 
been placed on income in the history of Canada. 
 
Wage earners are concerned about the federal government of 
the same political stripe as the government in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, putting in a national sales tax. 
National sales tax comes in, 9 per cent, added on to 7 per cent 
sales tax in the province. That’s a 16 per cent sales tax, Mr. 
Speaker. So every time you go out and buy an item that’s new 
for $100, you have to pay 16 more dollars. 
 
As I pointed out again earlier, Mr. Speaker, this government 
promised to eliminate the sales tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. But they didn’t. They increased it by 40 per 
cent. Went from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. Wage earners are 
worried about things like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And wage earners are also concerned about the farce that’s been 
made of collective bargaining in the province. Saskatchewan 
workers have always been proud of their right and their ability 
to organize. And if someone doesn’t want to participate in 
collective bargaining they’ve never been beaten or forced to. 
It’s not like our friends to the south where there’s terrorism that 
runs between the political parties and some of the unions. 
 
Saskatchewan has developed a different working relationship 
with wage earners and organized labour in this province than 
what we have to the south. We’ve cushioned that from the 
global village, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about small business? Small business is worried about 
meeting their monthly payroll. They’re surely concerned about 
the rising interest rates which this government does nothing 
about. The only thing that’s shrinking faster than the consumer 
dollar is small business’s optimism in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Because as consumers, the wage earners and the 
other small businesses, the organized working people and 
families, as they have less disposable and discretionary income 
to spend, small businesses suffer. 
 
Quite often in our constituency office, Mr. Speaker, we have 
people coming in that are either in small business or are 
interested in getting into small business. Mr. Speaker, when 
they come to the office and ask, what assistance is there for 
small businesses, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, they say, what 
assistance is there for small business? And I say, well I know 
there are some good people working at the business resource 
centre in North Battleford, but they have nothing to offer you 
because there is no government program for small business. 
Small businesses are still waiting, Mr. Speaker, for their 
business tax rebate forms. When are they coming out? Are they 
being distributed through the chamber of commerce, as the 
member from Regina South pulls up the rah rah flag for? Where 
are they, where are the forms for the small business tax rebate? 

They don’t exist yet. What programs are there for small 
businesses in Saskatchewan? I maintain, nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see there is not a lot of time left this evening, but 
there are couple of other items that I wanted to address before I 
took my seat. 
 
What’s been happening in the province in terms of 
privatization. We have a Minister for the Department of Public 
Participation, they call it. Most people, even the government 
members, refer to it as privatization. Some of our members 
refer to it as piratization, but what we do certainly know, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it is a very distinct change from what people 
have dealt with previously in the province. 
 
They privatize things like our phone book in the province. That 
might not be as good as what the government said it would be; 
lots of mistakes in the phone book; sold the directory business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are various ways that this government has 
gone about the piratization in Saskatchewan. Some of them are 
acceptable to people in the public. I say that none of them are 
acceptable. Some are more acceptable than others to people in 
the public. And I still say that none of them are acceptable by 
this government, because what they’re doing is that everything 
that is being privatized by this provincial government is being 
sold at less than value. It is, in many cases, not paying anything 
back to the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what seems to be happening is that the 
government retains the debt and sells the asset. As long as you 
sell your assets and retain the debt, you’re going to get yourself 
into very serious problems. Because if you sell off all the assets 
and retain the debt, what have you got left if this government’s 
trend continues? If this government trend continues, the only 
source of revenue we will have is from average individuals in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Corporate tax is going down, 
personal income tax is going up, sales tax is going up, and at 
some point, I maintain to you, Mr. Speaker, the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan will say, no more, no more are we 
going to pay for the havoc created by this government. They are 
not going to pay to see the destruction of things they’ve worked 
for in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have to ask themselves, with the 
privatization, how are things better for me? It’s the same as the 
free trade deal that was being pumped up by the government. 
The government said, we’ve got to support this free trade deal, 
it’s going to be a boom for our economy. This government told 
us that privatization would be good for the economy. 
 
But are things better, Mr. Speaker? Tell me what’s better? Are 
we paying less tax? No, we’re not paying less tax. Well are we 
getting more services? No, we’re not getting more services. 
Well then what can be good about it? What can be good about 
giving away assets and retaining debt? Could the motivation be 
that their friends will take care of them after they’re gone? 
Because sure they’ll be 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

542 
 

gone; we know that many of them won’t run again in the next 
election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty-three of them. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — One of our members says 23 of them will not 
run again in the next election. Why is that? Why is that? 
Because they are desperately trying to find a way to get 
re-elected. They know that they can’t buy votes like they did in 
1986, because it worked then — it worked then, but people are 
wise now. 
 
People know that the government used their money to buy an 
election. They painted a false picture and deceived people in the 
province. They told them about the rosy economy — things 
were tough but we’re doing better; we’re doing good; watch out 
for the global village, the world economy; you got to have us or 
it will sweep us over. Well it’s sweeping us over, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The giving away of the assets, the retaining of 
the debt, the support of free trade, the piratization. And how has 
it helped us? We invite any of the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, any of the members opposite to stand in this 
legislature and tell this Assembly and the people in the province 
of Saskatchewan, how are things better for them as individuals? 
They are not. They’re desperately trying to find new candidates, 
it looks like. They’re trying to portray some vision of the future. 
Well a vision of the future might work, but if the people in the 
province look at the legacy of the government over the past 
couple of years, they won’t believe a vision of the future. 
 
People want to have hope in the future. They want to have hope 
for their families; they want to have hope for themselves; they 
want to have hope for their businesses; they want to have hope 
and security for their jobs; and they want a sustainable economy 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The economy that’s being created relies, Mr. Speaker, only on 
one cylinder. It relies now on the private sector. And by the 
time this government is done wreaking and causing havoc, it 
will only have the private sector to rely on. That is not a 
sustainable economy in the province of Saskatchewan, because 
if the private sector is the only thing you rely on, the global 
village in the world economy will run us over because the only 
motivation is profit. 
 
And I don’t believe that anybody in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that sits down and thinks, cares only about 
profits. They care about their job, they care about their business, 
their farm, their family. They care about decent, caring things, 
and that’s why 80 per cent of the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan vote at election time in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s why they voted for us. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — But they stand back and they watch . . . the 
Deputy Premier says, they voted for us, referring to the 
Conservatives. I maintain to you, they won’t do it again. You 
will never get re-elected in your political life in the province of 
Saskatchewan because people have seen what you truly stand 
for. Since 1986, devastation has 

happened in the province. 
 
As I was saying, the private sector will be run over by world 
economy. The only way Saskatchewan can exist and cushion 
itself, at least to some extent from that world economy, from 
that global village, from things that happened beyond our 
borders, is to have the mixed economy in the province which 
worked during the ’70s and will work during the 1990s, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think we have to keep re-stating what a mixed 
economy is all about. 
 
A mixed economy believes that, yes, we need a strong vibrant 
private sector in the province of Saskatchewan. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we need a strong public sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan, because if we didn’t have outside our borders 
would run us over. We need a co-operative sector, Mr. Speaker, 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Those three work together to 
make a mixed economy in this province, and this government 
wants to take away the latter two which are the most important 
in providing good, caring, compassionate programs for good 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. The private sector does 
not have a mandate to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Public sector co-operatives have a responsibility beyond the 
profit motive. I don’t criticize the profit motive. If a business 
doesn’t make profit, it’s not going to be there unless it’s a 
business that’s propped up and pushed and supported by a 
senseless policy from a government that throws out cash 
whenever they see a problem. It increases their big deficit 
problem in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close, I want to say that people in 
Saskatchewan have fought for the things that they believe in. 
And I will restate that again just before closing. There’s only 
about 10 minutes left this evening, so I might as well finish off 
for the evening. 
 
But I want to talk about the commitment and the integrity of 
some people in the province. During the medicare crisis in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I mentioned earlier when the Keep 
Our Doctors committees were running around the province, 
Woodrow Lloyd was the premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan at that time, and there was hot and heavy debate 
in the legislature. There was hot and heavy debate on coffee 
row. Families were torn. Families argued about who was right. 
Was it the Keep Our Doctors committee, or was it the 
performance of medicare, so that all people could have good 
access to good quality health care in the province? 
 
And I vaguely remember — I was very young when that was 
happening. I can remember, though, the tension that ran 
amongst families and friends and communities — communities 
that wanted to keep their medical facilities, that were afraid 
they’d lose them. Communities . . . I don’t know about riots, but 
almost came to the point of riots within our own province over 
a thing like health care. 
 
And one thing that always stood out in my mind, Mr. Speaker, 
was a meeting held by the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
in, I think, in the Trianon — was there a Trianon Ballroom here 
at one time? I believe the 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

543 
 

meeting was at the Trianon Ballroom and the building was 
packed. The Trianon ballroom was packed in the city of Regina. 
And Woodrow Lloyd, as premier during this medicare crisis, 
was asked to come and address the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. 
 
And there was no security at that time, not like the government 
has now in their property management corporation — they hire 
a bunch of ex-RCMP officers to protect them from bomb 
threats and scares on their person because of how they’ve 
devastated and wreaked havoc — there was no security at that 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Woodrow Lloyd entered the hall at the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. He had one other individual with him. That 
individual was a man by the name of Alvin Hewitt. And 
Woodrow Lloyd and Alvin Hewitt had to walk all the way up to 
the front of the Trianon Ballroom, and at the point they were 
walking up about half-way, someone from the audience jumped 
out and spit in Woodrow Lloyd’s face and asked him why he 
was trying to destroy medicare in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To tell you something about the integrity of that man, which 
doesn’t exist in any of the members opposite, Woodrow Lloyd 
walked to the front of the hall, never raising his hand to wipe 
the spit from his face, stood in front of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, gave his address, left the stage, walked 
out of the hall, after having stated his case for why people in 
Saskatchewan should have access to medicare — regardless of 
their financial position, they should have access to good 
medical treatment — and never having raised his hand to wipe 
the spit from his face. That’s integrity, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
integrity, Mr. Speaker, that none of the members have opposite. 
It’s courage, as well, as one of our members point out. 
 
What were members on that side doing during that time? They 
were the ones spitting in the face of Saskatchewan people. They 
incited, they incited the Keep Our Doctors committees. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just as a note to you, I find it very interesting 
when I’m in my seat, Mr. Speaker, if I say one word, you’ll call 
me to order. And I’ve had to raise my voice all evening to try 
and raise it above the roar that’s going on over there — the 
yelling and the hollering. And I refer back to the respect for the 
institution, so I don’t bring that . . . or I didn’t bring that to your 
attention. It’s almost 10 o’clock, so I’ll finish off my remarks 
and overlook what the members opposite are doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that they’re making fools of themselves 
over there. People like Alvin Hewitt and Woodrow Lloyd had 
the integrity that members on that side of the House will never 
understand, because they don’t have integrity. Saskatchewan 
people say, Mr. Speaker, this government stands for no hope, 
no opportunity, no compassion, no security, no fairness, no 
co-operation, no democracy. 
 
They don’t ask people in the province about doing anything; 
they just do it. They’re wreckers; they’re destroyers, and they 
will have to, I say again, Mr. Speaker, account. 

And for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that 
I’m honoured to support the amendment to this budget address 
that was put forward by the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake earlier this evening. And I would like to read the 
amendment. 
 
The amendment was moved by the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, sir, and seconded by myself: 
 

That all the words after the word “that” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
this Assembly regrets that the provincial budget imposes 
unfair tax increases on ordinary families, reduces funding 
for youth job creation and for agriculture, fails to restore 
the damage caused by provincial government cut-backs in 
health, education, and other social programs, and 
completely fails to address the causes of Saskatchewan’s 
population loss to other parts of Canada. 
 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that my remarks have been varied 
tonight, but as you would know in the knowledge that you’ve 
gained in your position as Deputy Speaker — but I do refer to 
you as Speaker in the Chair; I believe you take on that authority 
when you sit there — that we had many things to say because 
there is latitude allowed in two speeches that are given. One is 
the throne speech debate, the other is the budget debate, and I 
appreciate the latitude that you’ve given me here this evening 
without calling me to order. 
 
I quite honestly, Mr. Speaker, don’t remember any time being 
in this legislature, other than tonight, that I haven’t been called 
to order by you and sat back down in my seat. So I would have 
to think that I’ve learned a great deal from you over the course 
of my experience in this legislature, because you’ve not called 
me to order this evening for anything I’ve said. And I guess that 
means I’m paying particular attention to making sure that my 
language is parliamentary and that I haven’t been saying 
anything too loud. 
 
On the same token, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate that you 
haven’t called them to order, because it actually inspires me, in 
terms of the yelling and the hollering that they do from that side 
of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I personally think it’s disgraceful, the way 
that they act. The lack of decorum on that side of the House is a 
terrible, terrible shame, Mr. Speaker. But in any event, as I said, 
it does inspire me. 
 
I’ve enjoyed being here with you this evening, and I can’t think 
of anything in the world that I would pass this opportunity up 
for. And I want you to know that, barring unforeseen 
circumstances, I may be back tomorrow to give some 
inspiration, not only to our members but to your members as 
well, and for our federal colleagues that I’m sure, since their 
House is closed tonight, would be watching on satellite this 
provincial legislature here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
because the federal system 
  



 
April 4, 1989 

544 
 

has learned a great deal from the province. 
 
The other thing that people are watching right across Canada is 
to what happens to Conservatives in the province of 
Saskatchewan It’s a test case for the entire country, as many 
programs have been in the past. And we know, we know . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Being 10 o’clock, 
this House stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


