


















































June 8, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 8, 1989 
 

1721 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege again 
this year to introduce the students in grade 4 and 5 from W.F. 
Ready School in Wascana constituency. The students, of course, 
are well aware that they are accompanied by Marian Ready, who 
is the teacher for that class, grade 4 and 5, and also Miss Colleen 
Cleveland, who is the chaperon. 
 
I started off to say that the students are aware that Bill Ready was 
recently honoured with a degree at the University of Regina 
campus, honorary doctorate of laws degree, for his contribution 
to the public school system in Regina, and they can be very proud 
of that. 
 
So on behalf of all members, I will have an opportunity to meet 
with you in a little while, but will the members please join me in 
welcoming the students from grade 4 and 5 from W.F. Ready 
School in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you, through you, and to the 
Assembly, 12 grades 7 and 8 students from the town of Admiral 
in the Shaunavon constituency. It gives me great pleasure to 
introduce you people today. 
 
I don’t know if this is the first time you’ve been in the Assembly 
or not, but I hope you enjoy the working of the Assembly this 
afternoon. The first thing on the agenda will be question period, 
and right after question period, after 2:30, I will meet with you 
people out in room 214 to have drinks, and you will be able to 
ask some questions, and whatever, and hear your thoughts on 
how the Assembly is run. So with that, I would like everybody in 
the Assembly to help me welcome these students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
introduce four senior citizens from Indian Head that are seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. They’re in Regina today to participate in a 
life-styles survey that is being conducted at the (Dr.) Paul 
Schwann Centre. 
 
I look forward to meeting you after question period. I hope you 
enjoy the procedures of the House, and I look forward to 
discussing the survey, the life-styles survey, with you. Welcome 
here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, because the University of Regina 
is in my constituency, I’d like to add my comments to this 
research project, the life-styles research project, that is going on 
there. Ten groups, 10 communities from around the province will 
be invited in. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, that research reports indicate that 
physical activity can postpone the process of ageing. However, 
Mr. Speaker, there is not a great deal of research in that area, and 
that’s why the University of Regina, physical activities study, 
and the Department of Culture and Recreation are involved in 
this program. It’s a very good program, Mr. Speaker, and from 
that we’ll get some good research that’ll help us in the future. 
 
And I certainly welcome the Indian Head people who are taking 
part in that process. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Environmental Impact Study in Great Sand Hills Region 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask a 
question of the Minister of Mines and resources. Madam 
Minister, on May 26 your colleague, the Minister of the 
Environment, informed this House that Lone Pine Resources was 
asked to do an environmental impact study in the Great Sand 
Hills area before the government gives permission to the 
company to drill in this region. In 1980, a study by the 
Environment department concluded that the ecosystem of this 
region, and I quote, Madam Minister: 
 

  . . . is intolerant of greater than natural physical disturbance. 
 

In view of this conclusion, why have you asked the company to 
do another environmental impact study, and is it because the 
government has already decided that it is going to give the 
permission to this company to go ahead with the drilling, and 
you’re simply using this EIS (environmental impact study) in the 
same way as you used the Rafferty inadequate EIS to justify a 
decision you’ve already decided you’re going to make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, for the member’s 
information, when Energy and Mines gives out a permit, it is not 
a blanket permit to go ahead and do the exploration. And in fact 
it states very clearly on the permit that they will require certain 
permissions: one, being the landowner, the surface rights owner; 
and secondly, that they must do an impact study. 
 
Now the impact study, if it should indicate that a full assessment 
be done on the environment, then they must do that, and it is that 
process that they are in now, is the impact study. And then the 
Department of Environment will in fact determine whether they 
will require a full assessment study to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, since you already have 
a study which clearly says that any of this kind of activity will 
devastate this region from an environmental point of view, why 
have you therefore asked that there be another study made? 
What’s the purpose of that study,   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1722 
 

other than the fact that you want to cover up a decision which 
you know you’re going to already make with regard to the 
permits? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, there is no cover-up on this. 
The process has been outlined for some time and hasn’t changed 
much in terms of what the companies must do before they get the 
final approval to go ahead and do the drilling. 
 
Now the area — and I don’t know if the hon. member is familiar 
with it — but the area is very, very large. Now it is agreed that 
within that area there is a certain section that is highly vulnerable 
to activity. The companies to date have been on the outside of 
that area and are moving inward. The plan that Lone Pine has put 
forth in terms of drilling, not all those wells are moving towards 
the middle of that vulnerable area, but in fact are around the 
outside. 
 
So they will still have to do the impact study. And if the well 
should take place towards the centre of that vulnerable system, 
then they will probably have to do the full assessment study. If 
in fact that study should show that they will not be able to do their 
exploration without damage to the land, then they will not be 
given approval to go ahead and do the drilling. That’s pure and 
simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, are you saying to this 
House — a new question, Mr. Speaker — are you saying to this 
House that in spite of the fact that you already have a 
comprehensive 1980 study which tells the government that this 
kind of activity in this region will literally devastate the region, 
you are allowing the companies to infringe into the region, as you 
say, on a gradual basis, in spite of that study, and that you’ve 
asked them to do this EIS simply to be able to explain to the 
public that everything is going to be okay, in spite of that study 
which is already made? Is that what you’re saying, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the study that the companies 
must do — and this includes the impact study that they must 
submit to the Department of Energy and Mines, and to the full 
satisfaction of the Minister of Environment and the Department 
of Environment — if they should show that they cannot explore 
on this land without permanent damage being done to the land, 
then they will not receive the necessary approval that they would 
require to go ahead with the exploration. 
 
Now while the member from Regina Rosemont, in all his wisdom 
again already knows long beforehand, and anybody else, the 
study that the member is referring to, Mr. Speaker, the 1980 study 
does indicate that the Great Sand Hills area is very fragile, and 
some areas are more fragile than others within the Great Sand 
Hills area itself. 
 
Now my point is that the assessment study being done in fact is 
moving towards that most fragile area of the Great 

Sand Hills area. If they should show that they cannot do it 
without damage, then they will not receive the necessary 
approvals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Madam Minister, your record on environmental impact 
studies is a very dismal one on the part of that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now you’re trying to convince this House 
and the people of Saskatchewan that you’re going to protect the 
environment of the great sand dunes, but you don’t even enforce 
existing regulations that you have in place. 
 
And I want to bring to your attention a letter which your 
department received earlier this year to which you responded. It 
was a letter from secretary of the Cypress Surface Rights 
Association to your department, of which you and the Minister 
of Environment received a copy. And here is what it says. It was 
a letter requesting a public inquiry, and I quote: 
 

Into the disposal and containment of waste fluids generated 
by various oil companies working in our area, there have 
been numerous instances of dumping and blowing fluids 
into the air, on private lands, on surface leases, and on R.M. 
road allowances. 
 

Now, Madam Minister, your response to that letter was that you 
would not institute an inquiry. You have not decided to follow 
up and enforce your own regulations. Why have you not taken 
the steps that are necessary to deal with this problem of dumping 
this environmental-damaging water and waste and brine into the 
R.M. ditches and places on private lands where it’s not supposed 
to be dumped? Where have you been on this matter, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, there was no need for an 
inquiry into the incident that the hon. member from Regina North 
East is talking about. For this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just let it go on, let it go. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, that’s not true. If you would allow me 
to carry on, you will be informed on it. 
 
There was no need for an inquiry. The regulations are very 
specific, through Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. And in fact 
the spills that did take place, the companies were investigated and 
they had to clean up and restore if there were any damage done. 
That took place. 
 
That’s why there was no need for an inquiry, because the field 
officers of Energy and Mines did in fact go out and look at it. So 
did the Department of Environment. And the companies were 
required to clean up the spills and to make sure that it was left as 
it was before they started. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1723 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary. A final supplementary to 
the minister. Madam Minister, in light of your answer, will you 
then make a commitment to this House that you will provide a 
report on where the companies have had to do the clean-up, what 
the locations were, and which companies had to do the clean-up, 
Madam Minister? Will you give a commitment to the House to 
do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I will endeavour to gather the 
information of the spills that we’ve had. I’m assuming that the 
member is asking on the west side, in that particular area, and I 
will send it to him. 
 

Environmental Impact Study on Mine Project 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting 
Minister of the Environment. Mr. Minister, you will be aware 
that Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting is developing a mine in 
Manitoba near Namew Lake, which straddles our border, but the 
majority of that lake is sitting right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are concerns about the environmental impact of the mine 
which is being studied by the Manitoba government, and your 
government said it would monitor the report. Could you tell us 
the status of that report and what it says about heavy metals and 
other pollutants getting into the lake and the Saskatchewan River 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with it. I’ll 
take notice and bring the answer back to the House on behalf of 
the Minister of Environment. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — While you’re taking notice, Mr. Minister, there 
is further information. In regards to the fish in the area, we 
recognize from before that the sulphur dioxide emissions from 
the mining company, Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting, has 
knocked off trout and also the sturgeon in that area of Sturgeon 
Lake and Cumberland. Now we know that this, through the talks 
that have taken place so far, that it’ll also destroy and kill the 
northern pike. 
 
Do you feel that the destruction of fish at this stage makes it very, 
very imperative that Saskatchewan government take strong 
action in this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has taken notice. The member has 
asked him to bring further information, and I think that’s 
self-explanatory. 
 
Order. The minister took notice. The member stood up and said, 
would you bring further information, which is correct — which 
is correct — and we will move to the next question. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — My next question, Mr. Speaker, has to 

relate to the operation of the mine. We know that in the operation 
of the mine they struck salt water, and millions of salt water brine 
is entering the water system. We also know that there was holes 
that were dug in the mine that were leaking right into the mine. I 
want to know, Mr. Minister, what will you do to rectify this 
pollution that is entering our Saskatchewan river system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I said a moment ago 
I’m not familiar with it and I will have to take notice and bring 
the answer back to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — We’re perhaps getting things a bit confused 
here. Let’s just go over it again, and I think it will make 
everything simpler. The member asked a question. The minister 
took notice. Then he wanted further information, which is 
absolutely correct. If he wishes further information on that he can 
ask the minister now, and then we’ll move to a different question. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, then I will direct my question to 
the minister in charge of northern Saskatchewan. In regards to 
the North, Madam Minister, the water is going to be directly 
affected, which will affect the drinking water system which is the 
only good, solid water that Cumberland House gets. 
 
In regards to the aspect of it affecting also the tourist industry and 
also the fishing industry, what type of alternatives are you going 
to propose, Mr. Minister, when the destruction of the livelihood 
of the people and their drinking water is definitely affected in the 
long run in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member I would 
say that that is an assumption on your part. In all my meetings 
with Northerners, this particular mine and the operation of this 
mine has never been brought up to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will direct another question to the 
minister because she doesn’t seem to know what’s going on in 
the North, and most particularly in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, there was letters written to the 
Minister of the Environment where the band was evidently 
concerned about the environmental damage in that area. And that 
letter has already been written to the Minister of the 
Environment. I would like to know, Madam Minister, what you 
are going to do, along with the Minister of the Environment, to 
help out the communities of Cumberland House and Sturgeon 
Landing and the Indian bands in that area to make sure that we 
have good drinking water and a long-term basis of economic 
development, and making sure that the environment is in top 
condition the way it is now. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1724 
 

member does not know what the northern affairs secretariat does 
— obviously. The northern affairs secretariat acts on behalf of all 
Northerners to access various departments when they’re having 
problems. Obviously the letter was directed to the Minister of the 
Environment. It was not copied to me, and the Acting Minister 
of the Environment has taken notice with the commitment to 
bring the information back to the House. 
 

Environmental Protection Legislation 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, given that we are in the midst of 
Environment Week, and in the absence of the Minister of the 
Environment, I guess I will direct my question to the House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have here a copy of the Hansard of your 
government’s throne speech, delivered in this House March 8, 
1989. In this throne speech, you make some very grand promises 
about environmental protection legislation. You say, and I quote: 
 

My government will introduce new legislation to protect the 
earth’s ozone layer. 
 

You say in this, and I quote: 
 

Legislation will be introduced to allow a tax on 
environmentally unsafe products. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the House Leader is: where is the 
legislation to protect the ozone layer; where is the legislation to 
tax environmentally unsafe products? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, there will be legislation 
coming forward dealing with a tax of environmentally unsafe 
products, and I happen to know that it’s very close to being 
tabled, Mr. Speaker. It’s only a few short weeks ago that the 
Minister of Environment announced the environmental round 
table with very eminent, qualified persons sitting on that round 
table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There will be legislation coming forward dealing with soil 
conservation and water management, and we’d be happy to deal 
with them all, Mr. Speaker, the minute that we can vote on what 
has become known as the bell resolution, so that we can prevent 
the hijacking of this place by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question. Mr. Minister, I 
asked two questions. I got a half an answer to one of those 
questions. Mr. Minister, my question is: where are the legislation 
. . . when can we expect the legislation providing taxes on 
environmentally unsafe projects, and when can we expect the 
legislation to protect the ozone layer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll move them forward 
just as soon as we can deal with them, but we’ve got some other 
matters to deal with first. The first, Mr. Speaker, is to bring some 
respect back to our democratic 

institution, and that’s our priority at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, I believe this is day 53 of this legislative session. I ask 
you this. What is more important to you and to your government, 
the protection of the ozone layer or hobbling the opposition, 
privatizing SaskPower, and selling off our potash resources to 
foreigners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’re quite prepared to vote on the 
resolution this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. We’re quite prepared to 
vote on the resolution whenever they are prepared to vote on it. 
We’ve heard every possible argument they could put up. Some 
of them made sense, but not many, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should also point out, while we’re on day 53 or day 54 or 55, or 
whatever it is, there were 17 days, Mr. Speaker, 17 very 
unproductive days when they hijacked this place, Mr. Speaker, a 
distinct lack of respect for democratic institutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian “88” Fertilizer Plants 
 
Mr. Solomon: — In the absence of the Minister of Trade and 
Investment and the Premier, my question will be directed to the 
Deputy Premier, and it concerns your government’s inability to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan the truth about the proposed 
Canadian “88” energy fertilizer plants in Rosetown, Melfort and 
Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Minister, following question period on Tuesday, your Trade 
and Investment minister told the media that this company’s plans 
to decentralize came about after the announcement of the Cargill 
plant. Greg Noval, president of the company, disagrees, and he 
says: 
 

What Andrew came out and said is completely untrue. 
We’ve got to set the record straight. 
 

He says your government knew the full proposal from the very 
beginning. Knowing as the people of Saskatchewan do, Minister, 
your penchant for twisting the truth, and your colleague’s 
penchant for twisting the truth, I believe most people will take 
Mr. Noval’s side of the story. And I ask you, why did your 
government once again try and mislead people about this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea what the 
Minister of Trade and Investment may or may not have said to 
the media. I have no idea what members opposite, what 
interpretation they may put on what they read in the media. So 
you see, the farther you get away from the actual fact of it, the 
more distorted it becomes, Mr. Speaker. And I suppose if you put 
it through a couple more of his pockets, members, it would take 
another twist   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1725 
 

before it got out on the floor. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, I sat in on one very, very 
early meeting with energy “88” people, and in that very early 
meeting — and I know nothing of what’s gone on since then — 
that one very early meeting that I sat in on, Mr. Speaker, there 
was only talk of one project in Rosetown, and I had not heard of 
the other projects, period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Minister, to quote further Mr. Noval, and I quote: 
 

These guys are just trying to cover their butts here. They 
look bad and they should look bad. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My question to you is this: given that your 
government is obviously trying to cover up the fact that your love 
of megaprojects has put you in the position of betraying a smaller 
industry which would have benefitted rural Saskatchewan, was 
the Minister of Trade and Investment designated as spokesman 
for this cover-up, because you and your cabinet colleagues are 
very familiar with his ability to not let the facts get in the way of 
an excuse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit 
about some of these megaprojects that the member opposite 
alluded to. We have one in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, called 
Phillips Cable; I think it employs about 20 or 30 people. We have 
one, Federal Pioneer, Mr. Speaker, that will employ maybe 100 
and 150 people, I think, in Lumsden, Mr. Speaker. We have one 
in Saskatoon called DuPont Plastics. We have one in Saskatoon, 
SK Turbines. We have one in a small town in the north-west, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is making linemen’s gloves. I think there are two 
jobs in this plant. They are making gloves for SaskPower. We are 
making a 107 products in Saskatchewan that weren’t made prior 
to 1982, being sourced in Saskatchewan by SaskPower. 
 
Now he’s telling us that we’re in love with megaprojects, Mr. 
Speaker. We like those too. We have Weyerhaeuser. We have 
two upgraders — two upgraders, Mr. Speaker — NewGrade and 
the bi-provincial upgrader. We have and will have the Rafferty 
and the Shand. And yes, Mr. Speaker, we will have a successful, 
up and running, and a very proud GigaText, one that all of us can 
be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, your government and your Minister of Trade and 
Investment has implied that there is something evil about a 
company asking for a guaranteed interest rate, that it’s a grant 
that the taxpayers have to fork over, and they shouldn’t do so. 
Keeping in mind that this company had asked for a $10 million 
loan at 7 per cent, 

can you tell us how much of an unacceptable government grant 
Weyerhaeuser received for its 8.5 per cent guaranteed rate on a 
loan of $248 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, that 
they said would never be built, the paper plant that would never 
be built, Mr. Speaker, and it’s out there churning out paper — the 
largest paper plant, fine paper plant in Canada, Mr. Speaker. It 
now has a sheeting — 30 million, I think — sheeting facility built 
on the end of it, or being built on the end of it. They have a lime 
plant there that wasn’t there before with about 20 jobs in it, Mr. 
Speaker. They have doubled the capacity of Saskatoon 
Chemicals, Mr. Speaker. What’s that lumber mill out there? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Big River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Big River lumber mill, they’ve improved 
that, rebuilt it, redesigned it, more productive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Weyerhaeuser deal was a good deal, and I 
continue to believe that it was a good deal. And the people in 
Prince Albert, in spite of the fact that your colleagues are against 
it, the people of Prince Albert like it, Mr. Speaker. Now let’s talk 
about some of the smaller projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are this day in the 
midst of environment week. We have a number of major 
environmental concerns in this province and in this world. Rather 
than this day, day 53 of the Legislative Assembly, rather than 
debating important legislation that is supposed to be introduced 
dealing with the environment, what has this government judged 
to be the most important issue facing the province of 
Saskatchewan? Bell-ringing in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who else in this province holds that view? Only 
members opposite, I submit, only this island of arrogance that sits 
across from us in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this motion that we are debating, 
and have debated, and will apparently debate for some time yet 
— this motion is unprecedented   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1726 
 

because it has for its motivation a partisan political purpose. Its 
motivation of course is to do through the back door what they 
couldn’t do through the front door, and that’s to privatize 
SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It is unprecedented, Mr. Speaker, it is 
unprecedented because in the history of this legislature, never 
before has a rule change of this degree been rammed through or 
attempted to be rammed through by a majority government 
without consultation, negotiation, and an all-party committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said a moment ago we sit across from an island of 
arrogance; that any government would attempt to do this in a 
legislature, to ram through a rule change unilaterally, is evidence 
of that arrogance. Mr. Speaker, I am not the only one, and we are 
not the only ones who now view this government as that island 
of arrogance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I refer to an editorial that appeared in the Swift 
Current Sun on May 29, 1989. In the Swift Current Sun, 
published in the city of Swift Current May 29, 1989, the headline 
of that editorial, Mr. Speaker, is this. The Swift Current Sun in 
its editorial says, “The Devine government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, members opposite are beginning to 
cross the floor. It may be a good sign. 
 
And is it any wonder that members opposite would be 
considering crossing the floor or resigning or leaving because of 
editorials that appear in newspapers across this province like this 
one from the Swift Current Sun, May 29, 1989, the headline of 
this editorial being, “The Devine government shows its 
contempt.” 
 
That’s what we see with this motion we’re now debating — 
contempt, Mr. Speaker — contempt not only for this institution, 
contempt not only for the opposition, but contempt for the people 
of Saskatchewan, because the people of Saskatchewan know 
what this motion’s about. They know it’s this government’s 
effort to privatize SaskPower. They’ve spoken on that issue. 
 
They’ve told this government that they’re clearly wrong to 
change the direction. This motion is clearly contemptuous — 
contemptuous of this legislature, contemptuous of the traditions 
of this House, contemptuous of the opposition, and 
contemptuous of the people of Saskatchewan. The Swift Current 
Sun has it right. “The Devine government shows its contempt”, 
that’s what it says. And, Mr. Speaker, the editorial that I refer to 
begins with this sentence, begins with this sentence: 
 

The provincial government seems to think lately that it can 
do anything it wants; drink our liquor from an old fruit jar, 
slander our names all over the place, even step on our blue 
suede shoes. 
 

That’s how the Swift Current Sun begins their editorial. Now 
listen how they conclude that editorial. They, in the editorial, 
give examples and evidence of how this government thinks it can 
do anything it wants. They refer to the Barber Commission being 
set up and financed in 

spite of public opinion. And the editorial here refers to what it 
describes as the Willard Lutz affair and the Minister of Justice’s 
unprecedented attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
It says in the editorial to that issue, “The Tories” (I quote) 
responded shamefully.” The editorial talks about the Securities 
Commission order to stop the SaskEnergy hearings and 
advertisements. It reminds the people of Swift Current what this 
government did in that case — well, it didn’t like the law so it 
just changed the law for its own benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the editor of the Swift Current Sun, reflecting 
feelings in that community, said this at the conclusion of his 
editorial or her editorial, I’m not sure: 
 

The rest of us must play by the rules. The Devine 
government makes them up as it goes along. In short, it does 
as it damn well pleases. 
 

And that’s a quote, Mr. Speaker. “In short,” says the editorial of 
the Swift Current Sun, “this government does as it damn well 
pleases.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see clear evidence of that in this motion, in this 
unprecedented, unprecedented kind of motion where a majority 
government comes into this legislature and attempts to ram 
through a rule change, contemptuous of the traditions of this 
House, contemptuous of the traditions of British parliaments 
across the globe, contemptuous of the opposition, but most of all 
contemptuous of public opinion in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said at the conclusion of my remarks yesterday 
afternoon that I view this motion to be inappropriate and wrong 
on at least five counts. 
 
Inappropriate and wrong, first of all, because it is proposed 
unilaterally, proposed by the government without discussion of 
the opposition. 
 
Secondly, it’s inappropriate and wrong, in my view, because this 
motion is being made, this rule change is being proposed, not 
calmly and rationally, but being proposed in the heat of battle, 
when obviously the battle — the political battle — is fierce. In 
the midst of that conflict, the government seeks to choose a rule 
change. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I feel this motion, as it now stands and is 
presented to the House, is inappropriate, is wrong, because it sets 
a precedent, and the precedent it sets is a precedent that no 
opposition — past, present, or future — could ever live with. It’s 
a dangerous precedent that I don’t think any government should 
set so that any future government could look back on. 
 
Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps most importantly, perhaps 
most importantly, I view this motion that we’re now debating to 
be inappropriate, and in that sense wrong, because we are 
debating this motion at the exclusion of important other 
government business that we should be debating in this House. 
 
And fifthly, Mr. Speaker, I believe it to be inappropriate,   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1727 
 

and therefore wrong, for one single rule to be changed without a 
wider look at all of the rules which affect this Legislative 
Assembly and its functioning. If we are going to do rule 
changing, if we are going to look at the rules of this Assembly, it 
is only appropriate, in my view, that we should look at many of 
the rules of this Assembly, not singling out one, but doing that 
which is right and looking at all of the rules of this Assembly. 
And everyone admits, rules of the Assembly will from time to 
time be changed to meet the needs of a new day. 
 
So with those five reasons in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
carry on this debate. 
 
Point number one: I view this motion to be inappropriate and 
wrong because it is being introduced unilaterally. Mr. Speaker, 
as you well know, the rules of this Assembly, the rules of the 
legislature, govern all members. These are not rules that simply 
affect members of the government or members of the opposition. 
When rules are made in this legislature, they affect all members. 
 
Is it therefore unreasonable to suggest that when rules are to be 
changed, that all members should be involved; that all members 
have an interest in these changes? Is it not unreasonable to 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, therefore that all members should be 
involved? 
 
In this case, the government has excluded the opposition from 
being part of this rule change; the rule change is being introduced 
unilaterally. Because, Mr. Speaker, the rules of this House affect 
all members, I would argue that all members should be, and have 
always been in past, involved in discussing the rule change. And 
so when the rule change is brought to the House, there is already 
agreement, and little debate will take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these rule changes affect the role of all MLAs, 
whether we’re on the government side or on the opposition side. 
And therefore, if we are affected as MLAs and functioning in this 
House, then our responsibilities and role within the province, 
within our democracy, is also affected. We are elected, Mr. 
Speaker, to serve our constituents and to serve the province as a 
whole. 
 
If rule changes introduced in this House affect either the 
operation of the government or the operation of opposition, if 
rule changes affect government members or opposition 
members, then our role in the society is affected. And so I would 
argue, Mr. Speaker, that when rules are changed in this place 
there is an effect in the wider functioning of government. If that 
is going to take place, it’s my argument, Mr. Speaker, that all 
members should be part of the discussion; that it should not be 
made unilaterally by one side or the other side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it can be argued somehow that it is justified that 
a majority government could introduce a motion like the one we 
are now debating and unilaterally pass that motion, then in 
essence what that is saying is that we have a government who 
cares not a whit for an opposition, who takes the view that 
democracy is better served without the voice of opposition. That 
can be the only conclusion. If a government wishes to ram a rule 
change through involving this House, involving the 

parliament, the legislature, and it seeks to do it unilaterally, then 
that is saying, not so subtly, that opposition has no role, that 
somehow democracy would be better served if there were not an 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I for one find that unacceptable. I find that 
unacceptable in our British parliamentary tradition; therefore, I 
argue that a unilateral introduction of a rule change into a 
parliament, into a legislature, is inappropriate. Therefore, I feel 
this motion is wrong. 
 
(1445) 
 
If I might draw an analogy, Mr. Speaker. If we are considered to 
be opposing teams involved in a contest, then the analogy I would 
draw is that what we have here is that the losing team, the team 
that knows they’re in trouble, is somehow in the midst of the 
game seeking to change the rules. Now who could consider that 
to be fair when all players on both teams are affected by the same 
rules? Who would consider it fair or reasonable or responsible 
that one of the teams would unilaterally change the rules, 
particularly when that team find itself in difficulty? So that is my 
first point, Mr. Speaker, that the motion is inappropriate because 
it is begin introduced and rammed through unilaterally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier and wish to say again that I think this 
motion, its introduction at this time is inappropriate because of 
its timing; because it has come in the midst of a very strenuous 
political battle, not only in this legislature, but across the 
province. I reviewed some of the history that brought this motion 
to the House yesterday. I need not do that again; others have. 
 
But obviously this motion came as the government’s response to 
not only the opposition’s ringing of the bells in this House, but 
to the public response. Very first thing back, we were introduced 
with a motion by the government to change the ringing of the 
bells. That kind of timing, Mr. Speaker, in my view is wrong. No 
reasonable, rational men and women would want to change such 
fundamental rules of a democratic institution in that kind of 
atmosphere, it seems to me. Surely it would be more appropriate 
for a group of members from this House, from both sides, when 
this session is over to sit down together, when the heat of battle 
in this place is over, when some of the public issue has died, to 
sit down rationally and reasonably, apart from this place, apart 
from this setting, and review this rule and all the rules very 
carefully. I do not see that as unreasonable. I see that, in fact, as 
the direction we ought to be going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite members opposite who have not spoken in 
the debate, I invite them to tell me why that’s an unreasonable 
proposition. I invite them to say to us why it is that it’s somehow 
appropriate to be debating this kind of rule change in the heat of 
battle. I invite them, when they stand in this House to speak in 
this debate, I invite them to show me precedent where a majority 
government has instilled a rule change on its parliament at the 
exclusion of discussions with the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge members opposite. I invite them to 
respond to these questions and many others that I’ll   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1728 
 

want to raise. Why, members opposite, why is now the time? Tell 
us why that this is the time that this rule should be changed. Tell 
us where is the precedent of a government inflicting a rule change 
on a legislature unilaterally. I invite members to do that. 
 
Members from the government side who have spoken in this 
debate thus far have not spoken to those questions. I invite the 
next speaker on the government side to do that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why at the exclusion of all other 
business? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And as my colleague from Regina North asks: 
why this debate at the exclusion of all other business? Why? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see this rule to be inappropriate as well because it 
does set a precedent. There can be no question about that. If, in 
fact, the government is successful in changing the rules without 
the very traditional legislative committee and review and report 
to all members, then that is a precedent, a precedent to which 
future governments can look back on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government is allowed to change this rule, if 
this motion were to pass the House and the government therefore 
would have had set this precedent, where would that leave us in 
terms of other rules changes? Is it unreasonable to ask, from an 
opposition point of view, which rule is next? Which procedure of 
the House is next? 
 
Could it be, Mr. Speaker, that if a government — and I’m not 
saying this government; any government — if this kind of 
precedent exists, could it be that some day after an extremely 
difficult question period a government caucus would meet and 
say, well we can’t handle this. We just can’t handle this, so let’s 
limit question period to 15 minutes, or let’s limit it to 10 minutes, 
or let’s do away with it altogether. I mean, question period has 
not always been a part of this legislature or the British 
parliamentary tradition. 
 
This kind of precedent exists, that a government who finds that a 
rule is giving it a political problem, if the precedent then says the 
government unilaterally can simply change the rule, what is to 
prevent this government or some future government from doing 
just that? 
 
What would prevent this government from deciding that certain 
reports do not need to be tabled? What would prevent this 
government or any future government from unilaterally changing 
the rule to say that, well, we’re only going to sit one day a week? 
 
All of these rules, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, did not come 
about quickly. They’ve evolved over time, with the changing 
needs, but they’ve always been done with the co-operation and 
the negotiation of all members. To set a precedent which says a 
government, of its own initiative, in a time of obvious political 
trouble — there’s no debate about that — can therefore come into 
the legislature and change the rules of the game, change the rules 
of the legislature for all concerned, that, Mr. Speaker, I think is a 

very dangerous precedent. 
 
And to follow up in the observations made by the member from 
Regina Centre, it seems to me the only government that would 
want to set that kind of precedent is a government that’s 
absolutely sure that it will never find its way into opposition. The 
only government that would dare set that kind of precedent is a 
government that is so arrogant that it thinks it will never, ever be 
defeated. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, history well shows that in this province and 
in every democratic nation and province in the world, history 
shows that governments do not last for ever. In this province it is 
a significant feat to win three elections in a row. Few 
governments have sat three terms in a row. Most governments 
are defeated after two terms, and some after one. And some of us 
wish that would have been happening in 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only government that would want to set this 
kind of precedent, where a government can unilaterally change 
the rules of the House, is a government that assumes it’s going to 
have those levers of power for ever. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious in this province that this certainly 
isn’t going to be true after the next provincial election. There will 
be a change in this province, and I ask members opposite, do you 
want that precedent set for some future government? 
 
An Hon. Member: — If you’re so confident, let it go. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The Hon. Minister of Finance has a question. 
You see, Mr. Minister, I’m concerned that a Liberal government 
might take over some day, and then what do you think they would 
do to your members? 
 
An Hon. Member: — He might be part of it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — He may be part of it; he may be part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I object to this motion on that basis, that it is 
precedent-setting. It is the precedent of a school-yard bully, a 
school-yard bully being able to inflict his or her will on the school 
yard. And, Mr. Speaker, no one appreciates a school-yard bully, 
and we don’t need that kind of precedent in the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that the rules of the legislature were 
not all crafted in an instant; indeed, they’ve evolved over 
decades, over centuries. It is a process of evolution that rules 
change to meet the needs of a new day. But that kind of process 
only happens with mutual discussion and negotiation. That kind 
of evolution has never happened with a unilateral action of a 
majority government inflicting its will, particularly a majority 
government that has itself in trouble. So, Mr. Speaker, it would 
be, I think, a very dangerous precedent to set in this House, if in 
fact the motion passes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that we should be debating this motion today, in my 
view, is totally inappropriate because we are debating a rule 
change for the Legislative Assembly, and have done for some 
days now at the exclusion of so much other important, important 
government business. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1729 
 

Mr. Speaker, I had the rare privilege yesterday morning to speak 
to a group of about 500, maybe more, public school students in 
the city of Moose Jaw, and many of their parents and many of 
their teachers. They were gathered yesterday morning in Moose 
Jaw to celebrate Canada Day. Mr. Speaker, if you’d permit me 
the aside, it was a very moving experience to be on a platform 
and to look out over that crowd of children dressed primarily in 
red and white, and waving the flags and the balloons, and singing 
O Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I left that group of young people, kindergarten, 
grade 1, grade 2, grade 3, their parents and teachers, and came 
into this legislature to find a government — and it wasn’t much 
different, I guess — to find a government who yesterday names 
the most significant issue facing the people of Saskatchewan as 
a rule change in the provincial legislature. And I thought to 
myself, if those children could be consulted, and their parents and 
their teachers, would they say that the uppermost thing on their 
minds yesterday was whether the rules in the Saskatchewan 
legislature were changed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I may be wrong, but it seems to me that many 
of the children, well, they’re concerned that their parents have 
jobs, and they worry about their parents and their job security. 
And some of those children know that their parents are going to 
have to leave the province to seek work. Those children know 
that some of their class-rooms are overcrowded, particularly in 
the south-west corner of my constituency. Those are the kind of 
issues that, it seems to me, that if the children were asked, they 
would expect their government — their government — to be 
dealing with. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remind you that the group of men and 
women opposite are the Government of Saskatchewan. They are 
the government. We may wish it not to be so, but it is. It’s fact. 
That group of men and women are the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and it is their responsibility to govern on behalf 
of all the people of the province, and to govern to meet the needs 
and the hopes and the aspirations of those people, and, I would 
submit, also to listen to the wishes. 
 
This government is the government for that group of children and 
their parents and teachers who were gathered yesterday in Moose 
Jaw. I submit, this government has therefore grown completely 
out of touch, completely out of touch, because I come to the 
legislature expecting to meet a government that wants to deal 
with the real issues facing the people of the province. And what 
do we find? A government that considers bell-ringing, a change 
in bell-ringing, to be the most important issue. And there can be 
no other interpretation of events because it is the government 
who sets the agenda for the Legislative Assembly. Daily this 
government decides what issues — except Tuesday’s when time 
is given to the opposition and private members — on every other 
day of the week it is the government that introduces the agenda 
for the House. 
 
So yesterday a number of important issues were raised during the 
question period facing women and families in this province — a 
number of very significant and 

important issues dealing with family poverty, with day care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened after the question period? Well 
rather than the family protection legislation; rather than dealing 
with, for instance, the estimates from the Minister of Social 
Services, the government chose not to do those things but to 
introduce this debate again on bell-ringing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the government opposite who sets the agenda. 
The obvious tradition, well-known tradition of the parliamentary 
system, is that the government proposes and the opposition 
disposes. It is the government that proposes, it is the government 
that sets the agenda, it is the government that decides what is 
important to be dealing with at any given time. 
 
This session, and this particular motion, would indicate this 
government has one priority, and that’s privatization, because 
obviously we’ve dealt with little or nothing else. Because this 
motion is clearly meshed with the privatization agenda, it is one 
further example that the goal of the government, the agenda of 
the government is privatization. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, in question period, this being Environment 
Week, a number of questions were raised concerning 
environmental issues: concern over the Great Sand Hills, concern 
from northern Saskatchewan, concern about the legislation — 
important concerns — concerns about the ozone layer. And the 
government has made commitments, has made promises, grand 
promises that they intend to do something, sometime in this 
session. We’ve got the promises but we don’t have any action. 
 
(1500) 
 
Today, the government has opportunity to put on the table the 
legislation. No reason, no matter what the agenda, they could 
have done that, but they chose not to. Today the opportunity 
exists to debate that important legislation, but what does the 
government choose to do? They government chooses that we 
should be debating a change to the legislative rules. 
 
Significant, significant in this province, agreed by all members 
on every side of the House, is a debt crisis facing Saskatchewan 
farmers. We could be dealing with that today, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has introduced its legislation. We have indicated 
over and over and over again we are prepared to debate that 
legislation. We are prepared to debate any estimate the 
government wishes to bring forward. What are we delivered on 
a daily basis? Day after day in this House we are delivered the 
motion that would seek to unilaterally change the rules in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my judgement there are very few if any people 
beyond this little island of arrogance across from us who would 
see this as the most important issue for their legislators to be 
debating. And, Mr. Speaker, if this government will come to its 
senses, will listen to what the people of the province are saying 
just once, they will know that their . . . they want their 
government to move   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1730 
 

forward. 
 
They may not like the agenda of the government, and goodness 
gracious, most don’t in this province, but at least they say to this 
government: move forward with your agenda; propose what 
you’re going to propose; let’s see what you’re going to do; let’s 
see you come through with some of the promises you made in 
your throne speech. We’re already at day 53. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to be here a long, long, long time 
— a long time — to debate the important issues facing the people 
of this province. This issue, this motion which we are debating 
now is, in my view, totally inappropriate because it is being done 
at the exclusion of so much, so much government business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite are calling for a vote. Mr. 
Speaker, I tell you, I tell you, I will not this day, nor at any future 
day, vote for the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, when the member calls for a 
vote, I assure him that across this province others are calling for 
a vote. They want a vote on the future of this government as soon 
as possible in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And that for sure would settle this issue, Mr. 
Speaker. That for sure would settle this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend some time proposing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake — 
why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I’d like to ask for leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
House, a group of 24 students from my home area, from Prince 
Albert, from St. Michael’s School. We have with us today 24 
grade 6 students from St. Michael’s, and I’d like to welcome 
them to the legislature. 
 
Along with them are their teacher, John Forget, chaperons Mrs. 
Gyoerik, Mrs. Ferchuk, and Mr. R. Krammer. I would be meeting 
with them for pictures and drinks later. And I would like to ask 
all members to welcome them, give them a warm welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake in 
welcoming the students here today from St. Michael’s School. 
Welcome to the legislature. I too hope that you enjoy your stay, 
and I know that you will enjoy your visit with my colleague from 
. . . the MLA from P.A.-Duck Lake. I know that for a fact. 
 
Students, we are now in the midst of a debate regarding a rule 
change for the functioning of our legislature. I’m speaking to 
that, and at the conclusion of my remarks I’m aware that a 
government member will be standing and debating the issue as 
well. I am opposing in my remarks . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. It was ruled 
last week that members of the legislature were not to involve the 
galleries in the debate. I thought that was the ruling that was 
stated. If that’s the case, I would ask that you bring that to the 
attention of the hon. member who is just speaking. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the tradition has been in the House, 
and I’ve noticed members of the government benches often 
giving short explanations of what’s happening in the House when 
they’re introducing guests. I mean, if we want to change that rule 
as well, we certainly can. But this has been a tradition in the 
Assembly, and I’m not sure why the Minister of Finance is upset 
about it. It seems to me explaining what the debate is about to the 
students is an important part of democracy. But if you want to 
change that rule as well, you’ve got the majority to do it, 
obviously. But I think it’s a good idea for members on either side 
to give short explanations of what’s happening in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I believe the . . . I 
would just reply to the issue which the Minister of Finance has 
raised. As I indicated last week when a similar issue arose, that 
at that time I said I didn’t feel it was a good idea to involve our 
guests with the debate in the House, and that applies to members 
from both sides of the House, of course, and I say that today. We 
saw kind of an altercation take place last week because of it, and 
there’s a potential for one today. Perhaps if hon. members would 
just speak to each other and just allow our guests to listen, they 
will get the explanation that we’re trying to give them. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know that 
during the visits with MLAs — and that means MLAs on all sides 
— outside the House, MLAs will have an opportunity to discuss 
the House with the students, and I’m sure that’s going to happen 
this afternoon. I’m sure of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend some time in this debate, 
because I have said consistently from the beginning of my 
remarks, I have indicated over and over again that I see this 
motion to be inappropriate and wrong, and so I feel some 
responsibility to bring to the House what I would see as an 
appropriate way for us to go   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1731 
 

in this situation; what I would see as being the appropriate way 
that rules could be changed. And by appropriate I mean 
maintaining the long tradition that has been part of this legislature 
and, to my knowledge, all legislatures in our Commonwealth and 
British parliamentary system. I feel some responsibility to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have said over and over again that I think this motion is 
inappropriate for a variety of reasons, and therefore I feel it’s 
somewhat incumbent upon me to describe to you, sir, and to the 
House, to other members, what I would see as an appropriate way 
to deal with this issue. Obviously, if we’re ever going to get on 
to the important work of government business, something must 
be done, Mr. Speaker, and again I would appreciate some 
response from members opposite when they enter this debate. 
I’m optimistic. I have confidence in some members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker; I have confidence — some. I have less confidence in 
the front bench, I must say, but certainly some in the back bench, 
I think, are reasonable, are reasonable members and do want to 
see the work of this House proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously we will have our political differences, 
but I hold some members opposite, particularly in the back 
bench, in some regard. And I would hope that they will enter the 
debate and respond to the kind of proposals that I hope to make 
and that other members in the House have made; indeed, a 
proposal not unlike that proposal made by their own Minister of 
Justice in this House. 
 
There is nothing radical or newsworthy in what I am about to 
propose, Mr. Speaker. Simply I would propose that a committee 
of legislative members from both sides of the House — two or 
three from that side now . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why did you turn it down the first time? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — You see, the minister from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says, why did we turn it down. He 
knows we did not turn it down. He knows we sat down with his 
Minister of Justice and then it was his Minister of Justice who 
pulled it. He knows that. Why does he consistently say these 
things from his seat? Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to have that 
member — he’s a new member — to sit on the committee. He 
could bring up a fresh perspective as a new member. I’d be happy 
to see him sit on the committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposal is simply that we establish a committee 
of members from both sides. That’s been the tradition in past. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Just allow the member to 
continue with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
propose that that committee of members could begin — 
including the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg if the 
government saw fit to make him a member of the committee — 
I would propose that that committee could begin meeting during 
the session. I would propose that it should meet outside of the 
session 

to escape what I’ve pointed out earlier as what I’ve described the 
heat of the battle, that this is not really the appropriate time to be 
making final decisions on rules. I propose it could meet during 
the session. I propose it could meet then following the session, 
intersessionally. 
 
And after a process of meeting, of reviewing the rules of other 
assemblies in Canada and across the Commonwealth, the process 
of discussion . . . and I would propose also in a process of public 
hearings, that the people of the province could have some input 
to what happens in this . . . Well again the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg finds that amusing. He finds it amusing 
that we might hold public hearings on rule changes to the 
legislature. So that not only, I guess, are the opposition not 
supposed to have a role in rule changes, but the public also are 
not supposed to have a role. The only people in the province I 
guess who have the ability to deal with rules in this House are 
sitting across from us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the island of arrogance speaks again. The Devine 
government quote from the Swift Current Sun . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the hon. member not to use 
other member’s names. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize. I 
should have said prior to that: I would like to again quote the 
Swift Current Sun in their editorial when they entitled the 
editorial and describe this group of men and women as, “The 
Devine government shows its contempt.” That’s from the Swift 
Current Sun, Mr. Speaker, a direct quote. Those are not my 
words. 
 
We see that kind of contempt when members opposite will laugh 
at the suggestion that a legislative committee might hold a small 
number — I wouldn’t anticipate a large number — but a small 
number of public hearings in the province. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think that’s unreasonable. That’s what I would propose, that kind 
of committee. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to deal with — yes, to deal with the matter of 
the ringing of the bells. Fair enough, that’s a rule of the 
Assembly. And in my view, a legislative committee should have 
the free rein to look at all of the rules, not to single out just one, 
but to have the freedom and the responsibility — not only the 
freedom, but the responsibility — to review all of the rules that 
affect the functioning of this place, and to do it not just as a 
knee-jerk reaction to a certain political event of the day, but to do 
it over a longer period of time and to give it the kind of 
consideration that rule changes deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that committee were established, I believe it 
needs to be guided, it needs to be guided by a number of 
principles, as any group that will be set out to do a job should be 
guided. In this case, there are four principles that I would support 
for that committee, and that in fact we as a caucus have supported 
through our own study and consideration of this matter. 
 
I would propose, and we would propose, that such a legislative 
committee, formed of members from both sides, that one of the 
guide-lines and one of the principles should be that the work of 
the Legislative Assembly   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1732 
 

should be made more accessible to the public. That would be a 
guide-line. The question of bell-ringing, the question of the 
length of question period, the sitting hours, television coverage 
— all of those rules that affect us then would be judged. 
 
(1515) 
 
Proposed changes or amendments, or a proposal not to amend or 
change, would be judged in light of a guide-line, number one, 
that would say the work of the Legislative Assembly should be 
made more accessible to the public. And if a committee were 
established, a committee of members from both sides, as they met 
and looked at the rules, I would suggest that should be a 
guide-line that they should consider. And if involved with public 
hearings and involving the people of our province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the hon. member expresses 
opinions on other factors which may be taken into consideration 
regarding rules, and he’s gone on at some length, and I have 
allowed him to do that. However, we aren’t discussing rule 
committees and what they could possibly be doing, and public 
hearings and all those sorts of things. In an extended way they 
could be related but we really are discussing rule 33(1), and that 
should be the main focus of your argument. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the main focus of my argument is 
that I oppose the motion that is before the House because I view 
it to be inappropriate. I view it to be inappropriate because, one, 
it is unilateral. It is being done unilaterally; it is being rammed 
through by the majority government without the consultation of 
the opposition; therefore, I see it as inappropriate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I view it as inappropriate because it seeks to 
achieve a political goal. I feel it incumbent upon myself as a 
member of this legislature, if I’m going to describe some 
proposal of the government as inappropriate and wrong, I feel 
some responsibility, as a member, to indicate what I would view 
as an appropriate way to go. Mr. Speaker, that’s hopefully the 
direction I’m taking now, and with your indulgence would like 
to pursue. 
 
I said earlier in my remarks that I see this as an inappropriate 
motion because it just deals with one aspect of the rules. And if 
we are, as members, going to change the rules of this House, then 
surely let’s look at the whole package. Let’s not just separate one; 
let’s look at the whole package, the process and the procedure, 
the process and the procedure of rule changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my view and in the view, I must say, of my 
caucus, there are a number of rules, and I don’t need to outline 
all that we have outlined in past, but there are certainly a number 
of rules that we think would be appropriately discussed if we’re 
going to make a rule change regarding bells. 
 
Because if, in fact, the rule change regarding bells is made, then 
obviously the opposition — and this is any opposition, not just 
our opposition, because governments do have a way of changing, 
and we expect a change in 

this province. If the bell-ringing rule is changed and if 
bell-ringing, as the motion proposes, is limited to one hour, then 
that’s going to affect an opposition, this opposition, and all future 
oppositions. 
 
Therefore, I think it is important that if that is under consideration 
that we correspondingly be looking at rule changes that can 
strengthen the role of the opposition. Obviously, a reduction of 
that ability to ring bells, and in that way to stand firm against a 
government, although it’s done only with great political risk, if 
we’re going to sacrifice that to this opposition and every other 
future opposition, then surely we need to be looking at rule 
changes that could strengthen the role of opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if someone argues against that, then again I say it’s 
only those who think that opposition has no significant role to 
play in a democratic society. 
 
So therefore I would propose, Mr. Speaker, that the legislative 
committee that should be established and could be established, it 
could be established very quickly and get to work very quickly. 
I propose that this legislative committee, in addition to simply 
reviewing the bell rules, as the motion would have us do, then let 
this committee also look at the matter of the daily question 
period. 
 
If we are sacrificing something by the removal of bells, then 
obviously a strengthening of the opposition could be an extension 
of the daily question period, and by that I mean and extension in 
time. It’s my understanding that we have one of the shortest, 
maybe the second shortest daily question periods in the country. 
That does limit the number of questions an opposition can put to 
a government. To strengthen the role of the opposition, to make 
the government more accountable, and therefore to give the 
public more access to the working of the legislature, a lengthened 
question period, in my view, would be appropriate. I see that as 
being an issue that would be appropriately discussed in a 
legislative committee that would be set up to review the rules; 
that committee being set up in place of the kind of motion that 
we now have before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my view, if the government of this day wishes to 
limit and hobble the opposition of this day and, therefore, every 
other opposition — and they should recognize that any rule 
changes made now they will need to live with when they are on 
this side of the House, and that will come sooner than later, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So it would seem to me only natural that members opposite 
would want to look at a broader package of rule changes, and if 
we’re going to limit their opportunity to be in opposition in the 
future, then they would also be interested in strengthening their 
role as opposition in the future. Surely the role of an opposition 
would be made stronger and the functioning of the entire 
legislature would be made better if, in fact, there was public 
notice of government business. 
 
It’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve learned this from 
attendance at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association — 
it’s my understanding that in the British House of Commons, the 
government order of business is published on a Friday for the 
next week in its   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1733 
 

entirety. And that is provided to each member of the House of 
Commons in Great Britain by priority post, or whatever system 
they use, to be sure that that agenda is delivered to all members. 
 
Could we not, Mr. Speaker, in this House have something of a 
similar nature, a posting of what the government intends to do at 
least for more than 15 minutes in advance? Mr. Speaker, that kind 
of rule change, I submit, should be part of consideration by a 
legislative rules committee that can be made up of members from 
both sides; that can — yes, indeed should — look at the question 
of bell-ringing, but that also should be looking at other issues; for 
instance, the question period, publishing of the government’s 
order of business in an orderly way. 
 
This committee that I propose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition 
to the issue raised by this motion, the issue of bell-ringing, it 
seems to me should also be mandated to look at perhaps the 
creation in this House of a ministerial response time. 
 
Currently, as you well know, in the House, if a minister takes 
notice of a question, that minister then will return perhaps the 
next day, perhaps the next day, or it may take many days. But at 
some point that minister will usually come back to the House and, 
during a future question period, will give response to the question 
of which he or she took notice of. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you well know, that uses valuable 
minutes in a question period, therefore limiting the number of 
questions an opposition can ask . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is getting into 
specific issues outside of the motion that’s before the Assembly. 
It certainly is relevant to relate from time to time to other rules, 
but not to get into specific rule changes, other rule changes. So 
I’d ask the member to keep his comments to the motion before 
the Assembly, which is . . . or the procedure of changing rules, 
and the question before the Assembly is rule 33(1). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my . . . My 
opposition to this motion is indeed much related to the process 
by which it’s been brought into this House, the timing of this 
resolution in the heat of battle. My objection to the motion is that 
it comes with partisan political motives. I don’t think there’s 
much argument about that, even from government members. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is the process that I am concerned about. 
I do feel it incumbent upon me to suggest what I would view as 
a better process. And I appreciate your remarks that this is not a 
time to be in detailed specific, and I will endeavour to heed your 
ruling. 
 
I will like to make the point, Mr. Speaker, with your permission, 
that we should not be simply debating one rule. We should not 
be simply debating one rule, a change of that rule which will 
obviously hobble this opposition and oppositions in the future. 
 
And if we’re going to be taking from the ability of this 

opposition, and every future opposition, the ability to do what is 
their role in our parliamentary system and in our democratic 
society, then at the same time I would argue we should be 
considering rule changes that at the same time strengthen the 
opposition. If we’re going to be weakening the opposition with 
one rule change, then at the same time we ought to be looking at 
rule changes that will strengthen opposition. 
 
And for the life of me, I don’t know why members opposition 
would want this rule to go through, knowing full well that they’re 
going to be over here next time around. 
 
There are a variety of ways that opposition can be strengthened. 
I’ve suggested today an extended question period. I’ve suggested 
today a ministerial response time in the House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the committee also, not just in 
strengthening the opposition, but in the total functioning of the 
legislature, is it not possible that we could make better use of our 
time in Regina when the House is sitting, in terms of sitting 
hours. 
 
I know that in the negotiations that did happen when the Minister 
of Justice proposed what I am now proposing today, I know that 
in those negotiations a variety of issues were raised. I know that 
he proposed looking at other rules, including sitting hours and so 
on. That’s the appropriate way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I ask members opposite when they enter this debate to say why, 
why is the proposal made by the Minister of Justice, why now is 
that not an acceptable proposal to members opposite? What has 
changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What has changed? 
 
It was on May 11 in this House that the Minister of Justice, not a 
member of the opposition, it was the Minister of Justice who said, 
I am concerned about the concept of the rule changes being 
introduced this way. 
 
He was lifting that very same concern that we have lifted, that I 
have lifted, that rules are being changed unilaterally. The 
Minister of Justice understands what’s happening here and what 
kind of a precedent can be set by this kind of motion, should it 
pass. The Minister of Justice said: 
 

I am still concerned about this concept of the rules changes 
being introduced (in) this way. 
 

He expressed concern about what he was doing and what his 
government was doing, and so he went on. He said: 
 

And before I take my place, I make this point to the hon. 
members. If the opposition will stand in their place and say 
that the major concern they have is the process; the concern 
that they have with this issue is the process, then I ask them 
to do that. And if process is what is wrong with this action 
today (and he obviously says there’s something wrong with 
what they’re doing, he says), I invite the hon. member to 
(ask to) adjourn (he said, to adjourn) this debate, (and) to 
put together two members or   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1734 
 

three members from the opposition and two to three 
members from the government to go and see if we can’t 
collectively come to a resolve to find out what would be a 
fair rule as it relates to bell-ringing. 
 

(1530) 
 
The Minister of Justice was, in essence, proposing very little 
different than what I propose today and others from this side of 
the House have proposed. He said — this is on May 11, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — he said: 
 

(And) I offer that challenge to the members opposite if they 
are interested, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition, primarily, (and) 
in the process. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are interested. We are interested in the 
process of rule change in this House, and if that is not clear now, 
I don’t know how it can be made more clear. 
 
And we are interested in the tradition of change, the tradition that 
goes back, according to my colleague from Rosemont who in his 
remarks around this debate brought to us a wealth of education 
and information regarding change in the parliamentary system 
and in the achievement of democratic rights for people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — I understand that democratic and 
parliamentary change began as early as 1347. 
 
And the long, long tradition, and the only tradition in this 
legislature, to my knowledge, the only tradition in this legislature 
is for the very thing that the minister proposes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Johnson: — I’d like to have leave to introduce a gallery full 
of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We do have 
a gallery full, and they’re in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re from 
the P.J. Gillen School in Esterhazy, something like 60 grade 5’s 
and 13 grade 4’s, for a total of 73. With them today of course are 
their teachers, Doreen Haubrich and Randy Schramm and Bill 
Brand. And it might be worthy to mention that, I believe — and 
I stand to be corrected — but Doreen and Randy and Bill have 
come to visit the legislature every year since I’ve been elected, 
and we always look forward to having them here. The chaperons 
are Sandra Helmecei and Heidi Zoller — I hope that’s right — 
Darlene Neilson and Lois Steciuk, Marilyn Yankee and Megan 
Anderson. Their bus drivers are Joanne Heindrich and Beatrice 
Stevenson. 
 
I will be able to meet with you later on for drinks, and we’re 
going to have some pictures. And then we’ll have a little visit 
outside, if the sun’s still shining, and then you can be on your 
way home. So I’d like all the members to wish them a safe trip 
back to Esterhazy, and thank you for letting me introduce them 
to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and without 
any remarks to the gallery, may I just be permitted to say a word 
of welcome from the opposition side, particularly because my 
nephew attends the same school. So I want to welcome the 
students from Esterhazy today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 11, which is now approaching a month ago, 
almost month ago, the Minister of Justice in this House proposed 
essentially what I am proposing this afternoon, that a committee 
be established, a legislative committee, and he did that on the 
basis of saying that he was concerned, concerned about the 
precedent, concerned about the practice of instituting a rule 
change unilaterally. And he knows. 
 
The Minister of Justice has been in this House for a significant 
number of years and he understands, he understands the 
functioning of this House. He understands opposition. He 
understands that rule changes, if they are to be effective, require 
negotiation, discussion, and understanding, and he’s concerned 
that that tradition is being violated. He said so in this House on 
May 11. And he said further . . . Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Hansard of May 11. This is 
the Minister of Justice. He said: 
 

And I offer that challenge to the members opposite. If they 
are interested, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition, primarily, and 
in the process, Mr. Speaker, they will take up that option. If 
they reject it, Mr. Speaker, then that is saying to me, no, we 
want to maintain the vehicle, the vehicle of obstructionism 
by bell-ringing. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we said very clearly, the Leader of the 
Opposition later that day indicated very clearly that we would 
give this offer of the Minister of Justice — and offer it was — a 
very serious consideration, he said on that Thursday. He 
requested that we be given the weekend as a caucus to review the 
proposal. I don’t think it seemed to anyone at that time to be an 
unreasonable request. I am aware that some discussions did 
happen early in the course of the next week, but then by Thursday 
of that week — and it’s beyond me what happened in the 
government cabinet or in the government caucus — something 
happened, and by the Thursday of that next week the offer was 
withdrawn, the offer was withdrawn, and has put us then into this 
rather extended debate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I wish to make the point that one of 
the tragic consequences of this debate, one of the tragic 
consequences of this debate is that we are debating this issue at 
the exclusion of other important issues, other important business 
that should be discussed in this legislature daily, since that 
Wednesday or Thursday back   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1735 
 

in May when the offer was rejected. 
 
Almost on a daily basis, with the exclusion of private members’ 
day on Tuesday when the opposition gets to set the agenda, the 
government has decided that the most important issue facing the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan is 
to get a rule change through the provincial legislature. They have 
said that day after day after day after day, by introducing this 
agenda. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have said from this side of the 
House, day after day, that we are more than willing and more 
than ready to move on to other issues, to deal with substantive 
issues facing agriculture in our province, facing environment, 
facing small business, facing the needs of families. And 
therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to emphasize that point, I am 
prepared now to see this House move on to another issue, an issue 
of the government’s choosing, be it the estimates for the 
Department of Social Services or a Bill to protect the 
environment, interim supply Bill to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is tediously 
repetitious in naming other specifics that we should be getting 
into. The question before the Assembly is rule change of rule 
33(1), and the member is continuously bringing specifics into his 
speech. So I will ask him again to refrain from that and refer him 
to rule 25(2): 
 

The Speaker, or the Chairman, after having called the 
attention of the Assembly or of the committee, to the 
conduct of a Member who persists in irrelevance, or tedious 
repetition, either on his own arguments or of the arguments 
used by other Members in debate may direct him to 
discontinue . . . 
 

So I wanted to read that to you and warn you again that the 
member is straying from the topic. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I and all 
members in this House would like to see us move on to deal with 
other important issues. And I want to give members opposite the 
opportunity right now, right now in the middle of a Thursday 
afternoon, to move on to something else. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this debate now be 
adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can’t say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have a great deal of pleasure today in 
entering this debate. Normally one welcomes the opportunities to 
get on their feet and speak in this legislature, particularly those 
of us on the government side who aren’t a minister of the Crown. 
 
I had thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that upon the House 
reconvening this spring, that debate and voting on a rule such as 
. . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Moose Jaw South moved an adjournment motion which was 
defeated, and I agree it was defeated although there was no 
standing vote on it. He then rose again instantly to resume the 
debate. And I understand how it’s possible that you may have 
missed him, although it would be unusual if you didn’t check to 
see whether he wanted to speak again. 
 
But I wanted you to check the record and see whether or not he 
shouldn’t have been given the opportunity. Seeing as he had been 
on his feet, it would be obvious that he may want to get back into 
the debate, having moved an adjournment motion that was 
defeated, I just wonder if you’d check whether or not the member 
from Moose Jaw South should not be allowed to continue the 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The point of order is well taken, 
but the member did not indicate quickly enough that he wanted 
to get into the debate. 
 
Order, order. Order. And now the member from Thunder Creek 
has been recognized. The debate continues. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On another point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You’ve indicated that he did have the right 
to speak again. The fact is that he was on his feet — I watched 
very closely — in advance of the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
I wonder, under those circumstances it seems to me that the 
Speaker should have — although I can’t argue with your ruling 
— but it would seem obviously that one of our members has been 
cut off of an opportunity to speak when he wanted to. 
 
Does that mean that he will be able to get back into the debate at 
a later time? Or is he just being cut off by the Speaker, arbitrarily 
by the Speaker, even though everyone I think here would realize 
that he was on his feet and wanted to get back into the debate? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. He was not arbitrarily cut off 
by the Chair. He didn’t rise as quickly as the member from 
Thunder Creek. The member from Thunder Creek has been 
recognized. He does not have another opportunity to get back 
into the debate. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It seems that 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — As much over the last couple of weeks of 
debate the members of the opposition have implored people from 
the government side to rise in this debate, they have insisted on 
taking a great portion of the time allowed for debate in this 
particular House. And it seems that even though they deny on 
rule 33(1) that a filibuster is in place, I would say the evidence 
exhibited in this   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1736 
 

legislature does in fact say that on rule 33(1) we are in the midst 
of a filibuster. 
 
It’s very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we’re talking 
about this particular Bill, the bell-ringing Bill, that we look at 
what has happened in other areas of Canada and other 
jurisdictions. And it was very interesting last week to listen to the 
comments of some of the members opposite as they ran through 
a long and lengthy and sometimes very boring dissertation on 
British parliamentary development and history and their 
interpretation thereof of the last 900 years of history. 
 
And it’s very strange, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we went through 
the various kings and parliaments and talked about all these 
things, that when we get to 20th century Canada and what we in 
our country consider to be some of the most progressive 
parliamentary legislatures and parliament in the entire 
Commonwealth of Nations, that by common assent of the 
members of those particular institutions, eight out of ten 
provinces and the Parliament of Canada have determined 
amongst themselves that long drawn-out bell-ringing episodes 
serve no special function for the taxpayer of that particular 
jurisdiction. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I would suppose those various legislatures having gone 
through experiences not unsimilar to the one which we witnessed 
here where the opposition left this legislature for 17 days, meant 
that rule changes like 33(1) were necessary in those particular 
jurisdictions. 
 
It was also interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we talk about a 
rule change such as this and why it’s necessary, we feel, to bring 
this legislature in line with what we believe the taxpayer of this 
province wants, we think about those other situations that 
precipitated the walk-outs referred to by the members opposite. 
 
And in none of those cases, to my knowledge, was the Bill 
presented by the government of the day ever denied the 
opportunity of first reading. And I think that’s a very important 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we’re talking about the 
democratic process and rule changes. 
 
Members opposite have said that this government is very 
undemocratic in its application of this particular rule change. And 
I believe that when members of an opposition can walk out on a 
particular Bill before that Bill is presented, they have perhaps 
done one of the most undemocratic things that can be done in the 
British parliamentary system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Because it is one thing to walk out on an 
omnibus energy Bill which was laid out to the public of Canada 
and ask that it be split into smaller parts — and I admit that was 
done by Progressive Conservatives; it is one thing to walk out on 
a language Bill in the province of Manitoba — and once again I 
admit that was Progressive Conservatives, but at least the people 
of those particular jurisdictions had the opportunity to look at and 
assess that particular piece of opposition in its full breadth before 
those actions took place. And I believe that the members 

of the opposition in Saskatchewan didn’t have the least thought 
of democracy in mind at all when they walked out and 
precipitated that 17-day absence from this legislature. 
 
I don’t think it had a whole lot to do with democracy at that 
particular point in time. And I have some reasons to believe this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I hope you’ll bear with me as I lay 
out before this legislature, and I think they’re integrally tied to 
rule 33(1). 
 
Number one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to the introduction, or 
the attempted introduction of the SaskEnergy Bill that 
precipitated this particular walk-out that we talk about, we had 
the instance of the member from Elphinstone on a public stage 
with one of the well-known labour leaders in this province telling 
the public of this province, shortly after the throne speech, that 
they would make this province ungovernable. 
 
And I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, taken in the context of that 
evening, and it maybe didn’t mean a whole lot to some people in 
this province, but taken in the context of walking out of this 
particular legislature prior to the introduction of a piece of 
legislation, prior to the public having a full purview of it, that 
particular pronouncement, to me, takes on more meaning. And I 
think it should take on more meaning to everyone in this province 
because we had the example of a publicly elected official and 
also an official elected by union members saying, prior to the 
introduction of any legislation in this session, that this province 
would be ungovernable. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 
absolutely unforgivable. 
 
I have another instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I think 
points to the hypocrisy of the arguments made by the opposition 
in this particular debate. And I know at times it has been more 
than difficult for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the Speaker, to 
keep members opposite on the straight and narrow as far as 
debating this legislation, and they’ve often veered off into areas 
such as SaskEnergy and some of the other Bills that will be 
debated in this legislature; and you and I know full well that 
members opposite, when they were government of this province, 
certainly made provisions for, if not public pronouncements, as 
to what they would do with some of the Crown corporations in 
this province. And we’ve all heard in this legislature those 
arguments put forward. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it really flies in the face of reality 
today in our province when members opposite can walk out of 
this legislature on a Bill that was not allowed to be introduced, 
and yet members who occupy the front rows over there made 
provisions, as members of the treasury benches in the previous 
government, to do many of the same things that we’ve been 
debating in this legislature this spring. 
 
And for members opposite to say that this government is 
hypocritical in introducing a rule change like rule 33(1), in the 
face of hypocrisy like that, I really wonder if some member 
opposite can go back through those piles of British parliamentary 
history books and please find me an instance in that 900 years of 
development that gives them leave to do the things that have been 
done this spring,   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1737 
 

because I certainly haven’t heard them. 
 
A member yesterday from the opposition made an observation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government does not listen to the 
members opposite, that we are dictatorial, that we don’t allow 
freedom of speech, and certainly if this particular rule change 
takes place, that the ability of the opposition to have freedom of 
speech will be totally nullified. 
 
And they say, where is this government, where has this 
government ever taken one suggestion from the members 
opposite and put it into force of law, into a Bill, into a rule change 
in this particular legislature? How do you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
put into law ideas from people who say they will make this 
province ungovernable? 
 
And when you do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk about things which 
members opposite, when they sat on the treasury benches of that 
NDP government prior to 1982, talked about share offerings in 
public utilities in many of the Crown corporations in this 
province. And the documents are there to prove it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We talk about those very items, and suddenly we 
become undemocratic and we precipitate a walk-out of the 
legislature of Saskatchewan for 17 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventeen years! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Or 17 days. I’m sorry. And I say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is the depth of hypocrisy. 
 
I heard one of the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
referring to rule 33(1), that this government was acting like a 
bully-boy, and proceeded to say this over and over again through 
his speech in this legislature. And I believe it was the member 
from Fairview. And I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
bully-boy is on that side of the legislature. 
 
Those are the people who talk about making a province 
ungovernable; those are the people who combine with people in 
our society to go out and tell untruths, if you will, about certain 
pieces of legislation. 
 
I find it unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when members 
opposite can walk out of this legislature, go out amongst the 
people of this province on a campaign of innuendo, envy, and 
fear, and then come back in here and don’t want to do the 
business of the province of Saskatchewan, that they then accuse 
this government of being a bully-boy. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
if you listened to what was said during that 17 days, you know 
what I have said is true. 
 
I also had it said that we are bringing in this particular rule change 
so that we can help the big-shot friends of the Conservative Party. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a member from a large rural riding, I take 
special affront to that because I don’t know who the big, bad 
friends of the Conservative Party happen to be in my riding. They 
seem to be all people who farm and live in small communities 
like myself. I don’t see any great wealthy entrepreneurs in 
Thunder Creek riding who have something to gain by this 
government changing the rules on bell-ringing. 
 

I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you look all around this 
legislature, particularly on the government side, you will find 
riding after riding like that where there are no people out there 
who are going to take special advantage of the fact that this 
legislature is changing the rules on bell-ringing. 
 
And I think the people out there who are represented by and large 
by members on this side of the House, appreciate the fact that this 
government is saying it is time to get on with the business of this 
House, and that if we have to have some change in the rules to 
stop members opposite from walking out of this legislature every 
time someone pulls their chain, then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
those people would applaud us. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though the members 
opposite say no, we won’t do it again, we won’t walk out of this 
legislature again on other particular pieces of legislation, can you 
really trust a group of people, a political party which has said, 
prior to any legislation being introduced in this House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, said by their House Leader and said on a public 
platform, we will make this province ungovernable. 
 
If the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have no ideas to 
put forward as an alternative government in this province except 
to make the province ungovernable, how could this government 
in good conscience take anything those people suggest and put it 
into law or rule changes? That would be ludicrous. 
 
Debate in this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has not been 
limited. In my four years here, I have not seen the use of closure. 
The use of closure in other parliamentary jurisdictions in Canada, 
I’m told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is quite common, is used in the 
federal House. Members in this legislature have never seen 
closure, to my knowledge. They have never seen members walk 
out for 17 days either. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, members in this legislature have had the 
utmost freedom to debate whatever legislation has been brought 
forward. And we, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fully expected debate on 
each and every item that this government was going to bring into 
this spring session. 
 
We fully expected debate to the absolute fullest on SaskEnergy, 
on the reorganization of the potash corporation, on the 
agricultural Bills. We expected the fullest debate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And instead, what we got was a party, an opposition 
who said, we would rather make the province ungovernable 
rather than stand in this legislature and debate those particular 
issues. 
 
(1600) 
 
And as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, and I’m certainly not an 
expert on the rules in this particular institution, but even with the 
changes in rule 33(1), which would limit bell-ringing to an hour’s 
time, each and every member of the opposition has the 
opportunity to propose amendments to any piece of legislation in 
this legislature. And as such, each member in the opposition 
could, in effect, propose amendments which would require 
bell-ringing to the extent of at least one hour. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1738 
 

And I would hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this particular 
legislature would never get into that forum. But for the members 
opposite to say that the limiting of the bell-ringing for an hour 
will shut them off on debate on any particular piece of legislation, 
is an untruth, because the tools that are available to members of 
the opposition are still wide and extensive, as they have shown 
in the debate on this particular rule change. 
 
And in theory, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, we could have 26 hours 
of bell-ringing, at least on amendments proposed on any 
particular piece of legislation by members of the opposition. But 
I don’t think they would do that, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think 
they’d do that for one reason. Because if every member of the 
opposition proposed an amendment which required a standing 
vote, which then required an hour’s bell-ringing, they would have 
to stand in this legislature and explain to the people of the 
province why that was happening. 
 
They would not be able to walk out, they would not be able to 
walk out of this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before the 
legislation was introduced, and go out on their agenda of 
innuendo, envy, and fear amongst the population without having 
to come in here and answer for it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, some of the arguments, in fact most of the 
arguments made by members opposite, ring hollow when looked 
at in the light of the opportunities still available to any member 
of the legislature to debate in this particular forum. 
 
And I don’t fear for a moment, Mr. Speaker, this particular rule 
change, as some members opposite have indicated that no 
government lasts for ever and that some day I as a member of this 
legislature might be placed in the position of opposition. And if 
that occurred I suppose, Mr. Speaker, I would have to look at my 
legislative colleagues around this country, people that I’ve gone 
to Commonwealth parliamentary conferences with, people that 
I’m sure you have, Mr. Speaker, in your position — and you’ve 
talked about rules of legislatures and how they conduct 
themselves as elected members and how I would conduct myself 
as an elected member — having studied and been part of the 
British parliamentary system of government. 
 
I don’t fear this particular rule change 33(1) because members 
opposite alluded to the fact that we some day might, this party, 
might be in that particular position. 
 
And I don’t think I’m off the topic at all, Mr. Speaker, in referring 
to those aspects of the particular debate because if people in the 
rest of Canada feel no fear and do not quake at the thought of 
having a rule which I believe, Mr. Speaker, was originally 
intended, in my study of the system, to call members to vote, to 
call members to their seat to vote, I think there must be other 
ways, Mr. Speaker, that we can deal with the concerns of the 
members opposite. 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw South for the last hour and a 
half has talked about proposed rule changes that he would like to 
see brought into this legislature, a form of 

committee that he would like to see brought in so that we 
wouldn’t have to go through the debate that we have, Mr. 
Speaker, on rule 33(1). 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Let’s allow the 
member for Thunder Creek to give his version of the motion 
under discussion. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Could I have leave to introduce some guests, 
please? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege today to introduce some students from Yorkton, St. 
Mary’s School, grades 3 and 4, and there are 56 students here 
with us this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure to be able 
to introduce you to the Assembly. They’re in your gallery, of 
course, and they are accompanied today by Glen Tymiak, Mrs. 
McLashen, Mrs. Murphy, and Miss Krasowski. 
 
We hope you’ve enjoyed the tour of the building today. We hope 
you enjoy the proceedings that are going on in the Assembly. 
And I’d just like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I had the opportunity 
just a few weeks ago to take part in the official opening of a 
brand-new expansion to St. Mary’s School. They have a new 
gym now and new class-rooms, and it was really enjoyable for 
me to be able to take part in that official opening. 
 
So I would ask all members to please help me welcome these 
students. I’ll be meeting with you to have some pictures taken 
and have some refreshments. And if you have any questions 
about the Assembly and how it’s operating today, I’d be glad to 
try and answer any questions for you. So please welcome these 
students from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members opposite both this afternoon and other days, as I said 
before, made references to the fact that we should be studying 
rule changes as a whole, rather than rule 33(1) in this particular 
debate; that this government has not been reasonable and 
forthcoming when discussing rule changes with members of the 
opposition. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister of Justice 
made such a suggestion in this legislature some weeks ago. And 
the member from Riversdale rose in his place and at quite lengthy 
dissertation said that yes, maybe that was a good idea. 
 
And I won’t bore you, Mr. Speaker, and the other members of 
the House of going back through that   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1739 
 

particular reading from Hansard. I believe they’ve been entered 
into the record by members from both sides of the legislature, 
and I suppose each is open to their interpretations of what the 
member from Riversdale said, but it seemed like a good idea at 
the time. 
 
And the member from Riversdale said, give us at least the 
weekend to study the proposals and take it to our caucus. And 
there was nothing forthcoming, Mr. Speaker, from that 
suggestion by the member from Riversdale. 
 
And I really wonder, given the attitude of members opposite, if a 
rules committee by the whole of the legislature is going to 
achieve the end result, because on the one hand, we’ve had the 
House Leader of the Opposition talk about making the province 
ungovernable; we’ve had other members lamenting about the fact 
that the 1986 provincial election did not go as they wished. The 
fact that they ended up with a few thousand more popular vote 
and quite a few less seats has meant that they have never really 
accepted the judgement of the public on October 20, 1986. 
 
So I really wonder if members opposite are serious when they 
say to the people in this legislature and the people in the province 
of Saskatchewan, strike a rules committee of all members of this 
House so that we may talk about reform, about changing the way 
that we as members operate so that we cover off the democratic 
rights of all, so that we cover off how we will conduct ourselves 
in this particular House. Given those two things, Mr. Speaker, I 
really wonder at the sincerity of the members opposite, because 
they had a week and the Leader of the Opposition only asked for 
four days. 
 
So I say to them: what do you need? Do you need two weeks? 
Would that be reasonable? I don’t know. I’m only one of those 
back-benchers that you so . . . those so often referred to by 
members opposite. 
 
But I say to the members opposite, if they are really serious about 
it, and the member from Quill Lakes who sits in the front bench 
and who has obviously taken part in these negotiated things in 
his previous years in this legislature, I say to him: give us a time. 
Do you need two weeks? Do you need three? What do you need 
if you’re serious about reforming the rules of this legislature? 
You say the rule 33(1) is undemocratic, it’s unacceptable. The 
Leader of the Opposition said, give me four days and had over a 
week and nothing was forthcoming. 
 
It’s time members opposite, Mr. Speaker, stood in their place 
when they’re debating rule 33(1) and said, we are ready in this 
time frame to come forward and amend the rules of this 
legislature to make all members happy. But as I say, Mr. Speaker, 
given some of the past history and the past comments of members 
opposite, I doubt very much if that is going to take place. 
 
In winding up my arguments, Mr. Speaker, I too would just like 
to refer to Hansard, May 11, 1989, and read one particular 
sentence which I think all members of this legislature must keep 
in mind when debating things such as rule 33(1), and this was by 
the hon. member from Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition. 
And he finishes the one paragraph by saying, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 But we should respect always, always, that the people, at the 
end of the day, are right, through mandates. That’s what we 
should respect. 
 

And I would hope all members, Mr. Speaker, would think of that 
as they debate this motion in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I look at and listen 
to the remarks of the member for Thunder Creek, and particularly 
his closing remarks about democracy and the fact that when the 
people speak they are always right, that really is at the heart of 
democracy. 
 
I think there’s a sense, Mr. Speaker, in which the kind of debate 
that we’ve been having on this motion 33(1) in some respects 
could be said to be rather silly; in other respects, the other side of 
the coin is it’s far from that. It’s a very fundamental rule to the 
proceedings of this House, very fundamental to the whole of the 
parliamentary tradition that the demos, the people, as the root 
word for democracy would have it, always have the kratia, the 
power. That’s what the root meaning of democracy is: demos 
kratia, the people ruling. 
 
(1615) 
 
And if we’re talking about this particular rule 33(1) in this 
Assembly that provides for the bells to ring for only one hour, 
then that severely curtails the ability of the people to rule. 
Because if and when it comes to an issue like SaskPower and the 
bells can only ring for one hour, calling attention to the 
seriousness of this issue, then in fact it’s very difficult, if not 
impossible, for the people to get the facts about what this 
legislature and about what the government is doing, in one hour. 
And if they can’t get that information and be informed and make 
their decision on this issue, it’s impossible for them to have their 
say and to have their rule even within this parliamentary system, 
this representative system. 
 
And that’s why this side of the House opposes this rule to limit 
the ringing of the bells, because it will restrict the access and the 
opportunity for the public at large to deal with issues of public 
concern. And that is fundamental to the parliamentary system, 
the democratic system that we have come to know in this country. 
This is a very fundamental issue even though there, at points, are 
a lot of silliness going on in this particular House during the 
debate of it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I would like to share a 
number of reflections on the nature of the democratic process as 
it pertains to rule 33(1), and the ability of the people to have 
power or influence or rule according to the root meaning of the 
word democracy. 
 
Now the member from Thunder Creek, in his opening remarks, 
Mr. Speaker, was talking about using this motion about the 
bell-ringing to bring in legislation that the public wants. And 
implicit in what he was saying, and in fact he said it explicitly, 
was that if we could get beyond this silly motion about 
bell-ringing, we could get on to more substantive matters of 
public business. 
 
And perhaps there’s a certain logic to that, but as you   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1740 
 

yourself know, that’s precisely what didn’t happen twice this 
afternoon after question period, when the government refused to 
deal with orders for the day, its own legislation; when we had a 
question period that talked about the need for the government to 
bring forth promised environmental legislation on ozone 
depletion, depletion of the ozone layer, and other legislation on 
the taxing of environmentally unfriendly products. 
 
Those are government orders that should be brought forth for the 
public benefit, and aren’t being brought forth because of this silly 
rule change that the government proposes to limit debate for one 
hour, or limit the bells ringing to one hour. 
 
And again this afternoon, for a second time, the member for 
Moose Jaw South moved to adjourn debate just within the last 
half hour or so, so that we could in fact get on to more substantive 
business, public business. And that too was refused by the 
government opposite. 
 
And this is a cause then for concern, as I say, that we seem to be 
stuck here debating what in some respects is a very silly, 
frivolous motion to limit the ringing of the bells for one hour 
when there is more precious and pertinent public business that 
we ought to be dealing with. And I think then that if the 
government is serious, it could well move. It has had a couple of 
opportunities this afternoon. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek also, just now in his remarks, 
talks about the opportunity for public input. Well what is a 
democratic system or a parliamentary system if there isn’t public 
input? 
 
He talked about the fact that when the bells rang in Ottawa for 
the nationalization . . . the national energy program that the 
Liberal government brought in, and the Progressive Conservative 
Party walked out protesting that national energy program 
legislation and let the bells ring, that that was all right. There was 
no problem with the bells ringing there because it provided an 
opportunity for public input. 
 
He also went on to talk about the circumstances in Manitoba 
when the bells rang over the French language legislation of the 
Pawley government there. And again said that was all right, that 
was quite all right for the bells to go on ringing while the 
Progressive Conservative Party walked out of the Manitoba 
legislature. In both those instances the bells were ringing when 
the Conservatives walked out, and it was quite legitimate. And I 
point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that the ringing of the bells in both 
these instances was for well over one hour. 
 
So what we have, essentially, is a situation in which the bells are 
allowed to ring in other jurisdictions for more than an hour when 
the Progressive Conservative Party walks out or initiates the 
bell-ringing. And they’ll walk out for the big oil companies in 
Ottawa and they’ll walk out against legislation that has to deal 
with one of the founding nations of this country, and that’s quite 
all right. The member for Thunder Creek calls this walk-out, 
labels it as being undemocratic. 
 
And I think it’s important for us to remember, for us in this 
Legislative Assembly and for the people of Saskatchewan 

at large, to remember that it was Winston Churchill who talked 
about democracy as being the worst possible form of 
government, that democracy is the worst possible form of 
government, until you consider the alternatives. 
 
And that ought to give us all reason to pause and consider the 
implications of that kind of statement when placed in the context 
of this motion to limit the ringing of bells to one hour. Obviously 
for the government members the circumstances of having the 
bells ring for 17 hours is totally unacceptable. It’s more than an 
inconvenience — certainly more than that. The ringing of the 
bells for 17 days is more than just an annoyance. 
 
I think that, at heart, what the government is saying, that with 17 
days of bell-ringing there’s too much democracy. What the 
government is essentially saying is that this, this 17 days of 
bell-ringing, is too much democracy. This is the worst possible 
form of government, until we consider the alternatives, as 
Winston Churchill says. 
 
The government would have us believe that fundamentally one 
hour of bell-ringing is sufficient, that the purpose of the 
bell-ringing is simply to summon the members to vote, and that 
that can be done in one hour. And that’s an annoyance perhaps, 
and that’s an inconvenience perhaps, but when push comes to 
shove, it guarantees that the government will have its say and rule 
the day very easily and conveniently in one day. 
 
One hour of bell-ringing guarantees that any debate can be closed 
in one day, and in that fashion you avoid the unnecessary exercise 
in democracy . . . In restricting the bell-ringing to one hour, you 
eliminate the unnecessary exercise of democracy where the 
public cannot be informed and participate in issues of public 
concern when the bells are ringing for as long as 17 days. How 
much more convenient for a government to have the bells ring 
for only one hour — for only one hour. 
 
It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of a sort of a television commercial 
for Spic and Span or some other kind of household cleaner — no 
fuss, no mess. The government can get on with the job with one 
hour’s worth of bell-ringing — no fuss, no mess, with the 
democratic process, with the people having a say or a voice or a 
rule as they ought to have in a democracy when the bells are 
allowed to ring for six days or 16 days or 17 days as they did this 
past month here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it’s been the validity, Mr. Speaker, and the wisdom 
in the present rule that the bells are allowed to ring without any 
set terminus. The wisdom of that logic was proved in the exercise 
that we saw this past month when they rang for 17 days and the 
public of Saskatchewan accepted that. It was quite prepared to 
live with the annoyance and perhaps the inconvenience of the 
bells ringing for 17 days because of the importance of the matter 
and the need for public debate to take place within that period of 
time, for the public to be informed about the privatization of 
SaskPower over the course of 17 days, for the public to have an 
opportunity to consult with colleagues at work and friends and 
neighbours and, yes, even to get together with relatives during 
the course of those days and to jaw-bone about the merits or 
demerits of what was happening in the legislature. And   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1741 
 

I’m sure that conversations were repeated across this province. 
 
In fact, I was part of many of them, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure you 
were, as to how long should these bells be allowed to continue 
ringing. Should we have a situation where the bells would ring 
for only one hour, or maybe two — maybe the government was 
being a little bit unreasonable with the one-hour limitation — but 
should there be in essence some limitation, some terminus on the 
ringing of bells, or should we endure the present situation, the 
present rules where there were no strictures as to how long they 
could ring? 
 
And I think that the wisdom of this Assembly over the past years, 
in forging a tradition that said the bells are allowed to ring 
without limit, was established quite conclusively this past month 
over the SaskPower privatization issue, when people said it’s not 
a problem, it’s not a problem. It might have been a problem if the 
bells had been allowed to ring for two or three or four or five 
more days, such that the government spending allocations would 
not be able to be brought forth because the legislature wasn’t 
sitting and that then people on social services would be hurt, 
school boards and hospitals wouldn’t have money to pay their 
employees their wages. 
 
Then that might have been a problem, but there is a corrective in 
the present rules of this Assembly. There’s a built-in corrective 
built into the democratic process that this Assembly has forged 
over the years, a corrective that says if any opposition dare go too 
far with bell-ringing, it will pay a price. And the price that it will 
pay is the loss of public opinion. That kind of risk, that kind of 
price to be paid by an opposition, simply isn’t part of the scenery 
when we look at the proposed legislation in front of us, a change 
to rule 33(1). It simply isn’t part of the scenery because it’s very 
difficult, if not impossible, for an opposition to go too far when 
the bell-ringing is limited to only one hour. 
 
(1630) 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, a circumstance in which anyone 
would say that the opposition has gone too far, has gone too fast, 
too far, when the bells ring for an hour? I’m just trying to think 
of a circumstance where they might say that if we were to have 
the present proposed rule change implemented. Rare, Mr. 
Speaker, rare would the case be where the public would say: one 
hour — that’s outlandish. The opposition must be made to pay 
the price. 
 
There’s no corrective, Mr. Speaker, there’s no built-in corrective 
to the present legislation. And I think that’s part of the weakness 
of this proposal then, to change the existing rule regarding 
bell-ringing, that again, in the wisdom of the parliamentary 
tradition, those men and women who preceded us and who sat in 
your chair, it was deemed utterly appropriate to the parliamentary 
process that the bells should ring without limit. Because then the 
real price, the political price, would be imposed or paid on an 
opposition misusing that rule, not by the government, but by the 
public at large. 
 
And implicit in that, as I’ve said, is the notion that the 

people have the voice or the say or the rule or the power in a 
democracy; that implicit in the existing provisions for rules on 
the ringing of bells is the understanding that people will have the 
say even in disciplining a political party that goes too far in 
ringing the bells. 
 
And that is really an exercise in democratic faith, to have this 
kind of proposal before . . . or this kind of rule as the rule of the 
day with respect to bell-ringing in this Assembly — that the 
public will rule when it comes to bell-ringing, instead of any 
Speaker having to make that judgement or any timekeeper having 
to have a stop-watch timing for one hour to see if an opposition 
goes too far, stays out too long. There’s no need for that with the 
present provisions. 
 
And if that were to be changed, and if we were to adopt the 
proposed motion of the member from Kindersley that the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislature Assembly be amended by 
changing the second section following rule 33(1) to limit the 
bell-ringing to one hour, there would be obviously no built-in 
democratic corrective. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that at the root of this bell-ringing 
motion, at the root of this motion to change the rules of this 
Legislative Assembly to limit bell-ringing to one hour, at root 
there is an issue of democratic expression. And I think again of 
the way in which the ancient Greeks gave rise to democratic 
expression. They didn’t do it just in terms of the root meaning of 
the word, the demos have the kratia — the people have the power 
or the voice. 
 
They did it in practical terms and they took that notion or that 
democratic ideal from their everyday experience on the street in 
the agora, which was the ancient market-place. And that was the 
birthplace of democracy where the Greeks said the people shall 
have the power. 
 
And I think that we see again, implicit in this motion to limit the 
bell-ringing to one hour, an attempt to take the power or the 
decision making as it were, out of the agora, out of the modern 
day market-place, out of the public arena, and to put that into this 
relatively restricted arena of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And that’s precisely why many of the members of this side of the 
House, in fact a good part of the public, the majority of the public 
I dare say, consider this motion to limit the bell-ringing to an hour 
to be fundamentally undemocratic. It takes the democratic 
process out of the public market-place, out of the modern-day 
agora, and puts it into the rarified atmosphere of this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And when it comes to an issue as important as the privatization 
of SaskPower, that is precisely an issue that needs to be debated 
and reviewed and passed judgement on in public. And I say that, 
Mr. Speaker, precisely because this government had no mandate 
to privatize SaskPower. That issue was not taken into the public 
market-place in the last election, and that’s why it was necessary 
to have 17 days — be it so long — to have a full public review 
and scrutiny and voice, or rule, democratically on that issue, and 
not to have it bulldozed through this Legislative Assembly by a 
government that   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1742 
 

had a blind privatization agenda. 
 
And so I think we see the logic then . . . the people of 
Saskatchewan have seen the logic behind the bell-ringing 
episode demonstrated very clearly to them in the events of the 
past number of weeks, and have come to, I think, grow in their 
appreciation of the democratic process, and to see that, contrary 
to what the member from Thunder Creek would have us to 
believe, and other members of the government side would have 
us to believe, that this motion is undemocratic. In fact, it is a 
logical expression of the democratic ideal that comes all the way 
from ancient Greece. 
 
And I say that the Saskatchewan people today are inheritors of 
that ideal and are thankful for this New Democratic Party 
standing up and speaking for it, speaking for the bells to ring for 
as long as 17 days if need be. And that there need be no terminus 
then, no terminus as this proposed motion of Mr. Andrew’s . . . 
excuse me, the member from Kindersley would have us adopt, 
that there be a limit to only one hour. That’s not what the 
inheritors of the Greek ideal of democracy want today, and 
they’ve spoken on that issue. 
 
This party would be standing at 23 or 24 per cent in the polls if 
the people had not spoken clearly on the issue of SaskPower 
privatization and the ringing of the bells. That democratic 
exercise, Mr. Speaker, of the ringing of the bells for as long as it 
had to happen, validated the democratic process right here in the 
agora of Saskatchewan, and I think we could take some pride in 
that. 
 
The members on the opposite side have pointed out on a number 
of occasions that Saskatchewan is one of only two jurisdictions, 
I believe, that doesn’t have some kind of limit on bell-ringing. 
And that’s certainly a good observation, and probably a very 
pertinent observation. And I think the debate on this subject has 
been enriched by adding that observation to the mix, the 
proposition that we in Saskatchewan and, by implication, the 
people in Ontario, who don’t have a limit on bell-ringing in their 
legislation, that these two legislatures ought to get with it, ought 
to go with the flow of modern parliamentary procedure and adopt 
some sorts of strictures which would limit bell-ringing in this 
jurisdiction and in Ontario. 
 
And while that adds an element of consideration to this debate, 
and adds an element of interest, perhaps, and is a consideration 
that might be considered, it has to be measured against the 
democratic ideal and the parliamentary ideal. 
 
The people on the opposite side of the House, and some of the 
public as well, talk about this particular legislation as being 
unprecedented — unprecedented — in addition to being 
undemocratic, that you really can’t have members of the 
legislature walking out for some 17 days and holding the 
legislature to hostage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you might know, my own training is in theology, 
and I’ve done a little bit of reflecting, I must confess not a whole 
lot of reflecting or searching of the scriptures on the issue of 
bell-ringing. To my knowledge, 

they didn’t have any equivalent procedures or rules in any of the 
Old Testament literature, and I think that’s not without reason. 
 
And the reason for that is that in both the ancient worlds of the 
Old Testament and in the New Testament, there was no notion of 
democracy, there was no democratic ideal to the people of Israel 
or the people of the time of Christ, or after, in fact. In fact it’s 
really been said that the post-Christian era facilitated a revival of 
some of the democratic ideals that sprung out of ancient Greece. 
 
In the Old Testament world there was no need for bell-ringing, 
because in very primitive times you had Moses leading the 
people of Israel across the Red Sea and through the desert for 40 
years — for 40 years, and we’re talking about 17 days of 
bell-ringing here. Moses was responsible only to a council of 
elders and then ultimately to the people of Israel, but there was 
no notion of democracy. And of course then there was no thought 
even of bell-ringing. Now maybe they would have had 
ceremonial bells in their religious ceremonies. The Ark of the 
Covenant probably had religious bells. The members opposite 
who ask what this has to do with the debate could be well 
informed about some of the contemporary, political, and actually 
even theological dimensions of this issue. 
 
In later times, after the Israelite people ceased to be a nomad 
people, wandering, as I said, for 40 years through the deserts, 
they came to be governed — and this is a dramatic précis of 
ancient Israelite history, I’m sure you’ll understand, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a dramatic précis of it — they came to be governed by 
kings. And again in that regard, as far as I am aware, there was 
no provision for bell-ringing, whether it was for one hour or for 
17 days, because the kings had their advisers who were 
ultimately accountable to them, and the kings bore little 
accountability to the demos or the people of Israel. And there was 
no semblance then of democracy. 
 
(1645) 
 
As I said it isn’t . . . And we could maybe just say a word about 
New Testament times then too. In New Testament times there was 
similarly no provision for any kind of democratic participation. 
We all know about life in biblical times at the time of Christ, 
when the Roman Empire ruled, and the Romans ruled with an 
autocratic, iron hand. And so when it comes to any kind of 
provision for any kind of public participation, such as that 
afforded by the motion before us to limit the ringing of bells to 
one hour, there’s no precedent for it; there’s no relationship at all 
to it in terms of that biblical context. And as I said, that’s why we 
have to look to the birthplace of democracy, to ancient Greece. 
The Greek political institutions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member from Rosthern says that he will send a copy of my 
remarks to I’m not sure who. I’d certainly welcome that. I think 
that they bear some pertinence. I would say that to the member 
from Rosthern. And if the member from Rosthern wants to say 
that I’m a disgrace, I’m prepared . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order! I ask the hon. members to please be quiet. 
 
  



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1743 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m prepared to live 
with the allegations of a disgrace, because the point I want to 
make is the point about the relevance of democracy to this debate. 
And where democracy isn’t present, and where you have an 
autocratic kind of society with no democratic ideal, as we do in 
the Old Testament and the New Testament, we’re missing out on 
a lot — we’re missing out on a lot. 
 
And I say, thank God to the ancient Greeks who gave us the 
democratic ideal; and I say, thank God for the parliamentary 
tradition that enhances and contemporizes that democratic ideal. 
And I say, thank God for the wisdom of this Legislative 
Assembly in previous years that held to a notion of rules for 
bell-ringing that allowed for full, free ringing of the bells so that 
the democratic ideal could be upheld and that the people could 
have their voice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And the point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s in Bible times or in Saskatchewan today, where the 
people don’t have a voice, you don’t have a democracy. And 
that’s implicit in this motion of the member from Kindersley to 
change the rules, and that’s why this side of the House is 
opposing it, is because a rule change of this nature is 
fundamentally undemocratic. 
 
The Greek political institutions in and of themselves did not 
survive. But the democratic ideal survived, and that’s the ideal 
that we’re addressing ourselves to in this debate. It undergirds 
everything we’re saying. We’re dealing with the issue of whether 
the people will have a voice, will have opportunity to review and 
address issues critically and constructively if the bells are only 
going to ring for one hour, or if they have a fuller opportunity 
when the bells ring full and free, unrestrained as in the existing 
provisions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say if this government, if this present 
government didn’t have privatization at the top of its agenda as 
top priority, this bell-ringing legislation wouldn’t be a priority 
either. And if you think about it for a while, you have to ask 
yourself: why else do we have this bell-ringing legislation if it 
isn’t to buttress and amplify the government’s insistence to get 
on with their privatization agenda? 
 
What they’re really looking at is the opposite to the Greek ideal 
of democracy. They’re looking at an oligarchy, a notion of a 
select few calling the shots for the public. They really . . . the 
government really would disparage the rule of the many, as we 
find in a democracy. It would insist that the people of 
Saskatchewan are fundamentally unreliable; that they’re fickle; 
that they’re ignorant; that they’re irresponsible; that they may 
even be violent; that heaven only knows what will happen when 
the bells ring for as long as 17 days or more. 
 
The government would argue that the people of Saskatchewan 
are capricious and frivolous when it comes to their reviews of the 
issue, and therefore the government should have full say; that the 
masses of 

people, the great unwashed, are never really up to the task; have 
never really been taught to understand or appreciate what is right, 
what is best, what is in their own best interests, and so they can’t 
be expected to pursue that. And what we then have to do is leave 
the decision making up to the government. 
 
And the ancient Greeks were well aware of this temptation to be 
preoccupied with order and with structure and with stricture on 
the expression of public opinion. And there was a constant 
attention in ancient Greece as to whether you would give 
expression to this public opinion or whether you would put 
dampers on it and hedge it in and fence it in and control it out of 
fear for tyranny. 
 
And I think there were and still are echoes of that attitude when 
it comes to the motion of Mr. Andrew to limit the bell-ringing. 
There’s a fear that if you have more than an hour’s worth of 
bell-ringing you’re going to have tyranny; you’re going to have 
masses of people taking to the streets, perhaps coming to public 
meetings to protest privatization, and who knows what will issue 
out of that. And therefore the need to control; therefore the need 
to restrict the democratic process and hand decision making over 
to the government unilaterally. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, that this government opposite would 
love nothing better, would love nothing better than to have public 
debate closed entirely. The people of Saskatchewan know that by 
precedent. The people of Saskatchewan who were here after the 
1986 election know that it was from October ’86 to June ’87, 
almost a year — that it was this government who denied a sitting 
of the legislature so that there could be no public voice while 
social programs were hacked and slashed to pieces. And maybe 
if the legislature had been sitting, maybe then I say, Mr. Speaker, 
the bells would have rung for more than 17 days while people 
protested that cruel action. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that if we think about what happened in the 
spring of ’87, that was a violation of the democratic process. 
There was no accountability built into the present provision for 
bell-ringing. There is a process of accountability, namely that any 
government or opposition that violates its own responsibility to 
monitor if they’re going with or against the flow of public 
opinion, any one opposition that dares violate that will pay the 
price. 
 
I think also of the way in which this government took more than 
a year to call the Eastview by-election, the longest wait in 
Saskatchewan history for a people, a constituency in the province 
to be represented in democratic fashion, to have their voice in the 
legislature precluded, unilaterally eliminated because the 
Premier of the province did not want to call a by-election, did not 
want to have the democratic process take hold and be 
implemented after Mr. Martineau resigned. 
 
And I say that’s an outrage that the democratic process can be 
violated for that long, for more than a year, for the whim of the 
Premier to protect his own political interest. 
 
And we also can recall the omnibus Bill 1 that was   



 
June 8, 1989 

 

1744 
 

introduced this session, at the beginning of this session, to 
centralize all political power and to give all unrestricted power to 
the government, to Executive Council, to privatize 
fundamentally any agency or department or Crown corporation 
that it chooses, without any public accountability. 
 
And therein is the need for a motion, for a rule on bells such as 
we presently have already that says the bell shall ring for as long 
as the opposition deems to be responsible, and as long, implicit 
in that, as the public deems to be responsible — that that gives 
full and free expression to the democratic ideal. 
 
Now another attempt, Mr. Speaker, to . . . This goes so many 
different directions, but one can see the importance of the present 
provision to have unrestricted bell-ringing when it comes to an 
issue such as the privatization of SaskPower, inasmuch as it 
affects so many people across the province. 
 
If it weren’t for the fact that it affects virtually every single 
person in this province, some — what is it? — 450,000 bill 
payers, customers of SaskPower, virtually everyone, we could 
say, well we can afford to do without full and free debate on any 
given subject, the privatization of SaskPower, for example; we 
can afford to have a restriction or a constriction of the 
bell-ringing to one hour. But it touches so many people in so 
many different ways that it’s really quite alarming to consider the 
implications of not having ample provision for the issues to be 
discussed. 
 
And I’m thinking, for example, of a letter I just received the other 
day from His Worship, Mayor John Empey of the city of Estevan, 
who writes: 
 

The city of Estevan joins other communities in the province 
in requesting (and he’s writing this to the Premier, with a 
copy to myself) in requesting that your government 
addresses the provisions of section 43 of Bill 22 pertaining 
to SaskEnergy. 
 

And he goes on to say: 
 

. . . that the elimination of the grant in lieu (of taxes he 
means) would have a detrimental effect on the city. And the 
report prepared by the city of Regina . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. That aspect 
of the letter does not bear on the topic under discussion. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, I think you’re probably right, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I think you’re probably right, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the point that he makes is that the privatization of 
SaskPower will have a detrimental effect. And I think that’s why 
it’s so important that there be a full and free debate of the issues 
surrounding a measure or a move like the privatization of 
SaskPower so that municipalities can be informed of the impact 
of these 

measures on their own ratepayers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands adjourned 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


