


















































May 17, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 17, 1989 
 

 
1171 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present 
some more petitions to the legislature. The residents who signed 
this petition have asked me to present it on their behalf to the 
government in their opposition to the privatization of 
SaskPower. They are concerned about the privatization and 
have asked the government to reverse its decision and leave 
SaskPower in the hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Dinsmore, 
Macrorie, Rosetown, Regina, Martensville, Warman, Hague, 
Christopher Lake, Riverhurst, Elbow, and Indian Head. On 
behalf of those people, Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 
11. I want to join with my colleague in presenting a number of 
hundreds of names of people from a lot of different towns who 
are opposed to privatizing of SaskPower. 
 
These people are telling us is that they are well aware that 
SaskEnergy is part of SaskPower, and they don’t want it 
privatized. And they’re from a large number of towns: Eastend, 
Swift Current, Gainsborough, North Battleford, Maple Creek, 
Kenosee Lake, Alameda, Pierceland, Fillmore, Mossbank, 
Robsart, Stewart Valley, Weyburn, Carlyle, Radville, Gull 
Lake, Maidstone, Shaunavon, Loon Lake, Mayfair, Arborfield, 
Eston, St. Louis, Bruno, and Swift Current. 
 
I would like to table these names on the petition as opposition 
to the privatization of SaskEnergy and SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present to the Assembly some 600 petitions from the 
residents of Saskatchewan who are urging the government not 
to privatize SaskPower but to keep this as a major public utility 
in the service of the people of this province. 
 
The petitions are from a variety of communities across 
Saskatchewan, including Saskatoon, Kelliher, Maple Creek, 
Hafford, Meath Park, Cut Knife, St. Front, Outlook, Turnor 
Lake, Eston, Prince Albert, and Shaunavon. I’d like to present 
these petitions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present 600 names of Saskatchewan residents who 
are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. These petitioners 
are from such places as Dillon, Turnor Lake, St. George’s Hill, 
Canoe Narrows, Big River, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Preeceville, 
Kamsack, Cabri, Frontier, Carrot River, Vawn, Jackfish, Dore 
Lake, La Loche, Beauval, Patuanak, Wilkie, and Meota. Thank 
you very much. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule no. 
11 to table approximately 600 petitions from Saskatchewan 
citizens who have signed this petition opposed to the 
privatization of SaskPower, not being in the public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people came from such varied places in 
Saskatchewan as Melville, Neudorf, Ituna, Tisdale, Sylvania, 
Regina, Melfort, St. Walburg, Eston, Maple Creek, Kindersley, 
Shaunavon, Hagen, Springside, and my own city of Saskatoon. 
By and large these people are from rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And at this point in the tabling of petitions I have 
personally tabled 3,700 names of people that are opposed to 
privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to lay on 
the table about 600 petitions, Mr. Speaker, from people from a 
variety of different communities in Saskatchewan, from a 
variety of different areas: Maidstone, Chaplin, Wakaw, 
Pennant, Success, Kinistino, Balcarres, North Battleford, 
Raymore, Nipawin, Rose Valley, Melfort, Rush Lake, Herbert, 
Glenavon, Preeceville, Marquis, Wadena, Fox Valley, and 
others. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present some 600 petitions on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan who are opposed to the government’s 
plans to privatize SaskPower, and who are asking that that 
decision be changed and that this major public utility be kept in 
the service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from communities such as 
Moosomin, Assiniboia, Lafleche, Ponteix, Indian Head, 
Gravelbourg, my home city of Moose Jaw, and others. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition on behalf of approximately 600 people. And 
these petitioners are urging the government not to privatize 
SaskPower but to keep this public utility in the service of all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The residents are from Marsden, Springside, Kindersley, 
Sturgis, North Battleford, Spring Valley, Mervin, Leader, 
Oungre, Melfort, Nipawin, Saskatoon, and Regina. So I present 
this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present to this House a petition signed by 
approximately 600 residents of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and their intent in signing the petition has been to ask this 
government to listen to their concerns and to stop the sale of 
SaskPower. They’re concerned about losing the gas utility to 
private sector interests, and since the gas utility has served this 
province very well for a number of years, they have concern. 
 
The residents come from the communities of Swift Current, 
Success, Hodgeville, North Battleford, Raymore, Herschel, 
Edam, Foam Lake, Cando, Maymont, Bulyea, Mont Nebo, 
Leask, Shellbrook, Prince Albert, Meadow Lake, Maple Creek, 
Gull Lake, Admiral, Moosomin,  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1172 
 

Hazlet, Thompkins, Grenfell, Battleford, Saskatoon, Canoe 
Narrows, Canoe Lake, Maidstone, Glaslyn, Hepburn, Climax, 
Frontier, Robsart, Golden Prairie, Tisdale, Neville, Sturgis, 
Debden, Green Lake, Big River, Asquith, Buffalo Narrows, 
Beauval, Alsask, Hudson Bay, Carnduff, and Birch Hills. And I 
present these to the House today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly of several hundred 
Saskatchewan residents who are urging the provincial 
government not to proceed with its privatization plans for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the natural gas utility. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities, including 
Sturgis, Outlook, Churchbridge, Saltcoats, Choiceland, 
Fillmore, Tisdale, Rama, Garrick, Elrose, Canora, Davidson, 
Mankota, Yorkton, Neudorf, Canora, Carlyle, Lloydminster, La 
Ronge, Eston, Kamsack, and Hudson Bay. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to this Assembly for several hundred 
petitioners in the province of Saskatchewan. They have signed 
this petition, Mr. Speaker, opposing the government’s 
initiatives in selling off SaskPower and SaskEnergy. They are 
not happy campers when it comes to this government’s policy 
in regard to that issue. 
 
They represent a number of communities, Mr. Speaker, 
including Bellevue, Demaine, Beechy, Rosetown, Loon Lake, 
Wawota, Wilkie, Leipzig, Wild Rose, Prince Albert, 
Shellbrook, Regina, Swift Current, Saskatoon, Neudorf, and 
Lemberg. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions signed by some 600 
people who are using this means of exercising this democratic 
right of having their views known on the issue of privatization 
of SaskPower. 
 
These people come from Leroy, Assiniboia, Arcola, Lampman, 
Estevan, Strasbourg, Watson, Abbey, Sedley, Englefeld, 
Willow Bunch, Lestock, Watson, Whitewood, and Carnduff. I 
hereby present this petition. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too, pursuant to 
rule 11, to table with the Legislative Assembly petitions with 
approximately 600 signatures of Saskatchewan residents 
protesting the privatization of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the communities represented in these petitions are 
Wynyard, Nipawin, Prince Albert, Regina, Wadena, Esterhazy, 
Weyburn, Central Butte, Melville, Herbert, Naicam, and 
Outlook. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present to this legislature on behalf of approximately 
600 people who are voicing their opposition to this 
government’s plan to sell off, privatize SaskPower. These 
people are from places such as Lanigan, Hudson Bay, 
Humboldt, Buffalo Narrows, Craven, Lumsden, and Halbrite. 
 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 
11 to present a petition on behalf of hundreds of Saskatchewan 
citizens who are opposed to this government’s intentions to 
privatize SaskPower. These people come from Hudson Bay, 
Shipman, Candle Lake, Meath Park, Spruce Home, Glenbain, 
Vanguard, Saskatoon, Regina, McLean, Kennedy, Yorkton, 
Endeavour, Love, and Wawota. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I join my colleagues proudly in 
presenting in this case, 600 petitions pursuant to rule 11. These 
petitioners are urging the government not to privatize, not to 
sell SaskPower. They’re urging some reconsideration on the 
part of the members opposite. 
 
These petitioners are from places like Assiniboia, Benson, 
Weyburn, Moose Jaw, Central Butte, Melville, Riverhurst, Fife 
Lake, Kelliher, Regina, Nokomis, Swift Current, Outlook, 
Chaplin, Semans, and Indian Head. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging the government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep 
this major public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities, including 
Rose Valley, Tisdale, Regina, Qu’Appelle, McLean, Indian 
Head, Radville, Maple Creek, Minton, Lumsden, and Balcarres. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant 
to rule no. 11 to present a petition on behalf of 600 
Saskatchewan residents asking the government not to privatize 
SaskPower. These individuals represent communities such as 
Spy Hill and Sintaluta. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present about 3,600 petitions of people 
who’ve signed these petitions opposing the privatization of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation because it constitutes, in their 
mind, a sell-off of a major public utility which serves all of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The people continue to sign this petition every day, Mr. 
Speaker. They urge the provincial government opposite to stop 
the privatization of SaskPower. I can report to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that today’s petition includes a total of about 15,000 
names, which now brings the total to over 80,000, the number 
of concerned citizens who have had their petitions presented in 
this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that 
that’s a very powerful expression of the sentiment of 
Saskatchewan people on this particular issue. 
 
The petitions I present here today come from all over 
Saskatchewan, including communities like Wakaw and Hudson 
Bay and St. Louis and Fort Qu’Appelle, Yorkton, Preeceville, 
Assiniboia, Nokomis, and it goes on and on and on. And the 
petitions include the signatures of people from every 
community in Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1173 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
Acting Clerk: — Mr. Petersen, chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills, presents the sixth report 
of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bill and 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend an Act to incorporate St. 
          Margaret’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Biggar 

 
Your committee recommends, under the provision of rule 
58, that fees be remitted, less the cost of printing with 
respect to Bill No. 01. 
 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now move: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills now be concurred in. 
 

Moved by myself, seconded by the member for Wilkie. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with considerable pleasure that I introduce to you, and through 
you to the Speaker, 13 students who are sitting in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. These are members of the urban native 
pre-employment program in Regina, a course of study which 
seeks to upgrade skills in order to suit people for employment. 
It has, I think, in the past been a recently successful course. 
Some would be from Regina and some would be visitors to this 
fair city. 
 
I’m going to have a brief opportunity to meet with them after 
question period, I hope. We’ll take some pictures. I know that 
members opposite will want to join with me in welcoming these 
students to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 
a couple of neighbours of mine, Mr. John Marsch, who’s been a 
R.M. councillor in my division. He’s been serving 25 years in 
the Canadian navy, and he spent many years on council. I, 
together with him, did a lot of work there. He’s served as the 
barn boss at agribition. He’s a Polled Hereford breeder. And 
with him is Dr. Doug Mann who’s a veterinarian, and they’re 
up in the west gallery. And I’d like to have all the legislative 
members here welcome them here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,  

through you and through the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I would like to introduce 38 students from Borden 
and Radisson schools. They’re situated in the west gallery. 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Sharon Assman, 
Mrs. Jackie Meister, and Mrs. Miriam Buswell. 
 
The chaperons that are accompanying the group are Mrs. Myra 
Reinheimer, Mrs. Eugenia Prystupa, Mrs. Lynn Emmel, Mrs. 
Colleen Nesbitt, Mrs. Linda Yuskiw, and Mrs. Myrtle Amsom. 
I hope that they find this afternoon entertaining and educational, 
and I ask the members to please make welcome my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I introduce to you and the members of the 
Assembly, three visitors from Nanaimo, B.C. They are: Dr. Roy 
and Mrs. MacMillan, and Mrs. Lillian Muirhead. They are 
seated in your gallery, accompanied by my wife, Helen. They 
have been visiting in Saskatchewan for the last two or three 
weeks. 
 
Mrs. Muirhead and her late husband, Roy, lived for 
approximately 50 years in the Weyburn area before retiring to 
B.C. in 1960. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main reason for this introduction is that the 
late Roy Muirhead, who was my uncle, was well known in 
Saskatchewan for his poetry. There were a number of poems of 
his published. He would write on any topic but was famous for 
his poems pertaining to his love of his native province, 
Saskatchewan. At 90 years of age he was still writing poetry, 
and one of these was published in the Regina Leader-Post. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was his earnest request that he would be buried 
in his beloved province of Saskatchewan. This happened in his 
95th year, January 1989. 
 
He served his country in the First World War from 1914 to 
1918, and as far as is known, he was the last living member of 
his regiment. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
introduce 29 grade 4 students from Grenfell that are present in 
your gallery today. They’re accompanied by their teachers 
Gordon Warman and Carol Piller, chaperon Jean Peter, and bus 
driver Gary Cole. 
 
I want to at this time congratulate Gordon and Carol for 
bringing yet another group of students to the legislature. I think 
they are giving the young people of Grenfell an opportunity that 
probably many of us in this Chamber never had when we were 
in elementary school, and I congratulate you and I welcome you 
here. I look forward to meeting with you, answering your 
questions, having some refreshments, and I ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming these fine students from Grenfell. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1174 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Grant to Game Farm 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday you gave this House your 
undertaking that you would look into the possibility of any 
conflict of interest involving the actions of members of your 
government in the operation of the Northern Lights game farm. 
 
Have you investigated those circumstances, sir, and are you 
satisfied that nobody connected with this transaction operated in 
a situation which is or could be perceived as a conflict of 
interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I took notice 
yesterday, and I’ve asked my officials to gather all pertinent 
information. And when I have it together, which should be 
within a day or so, I would certainly report back, as I have taken 
notice. 
 
I don’t have anything further to add today except I believe that 
everything was fine and without conflict. But I’ll check it, and 
if the hon. member has anything additional that he wants to 
provide me, I’ll certainly take it under consideration. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — A new question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, yesterday the minister of privatization said, and I’ll 
quote from Hansard: 
 

There is no potential for conflict. The Premier was aware 
of the operations that Northern Lights were looking at 
from the beginning. 
 

Mr. Premier, if you were aware from the beginning, then you 
will know the facts. And I’m asking you again: are you satisfied 
that no one connected with this transaction operated in a 
situation which is or could be perceived as a conflict of interest? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It sounds very, very much to me like a 
question which the Premier has already taken notice of. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
of privatization was quoted in Hansard yesterday as saying that 
you were “aware of the operations that Northern Lights were 
looking at from the beginning.” And I ask you again: have you 
. . . Is this factual? Is that statement factual? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Essentially the same question as the 
member. . . The Premier indicated he will take notice and bring 
back the answer. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker. And I quote 
from Hansard: 
 

There is no potential for conflict. The Premier was aware 
of the operations that Northern Lights were looking at from 
the beginning. 
 

Are you aware of this statement, Mr. Premier, and would you 
care to comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve taken notice, and the 
hon. member raised it, and I said that I would examine all the 
information. To date I am satisfied that there’s no conflict, and I 
will review it, and I will report back to the hon. member when 
I’ve had my officials bring the information together. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, I confess that I’m surprised that you take this so 
lightly, this situation which involves hundreds of thousands of 
dollars of public money and in which the minister, a minister of 
the Crown, and his family is so deeply involved. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: are you saying that the situation is not 
serious and does not merit the attention of yourself, who is 
ultimately responsible for any action taken by those who report 
to you, namely your cabinet ministers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how 
often the member can ask me to review this. I said I will look at 
it, and I will review it because the hon. member asked me to. 
And one of the other members asked me to review it, and I will 
do that. At the outset, without the review, I will say that I don’t 
believe that there’s any conflict, and I will review it to find out 
if there’s any reason that there should be. But I don’t believe 
that there is, and I’ll report back to the House when I’ve had the 
opportunity to review the material. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, I draw your attention to a statement made by the 
minister of privatization to the press yesterday, in which he 
admits that he made a phone call to WDI (Western 
Diversification Initiative) minister Bill McKnight to arrange a 
meeting between Mr. McKnight and one of the partners in his 
son’s game farm to discuss a WDI grant. This happened before 
the grant was issued. 
 
Mr. Premier, if that is not influence peddling, would you tell 
this House what would qualify under your definition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, again I’ll say that I will 
review it. But I think it’s also fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
when we sit at the caucus table and the cabinet table in dealing 
with municipal affairs, rural affairs, agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
all of us mostly are, as you are, elected and have lived in rural 
and urban ridings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you’re saying that you cannot discuss items at cabinet 
that have to do with agriculture, that have to do with municipal 
affairs or rural affairs, western diversification or other things 
that affect thousands of people, I mean, I don’t know how you’d 
operate, say, agriculture policy, or if each of us don’t have 
relatives in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that you have to review it. 
So we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in this case, I said if there is any conflict, I will review it. I 
don’t believe that there is. And I will certainly review it and 
find out and report to the hon. members here. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr.  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1175 
 

Premier, you weren’t on the topic that I was asking. I was 
asking in terms of a comment by the minister of privatization. 
But since you have moved to who was at the cabinet table and 
who wasn’t when the decision to change the regulations, let me 
deal with that. 
 
The minister explained his presence at the cabinet meeting 
where those regulations were changed to allow for game 
farming of the type operated by his son, saying that other 
members of the cabinet don’t absent themselves when 
programs, farm programs, which might benefit their families 
are discussed, and he’s probably right in terms of that. But 
you’ve got a different situation. You’ve got a different situation 
in this case, Mr. Premier. 
 
Such programs benefit a wide range of people. This is a very 
specific case. Now I ask you, since it appears that the minister’s 
son, his company, was the first to benefit from these regulation 
changes, would you not agree that it was inappropriate for that 
minister to participate in that cabinet meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said I will review it, and I 
will, and examine the details. I don’t believe there’s a conflict. 
And I will review it to find out if I feel any differently, and I 
will report back to the legislature. If in fact the hon. member 
wants to tarnish anybody by innuendo, if he’s got facts he wants 
to lay before us here, please do so. To be fair to the House, lay 
them out so that I can review it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I said I’ll review what I have, and if he’s got 
something else, well then lay it out there. Rather than innuendo, 
let’s see what there is. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, prior to the 1986 election your government was 
studying the new conflict of interest guide-lines, and in fact a 
report was presented in November of that year, a report that 
your government hasn’t yet adopted. 
 
I have the report in my hand. It’s entitled: A white paper on a 
proposed code of ethics for Saskatchewan public office holders, 
March 1986. The second page is signed by yourself, sir. And on 
the first page, under article 4, and I’m going to quote if I might, 
Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

Public office holders shall not step out of their official 
roles to assist private entities or persons in their dealings 
with the Government of Saskatchewan where this would 
result in treatment which would not be available to others 
under similar circumstances. 
 

Now I ask you, Mr. Premier, does your minister of 
privatization, as a matter of course, set up all meetings between 
companies such as Northern Lights game farm and the minister 
responsible for WDI spending in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, cabinet ministers talk to 
western diversification offices and they talk to other offices all 
the time. And cabinet ministers are no different than other 
MLAs in this legislature, and they have in some cases scores, 
and in some cases, I think it’s fair to say, hundreds of relatives 
in all kinds of different operations  

across the province. 
 
If the hon. member has something that is more than innuendo 
with respect to this particular accusation that he’s bringing 
forward, I would like to see it because I said I will take notice 
and review it, because I don’t believe there’s been a conflict. 
And I will report back to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
is a difference between cabinet and MLAs in that cabinets can 
change regulations and MLAs can’t. I think perhaps that we 
might move this along a bit. I’d like to direct my question to the 
Minister of Public Participation. 
 
Mr. Minister, between the date July 20, 1987, when the 
numbered company, 583867 Saskatchewan was formed, and 
eight days later when the government made amendments to the 
regulations of The Animal Protection Act, opening the way for 
game farming in the province, did you have any conversations 
with your son Robert, or his two partners from British 
Columbia, about his interest in game farming and this 
regulation? And did you have any discussions with your cabinet 
colleagues regarding the change to the regulations of The 
Animal Protection Act, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I can tell you I probably talked to 
Robert many days as most fathers do with their sons. I can’t say 
whether I talked about game regulating those days or not. But if 
you want to know, do I talk to Robert, yes I do, like most good 
fathers do with their sons. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. New 
question, Mr. Minister. When did you first become aware of 
your son’s interest in the game farm and/or the numbered 
company 583867 Saskatchewan, which later became the 
Northern Lights game farm? When did you first become aware 
of your son’s interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I could tell you that if you’d check 
Hansard — it might be interesting for you to do that — if you 
check I would say about 1979 — and the member for Regina 
East should remember that — that I spoke in this House, when I 
sat on the other side in opposition, in support of game farming 
in Saskatchewan. It’s well documented in Hansard. I spoke in 
support of it. I spoke in support of it as a way of helping native 
people to diversify and to become part of the agricultural sector 
in this province. And I still stand by that. 
 
If you ask when my son’s interest first started, I will tell you 
that my son’s interest in game farming first started when he 
visited New Zealand and worked on game farms and sheep 
farms, as he has on two occasions, and I think that was his 
second year out of high school. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, new question to you. Mr. 
Minister, on September 4, 1987, land belonging to one Doug 
Lyke was foreclosed after an unsuccessful appeal to the Farm 
Debt Review Board, of which your wife was a member. On 
October 15, 1987, your son Robert became a director of the 
numbered company 583867 Saskatchewan, which acquired the 
same land that was foreclosed on, on November 20, 1987. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1176 
 

Did you or your wife have any conversations with your son 
regarding this company’s interest in . . . in regarding this 
company and his interest in acquiring that land; and is this the 
reason why she absented herself from the Farm Debt Review 
Board hearing when this matter was discussed; and did you 
have conversations with your wife about her absenting herself 
from the Farm Debt Review Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, personally, I talk to my wife each 
night too, as I talk to my son, which I think is rather normal, 
and I will continue to do so because we have some very good 
conversations. 
 
I think the members would do well, would do well to source 
and check their source of information, because what the 
member is saying in the House today is not true. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, same minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, Sinclair Stevens also said that he spoke to his wife 
every evening, and you’re aware of that situation. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . Now throughout the time, up until January 15, 
1988, you served as the minister of SEDCO. During that time, 
during that time, Mr. Minister, did you have any conversations 
with your son regarding a SEDCO mortgage that he negotiated 
for and received on April 11, 1988, in the amount of $120,000? 
And did you have conversations with members of your board of 
directors at SEDCO about the loan, with the same board, in 
which the loan was actually approved? 
 
We’re asking for facts here, Mr. Minister, to determine whether 
or not there is a conflict of interest. We’re asking questions 
directed at you. You should be providing information to the 
Premier about what could be a very serious situation. What 
conversations did you have with SEDCO about your son’s loan, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Before the hon. member answers, I 
would just like to bring to the attention of hon. members that we 
should avoid using unparliamentary language from our seats as 
well as when we’re speaking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Sometimes you have to voice the truth. 
Let me indicate to you that I believe at the time — and the 
Premier will be reporting this in his report — of a loan to 
Northern Lights game farm, I was not the minister of SEDCO. 
Questions directed regarding SEDCO at that time should be 
directed to the minister of SEDCO, but I was not the minister. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask you if you were the 
minister of SEDCO at the time the loan was approved. I’m glad 
to know that you’re aware at least of that point. I was asking 
whether or not you had conversations with your son about the 
loan, or members at SEDCO, or employees of SEDCO prior to 
the approval of the loan, Mr. Minister. While you were the 
chairman, did you have those conversations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If I recall the question you asked just 
previously, you said, with your SEDCO board. I didn’t have a 
SEDCO board because I was not the member. 
 

Getting back to, do I talk to my son — I talk to my son about 
many things, every night, every day. And certainly we’ve talked 
about everything from the Roughriders to breaking horses to 
sowing crops to farming deer to doing everything. And I will 
continue to do that, and I see nothing wrong with that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, supplementary. Can you you 
confirm whether or not you ever discussed with your son 
Robert, a loan with SEDCO to either the numbered company or 
the Northern Lights game farm? Did you ever have a discussion 
about that with your son, the staff or the board, whether or not 
you were the minister at the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t know what all I discussed 
with my son. I’ve discussed a number of things with my son. I 
discussed with my son about Christmas. I discussed with him 
about birthdays. I discuss about everyday activities. I phoned 
him this morning. He’s putting in some fences; we talked about 
it. We’re building different corrals. I’m building some at my 
place. We talked about those things, as is normal in a farming 
operation. 
 
Regarding the SEDCO loan, as I say, I had nothing to do with 
that. I wasn’t the minister at the time. I had no discussions with 
the SEDCO board, so I don’t know what the member is wanting 
to finding out. The minister of SEDCO is in the House now, 
and I’m sure she’s prepared to answer any questions regarding 
the loan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, same minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, on August 9 the federal western diversification 
office approved a grant of approximately $466,000 to your 
son’s operation. You’re quoted in this morning’s Leader-Post, 
and I quote: 
 

As for the diversification grant, Taylor said he made a 
phone call to Bill McKnight, federal minister responsible 
for the diversification fund at the time, to inform him a 
Northern Lights official in Vancouver wanted a hearing. 
 

What you failed to mention, sir, is that this Vancouver 
individual was a partner of one Robert Taylor, who is your son. 
Do you not see a potential of a conflict of interest in this type of 
influence peddling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t see that as influence peddling at 
all. I’ve made phone calls, and I’ve talked to Mr. McKnight on 
various other aspects within my constituency. Agtech 
Processors, Indian Head, you can talk to them. They got WDI 
money. I’ve talked to Mr. McKnight about that. I happened to 
see him and said that Mr. Norton of Northern Lights wanted to 
talk to him at some point in time. I see nothing wrong with an 
MLA indicating that there are groups or companies within your 
constituency that would like to talk to the WDI. I’m sure 
everybody in this Chamber has done exactly the same thing. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that farm families in 
Saskatchewan would be very interested in seeing if you would 
intervene in every case where they need funding. It doesn’t 
happen. Your actions, sir, are unusual. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1177 
 

Mr. Minister, your government makes changes to rules for 
game farms, with the apparent beneficiary being your son. The 
Farm Debt Review Board makes a ruling, with an apparent 
beneficiary being your son; over $500,000 of public funds from 
the western diversification fund and from SEDCO, with the 
apparent beneficiary being your son. 
 
And were you unaware of any of this happening? Is that what 
you’re telling us, sir? And is that what you want the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, as I’ve said to you on 
many occasions in today’s question period, that I certainly have 
discussed with my son; I will continue; I support my son, and 
certainly I feel there’s been no reason for the allegations, the 
aspersions that you’re trying to cast. You seem very attuned to 
doing this, not only against members of my family but other 
families in this legislature and other people in this province. If 
that’s your modus operandi, so be it. 
 
The Premier has indicated to you that he’ll give a full report, 
and that will be forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, will you give us your undertaking here 
today that you will give full disclosure of the facts surrounding 
this issue to the Premier of this province, so when he’s looking 
into it he has full knowledge of your activities concerning the 
numbered company and the Norther Lights game farm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the Premier has already answered 
that question. 
 
(1445) 
 

Fertilizer Plant at Belle Plaine 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier, and it deals with your announcement of a fertilizer 
plant near Belle Plaine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — First off I want to say, Premier, that we don’t 
have any problems with large projects of this nature coming to 
Saskatchewan, providing jobs and opportunities. But I have to 
ask: considering that Cargill is the largest U.S.-based 
multinational company, with 140 affiliates or subsidiaries in 36 
countries, with its executives based in a 63-room replica French 
château on Lake Minnetonka, Minnesota, and that Cargill has 
millions of dollars of profit each year, can you tell us why they 
need a contribution of $175 million from this government in 
order to build this plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. members know, 
we hosted a distinguished Chinese politician here in the last 
couple of days, and in China the people are opening up to 
multinational, international investors. And  

in fact, Mr. Speaker, you can buy a Big Mac in Beijing; you can 
line up for Kentucky Fried Chicken. We see Flexi-Coil 
operating information agencies in Moscow. You see glasnost 
and perestroika in the two major communist countries, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the NDP opposite are saying, do you know what? You 
can’t have a multinational in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; you 
can’t have somebody that’s been here since 1928 in the 
province of Saskatchewan, has 200 employees, 150 dealerships 
and agents, 62 elevators, and a regional office, and a processing 
plant. And they stand up and say, but it’s a multinational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are even left wing of the communist Chinese 
and we’ve seen . . . let alone the Soviet Union, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They are so far out to lunch when it 
comes to modern global economics, it’s surprising, Mr. 
Speaker, that they would stand in their place and say: well, my 
gosh, a $350 million operation for the first time in 
Saskatchewan’s history to make our own nitrogen fertilizer with 
Saskatchewan natural gas for Saskatchewan people — 1,250 
jobs. And Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan plans 
to have no money in it at all, and they’re against it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
Premier, let me reiterate: New Democrats don’t object to joint 
ventures if the ventures benefit the people of this province. And 
there are many examples of profitable joint ventures, as 
initiated by the NDP government through SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Developing Corporation) in the ’70s. 
But you have shown through your privatization efforts and 
give-aways that your government is opposed to government 
intervention in the economy. 
 
You have said that if you free enterprise, enterprise will build. 
How have you explained, Premier, this change of heart to the 
operators of the plant in Rosetown, which is privately built 
without taxpayers’ dollars and will now be in direct competition 
to the provincial treasury, or has the Cargill deal killed the 
Rosetown plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition is now trying 
to pretend that they’re in favour of another private sector one 
because they didn’t get this one done. They’re against business, 
right? They’re anti-business, anti-privatization, anti-free 
enterprise, anti-trade, anti-American, anti-Chinese. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world today is saying that we should trade 
internationally, that we should build here in joint ventures. The 
Japanese are now in Saskatchewan making turbines. For the 
first time in our history we’re going to make our own gasoline 
and diesel fuel in the city of Regina, in an upgrader that we 
joint-ventured, using our energy, Mr. Speaker. Another one in 
the Lloydminster  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1178 
 

area, with government and with Husky Oil, a private company, 
and now we’re setting up our own fertilizer plant in southern 
Saskatchewan to provide, Mr. Speaker, for natural gas and 
nitrogen ammonia, anhydrous ammonia in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re against that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think it’s reasonable to request that 
members finally come to their . . . anyway, just be quiet. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to lay on the 
table the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, to speak to this government motion 
today, this very serious government motion. What we have seen 
by this government over the past few days is a continuation of 
their absolute and total arrogance and insincerity, I might add, 
Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Justice, a minister of this Crown, 
the Minister of Highways, expressed their concern about the 
erosion of trust and respect and co-operation in this Legislative 
Assembly on Friday. The Minister of Justice said that he has 
never seen the situation, the bitterness so bad in this Assembly. 
The Minister of Highways indicated, or left the implication that 
this is the fault or the responsibility of the official opposition. 
 
The Minister of Justice indicated that it is incumbent on all of 
us to turn this negative situation around, to which the Leader of 
the Opposition agreed and supported, and I do that today as 
well. 
 
The Minister of Justice offered the so-called olive branch, Mr. 
Speaker, and asked the opposition to join with the government 
to discuss this motion rationally and in good faith, in a 
co-operative manner so that we can arrive at some consensus, 
and this would be an exercise in building co-operation and trust 
back into this Assembly. The minister pleaded with us to help 
restore a sense of democracy in the legislature. 
 
As I indicated, the Leader of the Opposition agreed with this in 
his comments, and in the spirit of accommodation and 
co-operation, asked for a few days to think about this proposal 
by the Minister of Justice. The Leader of the  

Opposition very eloquently detailed how this government is in 
fact . . . how it’s this government that is responsible for the 
erosion of democracy in Saskatchewan, and he outlined many, 
many excellent examples of that which many people in the 
province agree with. 
 
Now since last Friday our deputy leader and our House Leader 
have had three meetings with the Minister of Justice to discuss 
this motion and other possible and important reforms in the 
Assembly. We are all aware that the Leader of the Opposition 
appointed me critic of democratic reform some time ago, which 
indicates that he had a sincere interest and desire to bring in 
needed reforms, and we still do. 
 
Well I hope that the Minister of Health enters this debate rather 
than chirping from his chair, because it’s many of the actions of 
him and his front-bench colleagues that in my view are 
responsible for the situation we find ourselves in today. 
 
In the spirit, again, of improved trust and co-operation and 
legislative reform, as was promoted by the Minister of Justice, 
we suggested other ideas, Mr. Speaker, that we thought should 
be looked at by this all-party committee at the same time, not 
just the bell-ringing motion. Why would you have an all-party 
committee just to look at one proposal? It doesn’t make any 
sense when everyone knows that’s here, and the public knows 
that there are other important considerations if we are going to 
open this Assembly up and make it more democratic and 
responsive to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. Why 
would you only look at one reform? It doesn’t make any sense. 
 
You may recall, Mr. Speaker, that in 1987 we produced a report 
which called for a number of important proposals for reform to 
this Assembly. We put forward many proposals that we thought 
were responsible and sincere and fit into certain principles that 
seemed to us to be very important. 
 
The first principle was that the work of the legislature should be 
made more accessible to the public, and we had a number of 
ideas around how that could in fact be made to happen. 
 
Another important principle, we felt, was that the work of the 
Assembly would be made more accountable to the public, again 
with several suggested reforms related to that. 
 
A third principle that was important to us is that the Legislative 
Assembly should become more efficient and effective in the 
debate of public issues and in the performance of the public’s 
business. 
 
And fourthly, the fourth principle that seemed to us to be 
important was that the role of private members in this Assembly 
should be enhanced. And we put forward some ideas that we 
thought would in fact enhance the role of all private members. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where three meetings 
occurred since last Friday. The Minister of  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1179 
 

Justice presented the government’s position and tentative view 
on what would be the government’s proposal to have this 
committee consider. And the suggestion was that the 
bell-ringing issue should be resolved by June 30. 
 
We were very open to this consideration and discussed it in our 
caucus on a number of occasions, and we placed before the 
minister a number of our reform ideas. We placed those on the 
agenda because we assume that in the spirit of making this 
Assembly more democratic and improving the co-operation and 
the trust and the respect, that other changes are important if that 
is going to occur. 
 
(1500) 
 
These are ideas that are long overdue, and ones that we thought 
were reasonable and sincere. All of these, in our view, would 
have contributed to the objectives, as I indicated earlier, of more 
accessibility to the public of this Assembly, more accountability 
to the public, more efficiency and effectiveness in terms of 
conducting our business, and in promoting the objective of 
enhancing the role of private members. To us, those seem like 
important objectives and important principles. 
 
So those were some of the ideas we put forward in addition to 
the bell-ringing motion, the bell-ringing proposal. Some of 
these, we looked at the possibility . . . again we were looking at 
discussing these. These weren’t our bottom lines or anything 
like that. We were looking at discussing these: the possible 
extension of question period to 45 minutes; the regular tabling 
of documents such as Public Accounts and annual reports. 
 
I mean, talk about hiding information from this Assembly and 
the public. If there’s been any way that that’s been done, it’s 
been by not tabling Public Accounts and annual reports in 
reasonable notice over the last two or three years. 
 
They also made the suggestion, or tried to put on the agenda, 
that we should get some indication of government business — 
and should the public — on a weekly basis. 
 
One of the things that has amazed me since becoming a new 
member here, Mr. Speaker, is that by noon on any given day 
we’re not even sure what the business is going to be for that 
day. So we have a situation where we simply don’t know from 
. . . we don’t know in the morning what the business is going to 
be for the day. We often don’t even know by noon what the 
business is going to be of the day. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that contributes to tremendous 
inefficiency in this Assembly. And I’m not going to attribute 
any motives to that, but it just seems to me that it doesn’t make 
any sense that the government can’t tell us on a Friday what the 
business is going to be for the following week, or can’t tell us in 
the morning what the business is going to be for the rest of the 
day. I think that’s a reasonable kind of request. So I think that’s 
a fairly sincere kind of proposal that we wanted to discuss. 
 
We also wanted to put on the agenda, again which we think is 
reasonable, the idea of timely responses to orders  

for return in oral questions. I mean, surely that’s a reasonable 
thing to discuss when, in fact, we haven’t been getting answers 
to those questions. So we had many other proposals, but those 
were some of the ones that we felt we could add to the 
bell-ringing proposal of the Minister of Justice. 
 
And we wanted to look at the hours of sitting. Again, we didn’t 
have any firm and fast positions or bottom lines, but thought 
that was a reasonable thing to look at. 
 
We wanted to look at the possibility of expanded T.V. and radio 
coverage. My goodness, many people in this province don’t 
even have access to seeing what goes on in the legislature, and 
certainly don’t have radio coverage, which was removed, in 
terms of the throne speech and the budget speech, under this 
administration. 
 
We also were interested in the possibility of an internship 
program for young people, and were led to believe that the 
minister was also interested in some of these reforms. 
 
And it was our view that since the committee was going to meet 
anyway, why not look, if it was a sincere initiative as the 
Minister of Justice led us to believe on Friday, why not look at 
a number of other relevant areas that would contribute to the 
kind of place he said he wanted this to be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it has now become clear that this Minister of 
Justice, that this government, that this Premier, is not interested 
in improving the trust in this Assembly; is not interested in 
improving co-operation in the Assembly; is not interested in 
promoting the spirit of good relations in the Assembly. The 
government is only interested in effecting changes which will 
allow them to ram through their agenda, their Bills, their 
legislation, despite what the Minister of Justice and the Premier 
might say to the contrary. 
 
I can’t believe, as I talk to those back-benchers every day, I 
can’t believe that many of those people would agree with the 
Minister of Justice that only one rule change should be looked 
at in this Assembly, because I know that they’re also frustrated 
about the sense of bitterness in this Assembly and are interested 
in doing something about it. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — by the 
government’s denial to look at other potential reforms by this 
all-party committee — the public of Saskatchewan will see 
through the hidden agenda of this government. They will see 
through the rhetoric that if the government was really sincere it 
would be willing to look at other general reforms to make this 
Assembly run more smoothly. 
 
In my first year here as a new member, Mr. Speaker, it has 
become clear to me just who has obstructed democracy and the 
spirit of good will in this Assembly. And I say that with all 
seriousness and sincerity. As a new member, as I said earlier, I 
see the business changing — not only daily — but changing 
throughout the day. How on earth are we supposed to conduct 
. . . You know, when you go into a board meeting, you don’t 
change the agenda during the course of the board meeting. You 
simply couldn’t function that way . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I hope  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1180 
 

you participate in this debate. There’s a lot of good comments 
coming out of the government benches from their seats. 
 
But another thing I’ve seen that’s disturbed me as a new 
member is that the government simply doesn’t answer 
questions. And the Minister of Justice is one that is partly 
responsible for that. I wrote him a letter two months ago, eight 
weeks ago, when it became clear that the chief commissioner 
was going to be resigning from the Human Rights Commission. 
I wrote him a letter. He didn’t even have the courtesy to 
acknowledge. Now to me, that says something about respect for 
the opposition, respect for fellow colleagues, and says 
something to me about the spirit of co-operation. He didn’t even 
respond to my letter. I hope that’s not too much to ask . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I hope that you participate as 
well, the member from Weyburn, the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Not tabling Public Accounts. I spent a week in Crown 
corporations, and again in committee the ministers do not 
answer questions. They view themselves as not being 
accountable to this Assembly, to opposition members, to the 
public of Saskatchewan. They delay annual reports. The 
Minister of Health said last year that, well I thought it had been 
distributed and it was in a corner of my office, or in a 
store-room or something. So he gave us the report for his 
department the evening we started Health estimates. 
 
So that’s the kind of thing that I’ve seen occurring. On the one 
hand we see the government not co-operating and changing the 
rules and then not answering questions, not responding to 
letters, and then accusing us of being undemocratic and 
contributing to the erosion of trust and sincerity in this 
Assembly. 
 
I think what we see in this motion, Mr. Speaker, is the hidden 
agenda of this government, their continued deception of the 
Assembly and the people of the province, and their incredible 
arrogance. 
 
We took up the government’s offer to sit down and to look at an 
all-party committee to review the bell-ringing motion, plus 
some other motions. And because the government couldn’t have 
its way in only dealing with that one motion, it backs out of the 
deal, and when they had an opportunity to make some real 
legitimate reforms with the co-operation of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one can only question the government’s legitimate 
desire for positive reform in the first place, and I think this is 
how the citizens of the province will view this about-face that 
has been made today. 
 
We thought that the Minister of Justice, even as early as this 
morning, had accepted a tentative idea of the broader agenda. 
Obviously something happened in caucus. I suppose the 
Premier got his way again and, because of his desire to ram 
through SaskEnergy, wouldn’t go along with any other 
considerations. When we were looking at a June 30 deadline, 
Mr. Speaker, obviously we underestimated this government’s 
lack of integrity. 
 
Let’s be clear about one thing, too, Mr. Speaker. We used a 
legitimate mechanism of this Assembly when we  

walked out. We used a legitimate tool that was available to us. 
Members opposite seem to forget that they have walked out as 
well. They seem to forget that their federal counterparts walked 
out in Ottawa, in 1984 I believe it was. They seem to have 
forgotten that their counterparts in Manitoba walked out in 
1985. So there are two sets of rules. 
 
We said we were going to go out because this government had 
gone beyond its mandate; it had gone too far. The people of 
Saskatchewan wanted an opportunity to express that concern. 
We said we would be back when we listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
presented over 80,000 petitions from all across Saskatchewan, 
many from the city of Weyburn where — the minister is 
nodding, he accepts that — where he got a rough . . . I think in 
the phone show he was on, of 12 callers, 10 were upset with 
him that his government had gone too far on this issue. 
 
We came back when we had listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan — which we said was our intention — and so 
let’s not make any mistake about it. We did not break or violate 
any rules of this Assembly. We used a legitimate vehicle that’s 
available to us, to the opposition. Seventy per cent of the people 
of the province agreed with us that this government had gone 
too far. 
 
While the Premier of this province, while the members of this 
Assembly were afraid to leave here, they were afraid to go 
home. We never saw the Premier for the first week that we 
walked out. He was afraid to go out; he was afraid to talk to the 
media. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this motion that we’re debating 
today, the government opposite is proposing a rule change. And 
that this change is undoubtedly the most important issue in this 
debate, the motive for this change is the most important issue in 
this debate — their motive for doing this. 
 
This motive is worthy of close examination because it says a 
great deal about the arrogance of this government opposite. 
This rule change is a means of ensuring the success of future 
SaskPower and other unpopular privatization legislation by this 
government. 
 
It is obvious, in the light of the remarkable recent events, that 
the government needs this rule change to privatize SaskPower 
against the clearly expressed wishes of the people of 
Saskatchewan, which has now become very clear. It’s a sad day 
indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for our province when vindictive 
rule changes have become necessary for the PCs to ram through 
their extreme right-wing ideological agenda. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it must not be forgotten, as I said earlier, 
that 70 per cent of Saskatchewan residents, almost 70 per cent 
— 67 per cent surveyed by Angus Reid — opposed the 
Saskatchewan government’s plans to privatize SaskEnergy. The 
people of the province clearly rejected and clearly reject the PC 
vision of Saskatchewan for the future. Their blatant 
privatization, which is dismantling everything which 
Saskatchewan people have built up over many years, and give 
this away to . . .  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1181 
 

and the benefits to foreign investors and a few wealthy friends. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have rejected the privatization of 
SaskPower and the breakup of this major public utility. They 
have resoundingly rejected a return to the 1940s when private 
utility companies gouged the people of this province. Let’s not 
forget that history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they refused to 
provide adequate service to the people of this province back in 
the 1940s. The people of Saskatchewan have rejected a return to 
the 1940s. 
 
This government, however, clearly intends to ignore the public 
wishes not to proceed with the sale of SaskEnergy. The minister 
of privatization has publicly stated that when the Bills . . . that 
the Bills will be reintroduced when the review panel has 
completed its work. 
 
The media ads are running. The senior officials of SaskEnergy 
are going around the province — some 80 communities they’re 
planning to go so far. I think the most they ever had at a 
meeting were about 13 people, but they’re still proceeding with 
this strategy. 
 
(1515) 
 
And the ads, I don’t know how many millions of dollars we’re 
going to spend. Again, money directly into the coffers of big 
corporate friends, advertising friends of this government. 
 
These tours, this media campaign, this panel, is simply a 
whitewash and a farce, and the people of Saskatchewan will 
reject it as they have indicated they will do. 
 
This rule change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very instrumental to 
the government in ramming its unpopular privatization plans 
down the throats of Saskatchewan people. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the proposed rule change 
will go a long way towards perhaps putting in the hands of the 
government the power to steamroll over the wishes and the will 
of not only the opposition but the people of Saskatchewan with 
respect to the privatization of SaskPower, and make no mistake 
about it, other publicly-owned assets will be next, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The members opposite will try to justify this heavy-handed 
unilateral change of the rules of the House by claiming that the 
opposition would use the tactic of the bells on any issue in the 
future and could, in fact, paralyse the government. I would 
suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has been 
paralysed for the last two years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to you that this government that 
condemns our walking out, our use of a legitimate means of this 
Assembly, this government fails to understand why the situation 
occurred in the first place. It did not happen because the 
opposition was prepared to take that sort of unwarranted action. 
It obviously . . . as the Leader of the Opposition said on Friday, 
this was a very, very serious step — a very serious and a very 
necessary step — so it is not something that we did lightly. 
 

But it happened because something in the order of 70 per cent 
of the people of the province — and we knew this — were 
opposed to the government’s intention to privatize SaskPower, 
and because the people have understood that this issue will 
determine what future direction this province will take for 
generations to come. 
 
This government does not yet understand the magnitude of 
grass roots, public opposition to their privatization madness. If 
they did, they wouldn’t be proceeding in the manner in which 
they are. 
 
However, I think the Finance minister . . . for once they didn’t 
listen to the Finance minister. The Finance minister did 
recognize this, and he’s not like the Premier; he didn’t blame 
the pollsters. The Finance minister . . . I have an article . . . a 
quote here from the Leader-Post. On May 4 he says, and I 
quote: 
 

The government made a mistake by not consulting the 
public before moving to privatizing SaskEnergy, Finance 
Minister Gary Lane conceded at an Investment Dealers 
Association reception on Wednesday. 
 
Lane’s admission comes one day after the Angus Reid poll 
shows that the majority of Saskatchewan residents don’t 
want the Progressive Conservative government to sell off 
SaskEnergy. 
 

So obviously the Minister of Finance admitted that the 
government had gone too far. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan would never have tolerated the 
actions that we took, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it were not for the 
fact that they had felt that this government had gone too far, had 
crossed the line, and that the government was totally 
wrong-headed in its approach. It would not have accepted our 
actions. If the public had not viewed that this government was 
on a course of action that was so inappropriate for the needs of 
Saskatchewan at this time and place in our history, they simply 
wouldn’t have tolerated what we did. 
 
However, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the vast majority 
of 70 per cent of the people agreed with our position on the 
issue, and a majority of people agreed with the strategy and the 
tactic that we used — that is, the bell-ringing — to give us an 
opportunity to talk to people across the province. The majority 
of people agreed with the tactic that we used, and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I’ve alluded to, it has become clear to the people of 
the province. 
 
They were given the opportunity to express their will through 
the petitions; through letter writing to letters to the editor — 
there have been many of those around the province; in public 
meetings — as we had several thousand to public meetings, just 
four public meetings — and many thousand people there who 
came out from all political persuasions because they were 
concerned about the need to keep under public control 
important utility Crowns. 
 
And clearly, many Conservatives were concerned that  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1182 
 

this government had broken a promise that it made, not only in 
the 1986 election but a promise that this Premier had made as 
late as last September; his Deputy Premier made in June of last 
year. It is very clear to the people of the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I was responsible for getting several hundred signatures. It’s 
very clear that the people of the province felt offended. They 
simply felt offended that a government could be so arrogant to 
think that they could be fooled by splitting off SaskEnergy and 
then saying it wasn’t SaskPower — calling it something else. 
People took exception to that. People in Saskatchewan are 
much more sophisticated than that. 
 
People in your community of Moosomin, we got many 
signatures from Moosomin because people resent that kind of 
deception and dishonesty. So people have spoken very clearly. 
It appears as though this government is not going to respect that 
because they’re saying the people didn’t understand what they 
were signing. And we’re going to have 80-some meetings to tell 
them what the real story is. We’re going to have this touring 
panel at great public expense. And we’ve already spent several 
million dollars in advertising and have had several public 
participation meetings around the province. 
 
And of course, the Minister of Public Participation, or 
privatization, obviously has not delivered public sentiment on 
behalf of the government, and is a total failure in this particular 
posting that he’s in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hope the 
Minister of Education and the member from Weyburn will give 
me an opportunity to finish my comments, and then I would 
invite him to feel free to stand up, and if you think that you’ve 
got something more enlightening to say, I would encourage you 
to share that with the people of the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I challenge you to say to them what you 
said to the public . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well when you stand up, you make your 
comments, and I’ll make mine for now, Mr. Minister. 
 
As I indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan, some 80,000 so far and more to come, were 
given the opportunity to express their will through petitions. 
That’s what we said we would do, go out and see what the 
people would say in terms of what we were doing by walking 
out. If we did not have public support, we would get right back 
in. 
 
Well, in two short weeks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had tens of 
thousands of signatures and the public saying to us, don’t go 
back until that government backs down and gets away from its 
privatization madness. And so we got 80,000 signatures to this 
date. We’ve had many, many letters in the paper from irate 
citizens around the province. We’ve had a number of editorials 
taking our position and wondering why the government was 
headed on this wrong-headed course. 
 
And I repeat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the use of the bells was 
acceptable to most people of this province because they want 
the government stopped — they want this government stopped 
— because it’s proceeding on an  

ill-considered course without having first found out what the 
public believes and what the public wants to see happen in this 
province. 
 
I want to share with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Speaker Jeanne 
Sauvé’s expressed opinion regarding the use of bell-ringing by 
the Conservatives in the House of Commons in 1982. And she 
says, and I quote: 
 

I may point out that obstructive tactics are allowed by the 
rules. However, their use must be regulated so as to 
safeguard the government’s right to have the House 
consider its order of business and, equally important, right 
of the opposition to criticize, oppose, and even obstruct a 
government measure. 
 

That’s a quote from March 18, 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
recognizing the legitimate right of the opposition to oppose a 
government measure as well. 
 
The government may not have liked the message which the 
people of the province have sent to it on the privatization of 
SaskEnergy, but it ignores the message — it ignores that 
message and proceeds with unilateral changes at its peril. The 
residents of Saskatchewan do not appreciate being lied to by 
this Premier and by this Deputy Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the action taken by the government in proposing 
this unilateral change, because — let’s remember they’ve now 
reneged on their proposal to us to sit down and discuss this in 
an all-party committee — the action taken by this government 
to propose and attempt to enact this unilateral rule of change, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is totally — and, I repeat, it is totally 
unprecedented in this legislature, as the Leader of the 
Opposition said the other day. 
 
And this government knows this. The Minister of Justice and 
the Deputy Premier outside of this House have acknowledged 
this. The Minister of Justice has admitted publicly that this is 
the first time that he is aware of the rule committee being 
passed by, and he makes no apologies for it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — I repeat, he makes no apologies for violating the 
tradition and convention of this Assembly in this situation. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has 
broken many traditions and many conventions in this Assembly, 
many established patterns. And one of the strengths of the 
British parliamentary system is its respect for tradition, its 
respect for its heritage, its respect for convention. And this 
government has broken many of those conventions, not just in 
this case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A week ago yesterday, on Monday, when the opposition 
returned to this House, the Premier stated publicly that the 
government would talk to the New Democrats about possible 
changes in bell-ringing rules. 
 
Obviously the Premier’s initial reaction was the correct one in 
terms of the parliamentary traditions of this House. However, 
shortly afterwards, on the same day, the government served 
notice it was going to introduce the  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1183 
 

rule change without consultation with the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, until now, as I indicated, this Assembly has not 
made these kinds of changes without all-party input and consent 
on any rule change. As I say, this has been a strength of our 
system. It has protected the majority from ramming through 
procedures without minority input and approval. And this is an 
important . . . the importance of this tradition cannot be 
underestimated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This has got to be 
preserved as an important tradition. 
 
Throughout the history of the Assembly, substantial 
consultation on rule changes has taken place through the 
mechanism of all-party committees which are given a mandate 
by this Assembly. Rule changes have, for the most part, been 
accomplished through consensus and without division. And 
there are many examples from 1985, 1981, and 1986, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
These all-party committees have undertaken in the past, 
comprehensive review of rules, not just one change at a time, 
but comprehensive reviews of the rules, and have brought 
forward legitimate changes, legitimate proposal changes for 
reform. And as I indicated at the outset of my remarks, there are 
many current important changes that need to be considered 
along with the bell-ringing proposal. 
 
(1530) 
 
But as I also indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
proposes a single rule change which has come about because of 
its extreme difficulties over its own privatization program. It’s 
run into a bit of a snag. It’s got to remove the obstacle so it can 
get on with the business of privatizing the Saskatchewan 
resource assets. This can only be seen as the action of a cynical 
and undemocratic government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly the tradition of this House has 
been not to unilaterally tinker with the very important rule 
changes and procedures of the Assembly. As an institution, this 
House has withstood major and extremely polarized debates in 
the past. This is not the first time on different visions of how the 
economy should run. It’s withstood major and extremely 
polarized debates, debates with very high stakes. And 
governments of the past have not unilaterally altered the rules to 
suit their immediate purposes, like we see this government 
doing with this motion. Governments of the past, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, have had more integrity and more respect for the 
democratic process, more respect for this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to place on the record and 
emphasize that in the past consensus has always been sought for 
rules changes — consensus has always been sought for rules 
changes. We thought that the Minister of Justice was sincere in 
his attempt to reach consensus on this matter as well. That 
appears not to be the case. 
 
In the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one would hope that 
consensus would always be sought, but this government is 
setting a precedent, this PC government. For the first time in the 
history of Saskatchewan, this PC government is setting a 
precedent, a precedent that we are not  

unmindful of, that says that if the rules are not in accordance 
with the wishes and the desires of the government, you go 
ahead and change them for your own purpose. 
 
And we don’t believe on this side of the House that this is 
healthy, nor do we believe that it is democratic, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it is not keeping within the traditions of this 
Assembly. Nor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the people of 
Saskatchewan see this as a healthy or democratic rule change 
and proposal. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion is yet another 
in a wide range of anti-democratic actions by this government. I 
would like to review just a few of these because they paint a 
scary trend leading toward the potential for tyranny. Now 
tyranny is a pretty strong word, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I use it 
very consciously and very deliberately. 
 
To begin with, it was fundamentally undemocratic of this 
government to introduce the SaskPower privatization Bills; to 
propose such a major change without a mandate from the 
people of the province and with no prior consultation to sell off 
the publicly owned utility. As I indicated earlier, the Minister of 
Finance has admitted the absence of public consultation by the 
government on this crucial issue. In a stand of unbelievable 
arrogance and defiance of democracy, this government still 
plans to forge ahead with the privatization plans. 
 
I see the member from Weyburn, he’s still chirping, but he’s 
chirping from a different seat. He’s sort of moving around from 
seat to seat and continues to chirp. And I sincerely hope that in 
all of his wisdom he has the forthrightness to in fact get up and 
make some comments and put them on public record so that he 
can show the folks back in Weyburn what he has to offer by 
way of democracy and this particular proposal, and why he 
wouldn’t be supporting other legislative changes that would 
help create the kind of co-operation and trust that even he says 
is necessary in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I don’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of 
Education challenges me. I hope he’s speaking next, and I 
would like to challenge him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
challenge the Minister of Education to get up and make some 
comments himself and contribute some comments and some 
light to this debate rather than all the heat that he’s contributing. 
 
As I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a stand of unbelievable 
arrogance and defiance of democracy, this PC government still 
plans to forge ahead with their privatization plans. They say that 
the only problem is that they have to do a bigger and better sell 
job to the people of Saskatchewan. Not enough people have 
been conned yet into believing their lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s commitment to parliamentary 
tradition and respect for the democratic process is highly 
circumspect. The list of undemocratic actions and practices by 
this government, by this PC government, is unparalleled and 
staggering, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll list a few of these. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1184 
 

The latest reworking of Saskatchewan’s electoral constituencies 
which, if the Bill is passed, will apply to the next election, 
represents an unacceptable deviation from the democratic 
principle: one person, one vote. This is most evident by 
comparing the ridings of Morse and Humboldt, both rural 
constituencies. In the Morse riding there are 7,757 voters, 
compared to 11,734 in Humboldt. It is blatantly unfair to allow 
variations of up to 4,000 voters between some ridings — 
blatantly unfair — up to 4,000 difference, rural riding to rural 
riding. 
 
Another example of this undemocratic actions, there are 
substantial discrepancies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between urban 
and rural riding populations. Again the difference between 
Morse, 7,757 voters and Saskatoon Greystone, with 12,567 
voters. In other words, this gives rural votes more weight than 
urban ones, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
With a population shift from farms to the cities, the variation in 
eligible voters between rural and urban ridings will only grow. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural people believe in fairness too, and 
accept this delicate balance of representation and democracy. 
 
Finally it must be remembered that the present government, this 
PC government, changed the boundary rules before the 
boundaries were redrawn. This served to ensure the present 
electoral boundary outcome as they had planned it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
For instance, they changed the 15 per cent variation in 
population between large and small ridings to 25 per cent 
deviation. As well, the government said the number of rural 
ridings must remain the same and there would only be one new 
seat each for Regina and Saskatoon, irrespective of the 
population considerations. 
 
In effect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this PC government did is 
it tied the commission’s hands before the commission even 
began its work — another blatant, partisan move by a desperate 
and unpopular government. In 1971 Ross Thatcher found out 
that the people of Saskatchewan believe in fairness, and the 
Premier’s government will not get away with this gerrymander 
either. 
 
Last year the provincial government pushed through legislation 
that significantly altered the manner in which municipal 
elections in our major urban centres are carried out. This was 
done despite the fact that a large number of people were in 
favour of retaining the ward system. Again, consultation was 
not part of the process leading up to this unilateral decision by 
this PC government. In fact, plebiscites conducted in Saskatoon 
and Regina in the late 1970s resoundingly endorsed the ward 
system. 
 
Again, in the municipal elections of last fall, urban voters 
endorsed the ward system concept and asked for its 
reinstatement. The Urban Affairs minister continues to maintain 
that he, and he alone, is right about this issue, another example 
by this government of its arrogance, another example that this 
government does not have to be accountable to the people of the 
province. 
 
One of the most significant undemocratic acts, in my  

view, Mr. Speaker, of this provincial government was their 
failure to disclose to the people of Saskatchewan the actual 
deficit figures of 1986. Instead, after the provincial election 
campaign, the Minister of Finance presented a budget which 
revealed that his deficit forecasting had been miscalculated by 
some $800 million. Whether one attributes this situation to 
deliberate deception of the public or gross incompetence, the 
end result is the same, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan have been betrayed and abused by a government 
that is supposed to be responsible and accountable to them. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
the member from Wascana says, at least we’re not dishonest. 
Well that’s not how the people in Saskatchewan have conveyed 
their perceptions to me about you. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, over the past couple of years, 
the people Saskatchewan have become aware of the several 
trends in the direction in which this provincial government is 
taking health care. However, one of the strategies most evident 
has been the way in which cut-backs and changes to our health 
care system have been made . . . the serious ones were made 
and implemented and announced. Significantly, spending-cut 
decisions were made without input from health care 
professionals or the general public, and were based on 
perceived savings today, rather than long-term implications. 
 
And this is not just the New Democrats saying this. The 
Saskatchewan health care commission in its 1987 report 
indicated that the one thing that would have to occur over the 
next year is that the government would have to communicate 
with health care professionals and those directly involved in the 
provision of health care in order to in fact make decisions that 
were in the best interests of health care and the people of the 
province’s well-being. 
 
So the Saskatchewan Health Care Association in its annual 
report of 1987 makes the point that this government has got to 
stop making unilateral decisions and has got to put people first 
and health care priorities at the forefront, in consultation with 
people throughout the province. So other people are saying this 
as well. 
 
Despite promises to the contrary, this administration, this PC 
administration has initiated measures that have impacted 
negatively on universal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d respectfully request 
that I raise a point of order with you. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
the exact page number or the exact quotation out of the rule 
book, but I do know in general terms, Mr. Speaker, the rules of 
this Assembly would say that a speaker, when he’s speaking on 
a motion such as we are talking about here today, which I 
remind you is the bell-ringing motion, that the speaker’s 
comments should be relevant to the issue. 
 
I’m having a great deal of difficulty finding the relevance, Mr. 
Speaker, between the health card, which is popular in 
Saskatchewan, and bell-ringing, which is not popular in  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1185 
 

Saskatchewan. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, I was 
listening to what the member was saying in referring to the 
undemocratic nature of this government and always referring 
back to the motion on the order paper that we’re speaking to. 
 
And it was quite obvious to me that what he was saying related 
very clearly to the undemocratic process that we’re involved in 
here today where you have a rule change that has no 
consultation with the opposition. And I would just say that I 
find the opinion of the member not to be in order and would ask 
you to rule that way. 
 
The Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order and the hon. member from Elphinstone’s remarks. And 
I’ve been also listening to the hon. member’s remarks from 
Saskatoon Eastview. And I must rule that the point of order is 
well taken for this reason. 
 
In speaking to a motion, I realize that hon. members wish to 
make some examples to buttress their arguments, and of course 
that’s reasonable. However, in making an example, I don’t 
believe that they should feel they can speak on and on and on 
about an issue indefinitely. I think they should make the 
example and then confine it to their motion. But I believe the 
hon. member understands what I’m saying. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think I 
understand your ruling and I’ll try and respect that. Just for 
clarification, I did not mention anything about health cards, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think Hansard will show that I did not mention 
health cards, so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes you did. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — No, I didn’t mention health cards. But I will 
respect your ruling and stick . . . I’m concerned about this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order, order. Oh I 
guess, you know, I think just a little point of clarification. The 
essential issue was that perhaps the hon. member was straying 
from the motion. I believe that was the essential motion, and 
I’ve dealt with that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, in 1986 I would submit that the 
people of the province . . . and I’m trying to list some examples 
of undemocratic actions, and I would suggest that the people of 
the province were given no reason to expect that this PC 
government was going to eliminate the school-based dental 
program. They were given no reason to suspect that. They were 
given no reason to suspect that the prescription drug program 
changes would be rammed through and creating hardship for 
many people of the province. That was not mentioned. I view 
that as an undemocratic action. 
 
They were not led to believe in 1986 that there would be 
extreme shortages of health care professionals; that the cuts 
would be so acute as to seriously compromise the level of 
health care provided in the province; and that in  

1986 the people of the province were not led to believe, and 
given no reason to believe, that waiting lists in hospitals in 
Saskatoon would climb to some 12,000. 
 
And my point is that, similar to the bell-ringing incident and the 
fact that this government was not willing to consider other 
important reforms that should occur, in the case of health care 
there was a lack of consultation exhibited by this government. 
And it used a unilateral approach on these health care issues as 
well, and continues to do so on the business before us today. 
 
Now despite appointing a commission on the future directions 
in health care to study the future of health care in the province, 
this government announces another undemocratic move and 
announces that the three hospitals in Saskatoon will be 
integrated before the commission even prepares and reports. 
And in fact the city council of Saskatoon, which is one of the 
stakeholders, did not even know that this decision was coming 
about. And I view that as undemocratic. I view that as a lack of 
consultation and a lack of seeking input and a decision that this 
government rams through its agenda, not unlike with this 
motion before us today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the point I was trying to make to members on the 
opposite side. And again, it’s not in keeping with the tradition 
of this province, which is to work together in co-operation, in 
consultation for the well-being, the collective well-being, of all 
people of the province. 
 
So in health care the Minister of Health says one thing and he 
did another. We saw the Minister of Justice propose one option 
on Friday, over three meetings give some indication that he was 
interested in looking at broader reforms, and when the chips are 
down, he really isn’t. So he says one thing and he does another, 
which again it’s the strategy of confrontation by this 
government, rather than co-operation and working together and 
communicating in goodwill. 
 
But there’s another example that many of us in the province 
review as an undemocratic action. In 1987, through Bills 
regarding regional colleges and technical institutes, this 
government legislated changes that fundamentally altered the 
structure of regional and community colleges in Saskatchewan. 
These changes were done arbitrarily, without any semblance of 
consultation with the people affected. 
 
This is serious, Mr. Speaker, because this is the approach of this 
government. In one fell swoop all the very good, locally 
controlled community colleges were scooped up and put under 
the direction of a centralized government-controlled 
corporation. Now the local communities have absolutely no 
control over how the colleges are run in their areas. In my view, 
that’s an undemocratic action, similar to the one that we’re 
seeing today in this Assembly. 
 
Decisions are foisted upon the community college system from 
the central control board, centralizing power. The minister in 
charge has been given complete control over decisions. Where 
local boards were once elected, they are now appointed by the 
Minister of Education. The  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1186 
 

people appointed are required through legislation to follow the 
dictates of the minister exactly. This is why educators boo this 
minister at education conferences. It’s his arrogance and 
deception which is fundamentally offensive to educators in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The community college situation is one more example of where 
this government has used its majority, Mr. Speaker, to trample 
the rights of Saskatchewan people. This incredible grab to have 
total power and control serves no one’s interests. It was a highly 
regressive step that has put the concept of community colleges 
back several decades. 
 
This government continues to hammer and push legislation 
through that is harmful and destructive to this province. They 
care only about achieving their own narrow-minded, selfish 
objectives, regardless of who gets hurt. Their arbitrary actions 
are an abuse of power, Mr. Speaker; they are killing this 
province. And then they have the audacity to call it progress. 
 
Another example of an undemocratic action, it is fundamentally 
right for the public to know where their money is being spent, 
has always been regarded as the public’s right to know. This 
government is directly interfering with that basic right in a 
couple of ways. In the past, their release of Public Accounts 
documents has been delayed past any reasonable time period. 
And we wanted to put that on the agenda to consider standard 
dates or time periods by when those accounts should be 
presented, not just by this government but by future 
governments; that there must be a reasonable time period that 
we can negotiate as to when Public Accounts had to be tabled. 
Again, that seems like a reasonable request and seemed like a 
reasonable proposal to put on the agenda. 
 
In February of 1989, the Public Accounts Committee only 
began their review of the fiscal year ending March 1987. This is 
a two-year delay, Mr. Speaker, and I submit this is very serious. 
This is a two-year delay before the people of the province have 
any idea how the government is spending their money, 
particularly when the people are concerned right now about 
how their money is being spent. 
 
Another way in which this government is directly interfering 
with the basic right of people to know where their money is 
being spent is that Public Accounts documents for the year 
ending March 1988 have now been tabled, and even this 
represents a 12- to 18-month delay after the money has been 
spent. 
 
During the Blakeney administration, Public Accounts were 
tabled within a few months of year end. That government took 
the responsibility of fiscal management seriously, Mr. Speaker, 
and respected the right of the public to be informed in an 
accurate and timely manner. The Blakeney government saw 
Public Accounts as an opportunity to demonstrate that it was 
running an accountable and an efficient and an effective 
government in the spending of the taxpayers’ money. 
 
This PC government used Public Accounts as a way to hide, 
sabotaging the process as they did back in the summer when the 
Public Accounts Committee met, sabotaging the process so that 
the people of the province  

couldn’t see the money that was spent during the election year, 
1986-87. 
 
Another example, the absence of a standard provincial budget 
day. The people of this province have the right to be given 
timely and accurate information regarding the finances of the 
government. In 1987 the government delayed calling this 
legislature and announced some of the most harmful budget 
cuts in Saskatchewan’s history, outside of this House — not 
here, but outside of the House. They didn’t have the courage to 
call the House. They didn’t even have the courage to be asked 
questions about these harmful decisions and be accountable for 
them. 
 
Another example, the formation of the property management 
corporation was ultimately done for one purpose, Mr. Speaker 
— as a mechanism to withhold expenditure information from 
the public. There’s no question about that. For instance, this 
government uses payments to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation as a way to claim that they have 
increased funding and services to government departments and, 
in my view, another way in which they’re attempting to deceive 
the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
While payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation have increased departmental budgets, these 
increases have not been for programs and services. They have 
not improved the quality or the quantity of services. Despite 
what the Premier says about all the new money into health care, 
that is not new money for programs and services. It’s been a 
shifting of money spent, from one department to another. I 
know in Social Services, where I spent 10 years, this 
government played the same games of shifting around money 
so that you couldn’t keep track of where . . . from one year to 
the next of where the public’s money was being spent. 
 
By trying to privatize SaskPower, the current government, I 
suggest, has broken its promise never to privatize a public 
utility and has betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. Following 
the last provincial election, our Premier guaranteed that 
SaskEnergy’s public utilities would be exempt from his 
privatization push. He specifically mentioned SaskPower, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and SaskTel. As I 
indicated earlier, the Deputy Premier has denied, later denied in 
this Assembly that the government was planning to privatize 
SaskPower. The record clearly shows that he said the answer is 
no, pure and simple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The PC government’s betrayal has outraged Saskatchewan 
people, as we’ve seen by the petitions. All across the province 
people are saying that this privatization scheme has gone too 
far. Over 80,000 petitions are presented so far in this Assembly, 
with several thousand more to be presented in the coming days. 
 
However, despite the polls, despite the some 80,000 petitions, 
this government wants to introduce legislation that will allow 
them to ram through their privatization Bills through this 
legislature. It is the ultimate undemocratic act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1187 
 

The list of undemocratic acts . . . I’ve mentioned eight or ten of 
them. I could go on and mention several more, Mr. Speaker. I 
could talk about the appointment, for example, of the 
Ombudsman, that again this government broke the tradition that 
had been established in this province. I won’t do that, but that’s 
another example, and there are many others that one could point 
to. 
 
(1600) 
 
I guess another tone of dishonesty or deception that I would like 
to just talk about for a minute was one that bothers me very 
much, and I want to indicate this because the Premier, as he did 
in 1986, and continued to last week at a meeting, he continues 
to compare himself to the late T.C. Douglas. And he says if 
T.C. Douglas were alive today he would support the initiatives 
that this government is engaging in and he would promote and 
endorse what we’re doing today. In fact he calls him a . . . the 
Premier calls T.C. Douglas a personal friend. And, Mr. Speaker, 
you may recall in 1986 when the Premier was running around 
the province trying to hang on Tommy Douglas’ coat-tails, Mrs. 
Douglas, a senior citizen, took great exception to the Premier 
doing that and wrote a letter to the papers very publicly saying 
that her husband spent all his life fighting for principles that 
were contrary to what the Premier was promoting — contrary to 
what the Premier was . . . 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, I’d once again like to bring up 
the same point of order that was raised earlier by the Minister of 
Highways. I believe that the speaker has been admonished to 
stick to the topic, and I have been listening very carefully, Mr. 
Speaker, and have heard him wander all over the place and not 
refer with any kind of accuracy at all to the substance of this 
Bill before us. I ask for your ruling once again. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, I just 
want to say that in talking about democracy here, the member 
from Saskatoon I think is laying out very clearly some problems 
that we see. And to be continually interrupted by members of 
the government side only proves the point that he’s trying to 
make. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, you have been sitting, listening very 
carefully. I’m sure if there were any rules being broken you 
would have rose to your feet and indicated that. But I just say 
that the reason that they’re getting up, over and over again, is to 
break the continuity of the argument and do exactly what the 
member from Saskatoon is saying; that is, defeat democracy 
and the whole principle of it in giving his speech here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. First of all, I’d just like to point out 
that all members have a right to raise points of order, whether 
accurate or not, but they do have that right. 
 
And, secondly, I have spoken to the previous member’s point of 
order, and I have addressed myself to the hon. member who was 
speaking. And I respect the hon. member and I believe that 
what he’s saying is going to relate to the topic under discussion, 
and I’m waiting for him to do that; I’m waiting for him to do 
that. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m trying to give another example of deception and a 
sense of a lack of democracy, respect for democracy, when I 
say that this Premier says that the late T.C. Douglas would 
support what he’s doing today; that T.C. Douglas was a 
personal friend of his. And I would ask that the Premier not 
promote that any more, not show disregard for Mrs. Douglas, 
who has said that her . . . and not disrespect Mrs. Douglas, 
who’s an elderly woman now, who says that her husband spent 
his whole life, committed his whole life to fighting against the 
very likes of this Premier and what he stands for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — She finds that offensive, and I would ask the 
Premier to respect the memory of her husband and to respect 
the many friends of the late Tommy Douglas and not promote 
that kind of dishonesty any more. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this government talks about 
restoring trust; it talks about co-operation. The actions of this 
government do not demonstrate that. And I’ve tried — if the 
members would have listened — I’ve tried to outline in my 
speech the many, many examples of where in fact this 
government is eroding the democratic traditions, not only in this 
House but throughout the province. 
 
This is exactly why electorally and in the polls this Premier is 
on a free fall in the province of Saskatchewan. This government 
is only interested in their reform on bell-ringing — that’s the 
only one they’re interested in — because they want to ram 
through the SaskEnergy legislation. We will not have any part 
of that. We will not allow that, and we will simply fight for the 
people of Saskatchewan to make sure that that doesn’t happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — They’re only interested in that one reform, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re not interested in other reforms that would go a 
long way, in fact would go further to restore the spirit of 
co-operation and trust and respect in this legislature. 
 
The bell-ringing motion did not contribute to the situation we 
find ourselves in; that was an action that was just done for a 
period of two weeks. It’s the other reforms that would have the 
effect of promoting the kind of spirit of co-operation that they 
say they want. They’re not sincere about that proposal at all. 
 
The public will see that this motion is only designed to ram 
through the SaskEnergy Bills. It won’t work. The people of 
Saskatchewan are on our side — we’re on the side of 
democracy — and this motion simply will not be accepted in 
the province. 
 
This government is going to continue to hold public meetings. 
The senior officials from SaskEnergy are going to continue to 
go around the community. They’re going to . . . The panel is 
going to continue its parade at over  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1188 
 

$1,100 per day just for the panelists. Who knows what the 
lawyer is going to get paid! We’re going to spend multimillion 
dollars . . . millions of dollars on advertising to promote 
something that the people of the province have already 
indicated that they don’t want. And it simply isn’t going to 
work. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, if this government is sincere, if this 
Minister of Justice is sincere, we will consider this motion in 
relation to other motions that are needed for reform in this 
Assembly. Let’s make that very clear. We will consider this 
motion, we will consider this motion in relation to other 
important reforms that have got to be considered. 
 
If the government is willing to expand the mandate of this 
all-party committee, then we can be back meeting about this 
tomorrow. And our door is open; we have shown since Friday 
that we’re ready to participate in an all-party committee. The 
ball is clearly in the court of the government, and they will be 
held accountable if they don’t take up the challenge and the 
opportunity to meet with us in an all-party fashion in order to 
improve the working relationships in this House. 
 
But we cannot accept this one isolated motion which is only 
designed to ram through this unpopular legislation. This motive 
is totally dishonest and we simply will not accept it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter into debate 
on this motion. And I think probably one of the most cynical 
statements that could be made about the willingness of this 
government to participate in democratic debate in the 
Legislative Assembly is faking . . . even faking the opportunity 
to speak. You know, I guess it’s indicative of what this is all 
about, what this is all about, that one of the members on the 
government side . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — . . . the member from Assiniboia, the one with 
the greatest amount of legislative experience in this Assembly 
— maybe he’s least tainted by goofiness, Mr. Speaker — places 
a lecturn on his desk to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. I 
believe the hon. member will agree that somehow that’s not 
actually on the motion. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am addressing the motion 
precisely. This motion is about rules in this House. The motion 
is about democratic function of this legislature, and that side is 
engaged in unadulterated goofiness, Mr. Speaker. They won’t 
even enter debate on their own motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — They won’t even enter debate about the function 
of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and how typical — how typical! 
 

Their motion, they come before this Legislative Assembly 
intending to ram through a motion that will somehow facilitate, 
they believe, their highly unpopular SaskPower legislation, and 
then they won’t even stand to defend it. They won’t even stand 
to defend it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, somehow this is all so symbolic 
about what this debate is all about. Because you see, Mr. 
Speaker, the debate on this particular motion before us, the 
debate on this motion from the eyes through the minds, through 
the clouded minds of the government members opposite, is not 
about democracy. 
 
When the Minister of Justice brought this motion forth to this 
Legislative Assembly, he was no more interested in promoting 
democratic rights of the people of Saskatchewan than he was in 
plucking teeth out of chickens. What he was interested in was 
doing only one thing — exercising his right to engage in 
political knee-jerk reactions that this government is becoming 
famous for, and bringing forth to this Assembly another 
exercise in smoke and mirrors to try and divert the attention of 
the people of Saskatchewan about their failed plans to engage in 
piratization at the disadvantage of the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s what it’s about. That’s what it’s about; it’s exactly what 
it’s about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I express that opinion about this motion 
before us today, I’m not alone. I see the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. The member from Kelvington-Wadena is 
a great expert on legislative debate. We’ve seen his insightful 
entries into debate here today. And you’ve got a lot to say, sir; 
you had your opportunity. I sat here giving every member on 
that side the opportunity — full opportunity to enter into debate. 
You sat on your tongues and you refused to defend your 
government’s intervention into the rules of the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Now we’ve got another legislative expert 
standing on his feet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, the member that is speaking, 
engaged in the debate here in the House, is suggesting that this 
government had not allowed the democratic way in this House 
take place. This government is demonstrating that, Mr. Speaker, 
by allowing the member opposite to speak. And again, I say to 
you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would you just state your point. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And I’m just suggesting to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that while the member makes those accusations, they’re not 
correct because we are giving him all the opportunity, the 
government is allowing the member all the opportunity in the 
world to debate this particular motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member has raised an issue which is 
a dispute between members and not a point of  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1189 
 

order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t even necessary to 
respond to that intervention by the member opposite. And I 
want to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, when I stand in this 
Assembly to express my point of view, I do not stand in this 
Assembly as a privilege given to me by the Government of 
Saskatchewan; it is a privilege given to me by the people of 
Saskatchewan and by the rules of this Assembly, and that’s 
what this debate is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — What an expression of arrogance! What an 
expression of arrogance that somehow you give me the right to 
speak in this Assembly. That is totally erroneous, and you will 
have your opportunity, sir, you and the rest on that side. If you 
could ever get off your tongues, if you can quit sitting on your 
tongues, you will have the chance to enter into this debate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I express this point of view, I want to 
put on public record the fact that this is not an opinion that is 
shared solely by myself and my colleague from Saskatoon 
Eastview, who gave what I considered to be a very reasoned 
and considered intervention in debate in the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I’d like to refer the members of the government, the 
members of the Chamber here today, Mr. Speaker, to an 
editorial. And let me quote from the editorial from the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of May 11. What does this editorial 
have to say in reference to the initiative taken by the Minister of 
Justice to introduce this goofy motion before us today? And the 
editorial reads, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Tories may end up shooting themselves in 
the foot by trying to limit legislative bell-ringing to one 
hour. If the government changed (and there are many of 
the opinion that this is a prediction that’s going to come 
true), they would likely be the first to bear the full punitive 
brunt of the new measure. Why would they want to rob 
themselves of a tactic which can obviously be used to the 
opposition’s strategic advantage? 
 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 
want to be giving some serious consideration to the rules of the 
Legislative Assembly, they should start paying a little more 
attention to the rules and their impact on the opposition, 
because they’ll be looking at them from that point of view very 
shortly. 
 
I conclude my quote, Mr. Speaker, by saying this, and I quote 
again from the editorial: 
 

The move also makes the Tories look thirsty for revenge. 
 

Let me repeat and underline that, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The move also makes the Tories look thirsty for revenge. 
 

And is there any clearer way of interpreting the actions of the 
government related to this motion than that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We have a government that is hurting, that is now coming forth 
with political, knee-jerk reaction; a government that thinks that 
the problem is that the opposition has delayed their plans. And 
in fact the reality is that the public thinks that the problem was 
that the government proposed this plan in the first place. That’s 
the real problem. We’re debating this motion, not because it 
interfered with the government’s plans but because the 
government is hurting. And it’s hurting over the public response 
more than anything else. 
 
And when we consider these kinds of motions having to do with 
the conduct of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we have 
to put them into their context as to how they serve the 
democratic process, and most importantly, the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If there’s anything that I know about rules of the game, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a very clear rule, and that’s this: you don’t 
change the rules in the middle of the game. Nobody would ever 
suggest that it’s appropriate to change the rules in the middle of 
the game. 
 
Let’s take an analogy. Let’s consider, let’s consider, Mr. 
Speaker . . . we’re into the ball season, and the Toronto Blue 
Jays were playing ball here in Saskatchewan last week. And 
let’s just say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Rosthern suggested the Premier got hit with a pitch in the head. 
I’m not sure if that’s true or not. I’m not sure if that’s true; the 
member from Rosthern can confirm that himself. 
 
But how ridiculous it would be in the middle of that ball game, 
Mr. Speaker, if someone slid into second base, somebody slid 
into second base and there was a close call, and the Blue Jays 
came running out on the field and said that because the umpire 
had called their slider out — their runner going into second base 
out — came running out on the field and said, well you made 
the right call, but we don’t like the rule. And all of the Blue 
Jays stood up and down and jumped up and down and wailed 
and gnashed their teeth and cried copious tears on the pitcher’s 
mound and said, we’re not going to continue this game until 
you change the rule. You called it right; you called it according 
to the rules, but we don’t like the rule. Wouldn’t that be 
absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Wouldn’t that be absolutely ridiculous . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Wascana, he wants to 
intervene in this debate too. Somehow he missed the calling 
when he had his chance to enter into debate. We’ll be waiting 
for yours. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sit down. I’ll stand up. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, you had your chance, and you will get your 
chance. Yes, you speak well from your seat, and we’ll see how 
you speak from your feet, whether it’s as effective as it is from 
your seat. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, that would be an absolutely . . . we think 
about that and we say that would be an absolutely  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1190 
 

ridiculous thing to have happen, because it is, number one, 
inappropriate to change the rules of the game in the middle of 
the game. But, number two, you never change the rules in the 
heat of battle. Rules are made to be fair; they should be made to 
be fair. And when rules are changed, they should be changed in 
an aura of objectivity, considering the rights and the 
responsibilities of all parties who are affected by them. 
 
Is there any professional sporting league in the world that 
changes, even changes its rules in the middle of a season, let 
alone in the middle of a game? No they don’t. Obviously what 
they do is at the end of the season, they review their rules, and 
those who are affected by the rules will sit down and look at 
how the sport has developed and will consider what would 
make it more effective to accomplish our objectives. 
 
And that’s the exact parallel, Mr. Speaker, to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. In fact, it’s the exact parallel to 
every Legislative Assembly and House of Commons in this 
nation. The rules for functioning by which the Chambers of 
elected members conduct themselves are never — are never 
changed in the heat of exchange and the emotion of political cut 
and thrust that we all engage in. They change when reasoned 
men and women have an opportunity to sit down and reflect and 
consider our collective responsibilities and try to decide what 
the rules will be to allow this Chamber to better serve the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s the way it should be done; 
that’s the way it has been done; that’s not the way this motion 
proposes dealing with this particular rule. 
 
For that reason alone, although I have many other 
considerations that I want to bring to the attention of the 
Assembly, for that reason alone, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
inappropriate to carry this motion because it violates a simple 
principle of clear and objective thinking, leading to a 
determination of the rules by which all of us in this Chamber 
conduct ourselves in the interests of those people who are most 
important in this province — in the interest of serving, through 
the democratic process, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s really in that context that we have to review not just 
bell-ringing, bell-ringing and the use of bells to call members to 
come to this Assembly and exercise their most important right 
— to vote, to express through the democratic exercise of this 
Chamber what they believe, what each of us believes to be in 
the best interests of our constituents and all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Bell-ringing has its purpose. I guess what’s open for debate is 
whether the rule that exists in Saskatchewan today, whether it 
serves its purpose best the way it is or whether it serves its 
purpose best in some other form. 
 
But surely, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Justice presents 
his proposal for a change of a specific rule, and then at the 
conclusion of his remarks offers to do the right thing, to consult 
— odd that he didn’t do that before; it’s an odd time. But 
maybe under the heat of the motion and maybe coming under 
pressure from the very influential member from Lloydminster, 
he was pressed into not being able to consult. 
 

But he offered. He made an offer to consult the government and 
the opposition side of the Legislative Assembly. And that 
process was going on. It was going on; I put that on public 
record. Everyone in this Chamber knows it; the people of 
Saskatchewan might as well know it too. 
 
And then today, just before the House is ready to deal with 
business, the government advises the House that any sense of 
orderly consultation and negotiation and attempt to come to 
consensus in a co-operative kind of manner is off, and we’ve 
got a Bill, we’ve got a motion before us, and here we are. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re engaging in 
this review of the conduct of this place, that it’s most 
appropriate to do it looking at everything, not just focusing on a 
government’s knee-jerk political reaction when it’s hurting 
politically because of the response of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it seems to me that there are a lot of other items that need 
to be considered as we, all of us in this Assembly, review the 
conduct of this House. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s probably no 
one in this Assembly who takes a greater amount of interest or 
concern then you, because ultimately you’re charged with the 
responsibility of applying those rules in the interest of fair play 
and the exercise of the democratic rights of the members of this 
Chamber. 
 
And I’d just like to put on record that I think there are a number 
of other areas that should, at the very least, be considered; 
should, at the very least, be discussed by all members when 
attending to the rules of the Assembly. 
 
And we’re prepared to talk about the application of the rules 
regarding ringing the bells and to call members for votes, but at 
the same time, why not consider looking at things like a 
timetable or a calendar related to the presentation of Public 
Accounts and annual reports, the tabling of Public Accounts and 
annual reports by the Government of Saskatchewan, tabled to 
be available to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It doesn’t strike me, Mr. Speaker, as being unreasonable that 
when the government has a responsibility to be accountable to 
the people, that part of being accountable means presenting the 
information in a time that makes sense in terms of being able to 
hold the government accountable. And we all know that Public 
Accounts and annual reports have been significantly delayed 
under the term of the government of the day. 
 
So it seems to me to make sense to say, well let’s take a look at 
that rule too and make it fair to everyone; most importantly, fair 
to the people. Why not consider a calendar or a schedule that’s 
predetermined and by law requires the Government of 
Saskatchewan to provide the information available to the people 
of Saskatchewan to account for its conduct of its affairs and the 
spending of its money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us, and probably again no one more than 
yourself, have experienced the frustration of the  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1191 
 

exchanges by members in this Assembly of the asking and 
answering of questions. And I know we go through that every 
day and at times it’s extremely difficult to monitor it and apply 
it fairly. Perhaps it’s time that we had clearer rules, not only for 
the submission of written questions, but submission of oral 
questions, and for the answering of those written and oral 
questions. 
 
Clearer guide-lines regarding the specificity that’s required with 
both questions and answers, so that the people of Saskatchewan 
are put in a better position to make their own informed 
decisions, and less emphasis on rhetoric on both sides — I 
admit, rhetoric on both sides which sometimes can get a little 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Lloydminster, 
I look forward, I look forward, sir, to your intervention. 
 
There’s probably no one who pays more attention to 
interruptions in debate in this Assembly than you, sir, and I look 
forward to hearing what you have to say to improve the 
function of the Legislative Assembly, and just how you feel that 
this and this alone is all that needs attending to to improve the 
functions of this Chamber in the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. That will be highly insightful. And I would 
suggest, sir, you may want to give notice so that the people 
across the province of Saskatchewan can turn on their TVs and 
tune in for this very entertaining presentation that I’m sure that 
you’ll make. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s room for improvement in 
both the asking and the answering of questions, oral and written 
form. And that should be considered as well, in order to help 
make this Assembly function in the better interests of an 
informed public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the budget? Surely we could consider 
the same — a calendar or a schedule for the presentation of the 
spending plan of the government of the day. Surely that should 
be considered as part of a rule that requires a government to 
function in the best interests of the people. And that’s not 
inappropriate to be considering it as well. 
 
Or how about the calling of sessions and the timing of calling of 
sessions? You know, in recent years it strikes me, when I look 
at the timing of calling of sessions, that all too frequently it 
seems that sessions are called to conflict with the interest or the 
attention of the people of Saskatchewan. And so it seems to 
have become a bit of a pattern that you call the Legislative 
Assembly to session when people are least likely to be paying 
attention. And perhaps that’s something, just in the very 
parameters that require us to come together and conduct the 
people’s business. Why can’t we look at that? 
 
(1630) 
 
How about, Mr. Speaker, the provision of notice by the 
government of the day, a week in advance so that all the 
members of the Chamber and Assembly can come prepared to 
do the government’s business. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the hon. 
member, and I’m afraid I must point out to him that he’s 
discussing, from what I can gather, rules in general,  

of the House. And I appreciate what he’s saying. 
 
However, the debate is actually about rule 33, and we have to 
be careful that we don’t get into a general discussion, because 
we’re completely off the topic, and what we’ll have here is a 
general discussion of all the rules in Beauchesne’s or whichever 
book you wish to use. And I really don’t believe that’s the 
purpose of this debate. So I’d just like to point that out to the 
hon. member. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate what you’re saying, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s why I’m not being specific in the proposals that I’m 
making for the kinds of things that I believe need to be attended 
to, because that would be debate on other rules. And I respect 
what you’re saying. 
 
I simply repeat the point that when this motion is before us . . . 
and I understand it’s only on one specific rule, and that’s 
precisely my point. If we’re dealing in this Chamber with rule 
change, it should not be only on this precise rule, but that there 
are a large number of other very valid considerations that all of 
us in this Chamber should be considering and bringing forth a 
series of proposals which in total will help this Chamber 
function more effectively, with the criteria being the way that 
we serve the people of Saskatchewan through the democratic 
process. 
 
So I respect what you’re saying, sir. And that’s why I’m not 
suggesting a schedule, but simply saying that there are other 
items that would be appropriate for us to be considering and 
that this very motion, by focusing on one specific item only, is a 
violation of the tradition of review of rules and contradicts the 
history that I think we should be continuing. And I simply make 
that point. 
 
The suggestion has been made, as I said, that notice of business 
that this House entertains each week, surely any government 
that has got its act together is able to provide information to all 
members on its side and the opposite side so as to be able to 
prepare. And that’s something that could be considered to help 
us function here. 
 
The suggestion is made by some that perhaps the possibility of 
an election of Speaker, similar to the House of Commons, is 
something that should be given some discussion, and either be 
accepted and acted on or rejected, and with some confidence 
that the process that we use here is good and valid and it is the 
best. 
 
And so I simply toss these out, Mr. Speaker, to make that point, 
that I believe it is totally inappropriate as we entertain 
consideration of a rule before this House, that that’s all that 
we’re dealing with. 
 
Well let me then turn specifically to the rule, specifically to the 
rule and deal with that, deal with the whole question of 
bell-ringing. I don’t think that there is one of us in this House 
who is not of the opinion that bell-ringing is a very risky, 
legitimate, legitimate — yes the rules of the Assembly permit it 
— but is a very risky legislative exercise to use. And why do I 
say it is risky? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about 17 days? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well the member from Weyburn says, what 
about 17 days. And I’m sure that the member from  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1192 
 

Weyburn will intervene in this debate too, because he has had a 
great deal to say from his seat, and we will marvel at the 
wonders that will utter forth from his mouth as he speaks from 
his feet instead of his seat. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn makes 
precisely my point. Normally, normally — maybe at any other 
time in the history of Saskatchewan perhaps; I don’t want to 
overstate the case — the ringing of the bells for 17 days would 
have tolled a death knell for an opposition because we all come 
here charged with the responsibility of representing our 
constituents and the people of Saskatchewan. And surely any 
party, political party, that comes to this Chamber intentionally 
abusing the rules for their own self-serving interests would be 
recognized by the public of Saskatchewan as doing that and 
would be sent a message in the clearest way when the public 
have an opportunity to send a message, and that’s an election. 
 
And I guess I find myself feeling that there’s really nothing 
wrong with the rule that we have here. I’m open to considering 
some change. 
 
But the rule that exists today doesn’t, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, 
have a great deal wrong with it, because, you see, the check and 
balance. If you want to look in terms of checks and balances, in 
terms of the ringing of the bells to summons the members for an 
extended . . . allowed to happen for a longer period of time, has 
got the ultimate check and balance. And the ultimate check and 
balance is the opinion of the people. 
 
You see, if any political party on either side of the Assembly 
were to walk out of this Assembly and use the ringing of the 
bells as a signal of protest for what was going on, immediately 
two things happen: number one, the attention of the public of 
Saskatchewan is drawn to the event. Number one, that happens. 
And that’s not . . . I find myself saying a rule of the Assembly 
or a legislative technique in the Assembly that draws public 
attention to an event doesn’t automatically strike me as being a 
bad one to have. 
 
Surely, in terms of the cut and thrust of political and legislative 
exchange of debate in this Assembly, that is part of all of our 
objective. 
 
Now we know — and it’s unfortunate that many of the 
members of the media aren’t sitting in listening on this debate, 
as all too often is the case — we have freedom of the press and 
freedom of the media, and some of the members of the media 
are here, and I’m glad to see them here. And all too often we 
rely, I think, on the media as being the vehicle by which to 
communicate our political positions. I will have some 
comments to make later about exposing the debate of the 
Assembly more broadly, which I think would be good. 
 
But the media don’t have people who are assigned full time to 
sit in on legislative debates and report through weekly 
newspapers and daily newspapers in the province. So the 
ringing of the bells provides for a political party the opportunity 
to express in a very clear kind of way — largely because it’s a 
technique that’s used so very rarely — in a very clear kind of 
way that there is something happening in these chambers which 
we  

believe to be extremely important. So number one, the ringing 
of the bells signals that to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then, number two, what comes into question is a criticism, 
a potential criticism that we are all subject to, potentially if not 
in fact, in this Legislative chambers, the criticism that I’m sure 
we’ve all heard. And we hear it particularly when knocking on 
doors to meet our constituents in an election — the expression 
of opinion by people, by our constituents, that we need to take 
legislative debate more seriously, to be less rhetorical, to be less 
politically biased in the conduct in the Assembly. 
 
And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, when the public sees 
politicians potentially playing political games, it’s not a 
sentiment that takes a whole lot of time for the public to draw a 
conclusion to say, hey, you’ve gone over the border; you’ve 
gone out of bounds; you’ve gone too far. 
 
And so it is the people of Saskatchewan who provide the 
built-in check and balance for the ringing of the bells. Because 
very clearly, if we signal to the people of Saskatchewan what’s 
going on here as important, number one; and number two, if the 
people of Saskatchewan say, well that may be true in your 
opinion, but it’s not in mine; you guys are out of touch with 
reality; quit playing stupid political games, and don’t count on 
my support at the next election — which is precisely the risk 
that is taken by any party that chooses to use that vehicle or 
technique, extremely risky. 
 
Because unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan don’t tend to 
hold politicians at the top of their list in terms of trustworthiness 
and esteem — unfortunately. And so we have to recognize that 
reality, and that means that for all of us to choose to ring the 
bells becomes risky because the people of Saskatchewan can 
draw that conclusion. 
 
And on the other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker — and that’s 
why I think we have the rule here — is that if, number one, the 
ringing of the bells draws attention to the issue of the day, and 
when people reflect on the issue of the day; number two, say, 
you’re not playing political games; you’re not engaging in 
political one-upmanship; what you are doing is drawing 
attention to an issue about which we care deeply and about we 
care passionately, and we are with you - 
_ then you have, Mr. Speaker, the use of the rules of the 
Legislative Assembly to help to focus the public attention and 
the public debate on the issues of consideration before this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Well you know, I see the member from Swift Current, I think it 
is. Is it? Who’s whining . . . which was whining over there? Oh 
she says it was the member from Elbow that was whining. Cut 
Knife-Lloyd was whining. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, you 
know the members opposite keep helping to make my point. 
And here’s another insightful intervention, I’m sure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. If the 
member opposite has anything to say, he has ample opportunity 
to say it. However, the point of order is that the member 
opposite is not to refer to members on this side of the House, 
the member from Swift Current, who is quietly minding her 
own business, doing her work in the  
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1193 
 

Assembly to avoid the boredom that has carried on this 
afternoon. The member for Melville was sitting here reading a 
scholarly work by a member of the Department of Education 
and was not involved in this debate whatsoever. 
 
The point of order is that the member is to stay on the topic of 
the order before the House and not refer to members on 
government side in any manner, and particularly in an 
inaccurate manner, which I will politely describe as inaccurate. 
The point of order is that the member should stick to the topic 
and not falsely refer to the activity of the members of the 
government side. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The point of order raised is an issue, a 
dispute once again, and from that point of view, I don’t accept it 
as a point of order. However, having said that, I believe that 
when members — and we have heard this before in the House; 
it isn’t the first time — but when hon. members are heckled 
from both sides of the House, sometimes the individual 
speaking refers to another member, unfortunately perhaps, 
sometimes inaccurately. And I suppose the long and short of it 
is that members on both sides of the House should refrain from 
interrupting the speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to direct 
my comments if the whiner would please stand and be 
recognized . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I should 
also like to bring to the hon. member’s attention that 
provocative and inflammatory language is not necessary but 
only adds to the problem. So I’d just like him to get back on the 
topic of which he is capable. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be very happy to do that. 
 
I just pause, Mr. Speaker, to try and understand the intervention 
of the member from Swift Current, but I await her entry into 
debate as well, as I’m sure all the government members, 
contrary to their long-standing tradition, will enter into debate 
on this Assembly. 
 
(1645) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, and I simply summarize in 
direct comment, Mr. Speaker, in direct comment to the specific 
of the Bill before us, that it seems to me that the biggest check 
and balance of all, in terms of the sensible application of the 
rule permitting the ringing of bells to call members to vote, is 
the response of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s for that very reason that we have it before us here 
today, because in making the decision to use the ringing of the 
bells to bring attention to the privatization of SaskPower it 
became apparent, as time elapsed, that the people of 
Saskatchewan appreciated the actions of the opposition in 
bringing this issue to their attention and made it very clear what 
their opinion was. 
 
And I understand it’s uncomfortable for members of the 
government to have to go through the pain and the grief and the 
agony of encountering their constituents who are  

telling them that they’re out of touch with reality. But it seems 
to me that the response that would be most appropriate would 
be for those members to come back to their caucus meeting and 
tell their front-benchers that they are out of touch with reality. 
It’s time to get off the piratization mania and get onto the 
agenda of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That would be the appropriate response. But 
instead we engage in legislative goofiness by having the motion 
before us to change the rule, and as an expression of legislative 
knee-jerk reaction. The people of Saskatchewan will ultimately 
decide in the end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — They’ll ultimately decide in the end whether it 
was an application of the rule of this House that they saw in 
their best interest or not. 
 
And I find it kind of interesting — let me be kind and say 
interesting, Mr. Speaker — when I listened to words of the 
Minister of Justice when he introduced this motion and talked 
about the importance of defending the principles of democracy. 
And I’d like to respond to that portion of the minister’s remarks 
for a moment, if I may, because it seems to me, in the two and a 
half years that I have had the privilege of being a member of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, that there have been a 
number, not one or two, but a goodly number of examples of 
the denial of the democratic rights and processes as exhibited 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if there is anyone, if there is anyone who is justified to be 
self-righteous about the applications of the principles of 
democracy, it’s not this group of the elected members that have 
that right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s just take a quick look, let’s just take a quick look at 
the democratic record of the Government of Saskatchewan 
which comes before us now all full of pomp and 
pretentiousness — defending the principles of democracy, they 
say. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected in October of 
1986, the first session of the Legislative Assembly was called 
for December of that year for two weeks, and what did we deal 
with? What was the main item that this Assembly dealt with as 
the new legislative agenda of the new PC government of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And we will all recall debating Bill No. 5 — Bill No. 5 — that 
gave the legislative right for the Government of Saskatchewan 
to no longer be required to come before this Assembly when 
changing the mandates and the structures of its government 
departments. A Bill which said that the very creation or 
elimination or change of government departments no longer has 
to be defended in the people’s chambers. It can be done behind 
closed cabinet doors without a single minister having to wiggle 
his big toe in the people’s Legislative Chamber to defend the 
change in departmental structure and the operations of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1194 
 

Bill No. 5, in the first two weeks . . . and by the way, 
interestingly enough in a session called two weeks before 
Christmas when this government knew that the people of 
Saskatchewan were involved in other kinds of personal and 
family kinds of priorities and wouldn’t be paying a whole lot of 
attention to the legislative chambers, and so they rammed 
through a Bill, rammed through a Bill which allows them to 
engage in government reorganization behind closed cabinet 
doors; contrary to the traditions of this House that had been in 
existence since 1905. 
 
The great defenders of democracy, bringing forth a Bill that 
gives their ministers the authority to make sweeping changes in 
government departments without even having to utter a single 
word or respond to an inquiry within the people’s chambers. 
Isn’t that a lovely defence of the principles of democracy in the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well isn’t this kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker! In the Report of 
the Provincial Auditor that you tabled earlier in the Assembly 
today, what does the Provincial Auditor have to say about the 
great defence of democratic principle by the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan today? What does the auditor have to say? 
 
On page 9, I quote, Mr. Speaker, he says . . . and this is the 
Provincial Auditor speaking. He says: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because: 
 

Interesting, Mr. Speaker. Let’s put on the record that it was said 
by one of the members from government side that he’s biased. 
Mr. Speaker, I continue to quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order that I wish 
to bring forward to you and bring to your attention here is that 
members from the opposition there are running across the floor 
to the member that’s speaking, with different types of 
information that is not related to the bell-ringing motion. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, sir, that they’re reading all sorts 
of implications and everything through from other members 
here. And I must ask you to ask the member, sir, in all due 
respect to this Assembly and your Chair, to get him back on 
track and speak directly to the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order, and the initial portion of the hon. member’s point of 
order wasn’t what I would consider a point of order. However, I 
have been listening to the hon. member’s remarks very closely, 
and since the last time I called him to order, he has been 
speaking to the topic. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the ruling and point out for the information of members 
opposite that I am responding to comments made by the 
Minister of Justice defending the government’s commitment to 
the great principles of democracy. 
 

And I make the point for you, sir, and for all members of this 
Chamber, that those principles have been violated substantially 
in the last two and a half years that I have been here. And I refer 
the chambers again, Mr. Speaker, to the Report of the 
Provincial Auditor for the year ended March 31, 1988, tabled in 
these chambers today. And the auditor says, and I quote, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. What is the hon. member’s point 
of order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, in relation to the auditor’s 
report, that is of another day and another debate. What I am 
saying here, Mr. Speaker, is that when we’re talking about the 
bell-ringing of this Assembly, we’re talking about bringing the 
bell-ringing under a control. We’re not talking about allowing 
this legislature to be held at ransom and in strike because of the 
NDP wanting to walk out of this legislature. That is the 
particular issue that’s at hand here, not the auditor’s report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There is no way that that can be anything relevant to . . . We’re 
not saying we’re abolishing the bell-ringing in this Assembly, 
but we’re bringing some order to it, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that as your ruling can be, is that the auditor’s report has 
nothing to do with the bell-ringing issue. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have listened to the hon. 
member’s point of order. It was similar to the one he raised 
initially. And I had ruled on that, and my ruling hasn’t changed. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to rise on a point of order. It’s a 
well-known fact of parliamentary procedure that when a 
member rises on a point of order, that member must go directly 
to what the rule is that was broken. He must allude to the rule 
directly so that the Speaker can decide whether in fact . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, a member must go 
directly to the point of order. The member for Cut Knife is 
interrupting the House with irrelevant points of order, and that 
is my point of order, that he constantly does that by not going 
directly to the rule that has been abridged in the House. And the 
member must do that at once when he rises. 
 
The Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order for Saskatoon Westmount and given it consideration, and 
my judgement is that the hon. member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster was raising a point of order dealing with 
relevancy of an issue being discussed by the hon. member. And 
in that context, his point of orders were in order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says in his 
report, tabled here today, in the area entitled current issues of 
importance, the Provincial Auditor says, and I quote, it’s item 
2.20: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because: 
 

  



 
May 17, 1989 

 

1195 
 

Point one: 
 

he now sees the financial transactions for about 50 per 
cent of the public spending (only half, Mr. Speaker); 
 

Item number two: 
 

when reliance on an appointed auditor is not justified, it is 
no longer possible to carry out the work not done by the 
appointed auditor; and 
 

Point number three, and I underline this one, Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor says, and I quote: 
 

I am being denied access to information. 
 

The Provincial Auditor, in his report tabled in these chambers 
today, has to say about these great defenders of democracy that 
he now sees financial transactions for only about half of the 
public spending. And again I quote: 
 

I am being denied access to information. 
 

Are these the defenders of democracy, Mr. Speaker? Are these 
the defenders of democracy? How facetious — how facetious! 
You know, they’ve got lots of debate from their seats; they 
speak well from their seats. But how facetious. None of them 
will stand to defend their Minister of Justice’s own motion and 
to defend their record of protection of the principles of 
democracy, because quite simply, Mr. Speaker, their track 
record, when you look at their behaviours and not their words, 
their track record says that this group does not defend and does 
not believe in the principles of democracy for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have several more 
comments that I would like to make on this motion, and I note 
that we are . . . noted we are approaching the time of 
adjournment. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


