




















































April 21, 1989 - May 8, 1989 Hansard


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 21, 1989 
 
 

969 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of the House, two members of my 
constituency from Sandy Bay, Mr. Bobby Ray, and Elizabeth 
Ray from Sandy Bay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to this House today, 21 grade 
8 students from Ituna, Saskatchewan, who are visiting the 
legislature and seated in your gallery here, together with their 
teacher, Mr. Bill Hudema, and their bus driver, Walter 
Petrowsky. 
 
The Ituna School visits annually at the Assembly and usually 
brings a grade 8 class as part of their education program to learn 
how governments function in Canada. I want the members to 
welcome these students and advise them that after their tour I 
will be meeting with them at 11 a.m. on the front steps. So 
would the members please welcome these students from Ituna, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of SaskPower 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question this morning is to the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, in this legislature, in this House 
last May, May of 1988, your Deputy Premier was asked in this 
legislature if the splitting up of SaskPower was the prelude to 
the privatization of SaskPower. And his answer was, and I 
quote, as follows: 
 

Mr. Speaker, to that rather lengthy straightforward 
question, the answer is no. 
 

Those were the words of your Deputy Premier. Mr. Premier, we 
see today how good the word of your government is, a word of 
your government which is a record of promises which are 
broken and are worthless. My question to you, sir, is this: what 
is your explanation or apology to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan for now breaking your promise and your word 
and privatizating a major public utility of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points should 
be made. Number one, I was asked the question as to whether 
the splitting of the utilities was being done for the purposes of 
privatization or public participation. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
the short answer at that time was no; and the short answer at 
this time was still no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you why. As I said then, and I  

continue to say, Mr. Speaker, this is the only place in Canada 
where we have competing forms of energy in the same utility 
— electrical and gas, Mr. Speaker — the only place in Canada 
where there are competing forms of energy. 
 
So it was considered prudent, Mr. Speaker, to split the utility 
into the electrical utility and the gas utility. We did that, Mr. 
Speaker, we did that. We now have separate lines of 
administration for the electrical utility and the gas utility. 
 
Since that split, Mr. Speaker, and because of some of the things 
my colleague the Minister of Public Participation has heard 
while he’s travelled around the province, and because of the 
some of the ideas that we have generated as it relates to 
opportunity and diversification, Mr. Speaker, we recognized a 
great opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan, for 
SaskEnergy, for SaskPower, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
diversification, jobs, all of the things that go with it. That is how 
we got to the point we’re at today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that the 
Premier saw fit not to answer my question on a very important 
matter, the privatization of SaskPower. It’s his choice, of 
course, whether he answers or not, so I guess I’ve got to direct 
my new question to the Deputy Premier, his desk mate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower annual report shows that in the last 
10 years, past 10 years, the natural gas side of the power 
corporation made profits every year, while out of the electrical 
side they lost money seven out of 10 years. There was 
cross-subsidization. That was the way power corporation 
always worked. Now you propose to sell the profitable natural 
gas side to private investors, and you want the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan the unprofitable electrical side. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can see that that’s a good deal to your big 
buddy investors in eastern Canada and elsewhere, but how in 
the world is that a good deal for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower, the electrical 
utility, has in fact shown a profit in the last two years. And part 
of the problem in the past, Mr. Speaker, is that there was 
cross-subsidization and no clear administrative lines in the two 
utilities in competing forms of energy. And of course today, Mr. 
Speaker, today you will see when this thing takes place, when it 
does, Mr. Speaker, that the rates at SaskPower will be at or 
below the rate of inflation, out for some period, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d say nine, ten years. Rates for rinks, Mr. Speaker, the centre 
of activity in our small rural communities, Mr. Speaker, will be 
50 per cent of what they are today, Mr. Speaker. In addition, 
Mr. Speaker, there will be up to $10 million each year put into a 
diversification fund at SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1989 

970 
 

And let’s take a look at the opportunity that exists on the gas 
side, Mr. Speaker. A few years ago there was a small company 
similar to SaskEnergy today. That company was called Nova. 
Today that company is worth $10 billion, employing thousands 
of Albertans, building fertilizer plants, upgraders, pipelines, you 
name it, Mr. Speaker. They are working for Albertans, as this 
company will work for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. I want to remind the Deputy Premier, you 
don’t have to go to Alberta. This province was working prior to 
1982 before you people got hold of this government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And SaskPower was working, and we 
didn’t have 6,000 people leaving this province a month. 
 
Now my question to you is this, Mr. Deputy Premier. I’m 
saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, the hon. member 
who’s the minister in charge of privatization, his sorry record, 
knows that’s the case that 6,000 people leave the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And if he would tend more to the 
businesses of the public rather than to his own business, maybe 
he’d understand that better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now my question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Deputy Premier is very simple. Under your administration, 
because of the way that you’ve mismanaged, you and your 
buddies, Mr. George Hill, you and your PC cronies — the way 
they’ve mismanaged the power corporation, we now have the 
highest electrical rates in Canada, thanks to your 
mismanagement. Yet another Crown corporation that you have 
messed up — the highest electrical rates. 
 
Now I want to tell you that selling off the most profitable 
portion of SPC, where the return is higher than the electrical 
side, I want to ask you this question: can you confirm that 
everyone in Saskatchewan has come to understand that one of 
the many unfortunate side consequences of privatization of 
power corporation is going to be the inevitable rise yet again of 
electrical rates? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell you how well 
this province was working, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1982. Prior to 
1982, in boom times, Mr. Speaker, in boom times . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In boom times, Mr. Speaker, in 1981 
there were three gas wells drilled in the province — three gas 
wells; 1988, 700 gas wells drilled in the  

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In addition, Mr. 
Speaker, because of some of the initiatives taken by SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy, we now have SK Turbines in Saskatoon. We 
have Phillips Cable in Moose Jaw. We have Dupont Plastics in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, we have Babcock & Wilcox in 
Melfort. We have 107 products now being manufactured in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that were once manufactured some 
place else. 
 
Now you don’t have to be a space scientist to figure out that we 
have had a net decline in jobs in the agricultural sector, but, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had 4,000 new jobs in the industrial sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Gas Distribution 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My goodness. My goodness, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy Premier. My 
goodness. The Deputy Premier stretches his own credibility and 
this government’s credibility, which is now threadbare in any 
event, by those kinds of statements. How in the world can he 
say that in the face of the statistics? 
 
I want to ask a new question to the Deputy Premier, a new 
question to the Deputy Premier. Your government announced 
again with great fanfare, a program that began in 1982 — 
natural gas to farms. You admitted at that time that it’s 
something everybody understands and a program which was a 
good program. Now it’s going to be a very long time before a 
gas distribution system comes to farms as being economically 
delivered. That has been said by you people and by the power 
corporation people. 
 
It seems that in the highest degree unlikely, in my judgement, 
Mr. Speaker, that a private company is going to have any 
interest in continuing this program. My question to the Deputy 
Premier is this: can we assume that farmers wanting to use the 
cheaper natural gas are yet going to be another victim of the 
ideological drive to sell off Saskatchewan’s heritage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points should 
be made here. Number one, I can remember when we were 
talking about the rural natural gas program, they fought it tooth 
and nail every step of the way, Mr. Speaker. They said that it 
was uneconomic and that rural Saskatchewan didn’t deserve 
that kind of expenditure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During that same period, Mr. Speaker, in the seven years prior 
to 1982, natural gas prices went up 188.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
Compare that, Mr. Speaker, compare that to the seven years 
since 1982. Natural gas prices, Mr. Speaker, during that 
seven-year period went up 8.8 per cent. 
 
Now tell me, Mr. Speaker — and I want to answer his direct 
question, Mr. Speaker, and that is, will the natural gas 
distribution program continue? The answer is yes, the natural 
gas program will continue until its completion in 1992. 
 
  



 
April 21, 1989 

971 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. He gave us that assurance in May of 1988, and 
today he broke his word by privatizing SaskPower. And that’s 
how much I can trust his word on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You can’t trust anything that they say about 
this government at all. In fact the Premier, he forgot he was 
elected to act as Premier, but he’s turned out to be the Monty 
Hall, and he thinks he’s making a deal with everybody in the 
province and the country. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is this. Look, you’ve given 
away now the power corporation; you’ve given away the potash 
corporation; you’ve privatized the Sask Minerals corporation; 
you’ve privatized Saskoil; you’ve privatized SaskCOMP; 
you’re privatizing the dental plan; you privatized the highway 
workers. 
 
My question to you, sir, after you’re done, after the wrecking 
crew is done, after you take us back to the 1930s, what in the 
world is going to be left to run for this province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what is left, what is going 
to be left to run? Mr. Speaker, as is the duty of all good 
governments, Mr. Speaker, we will have an obligation to 
deliver health care, Mr. Speaker; to deliver education and social 
services, Mr. Speaker; to build highways; to do all of those 
things that government has a responsibility and an obligation to 
do, Mr. Speaker. And in addition, we will have a much healthier 
revenue base to draw from to do those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can you compare SaskEnergy to Alberta Trunk Line of several 
years ago, Mr. Speaker? Alberta Trunk Line has grown, from 
something comparable to SaskEnergy today, to a $10 billion 
company employing thousands of Albertans, Mr. Speaker, and 
building and diversifying, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re 
talking about. Now only a few short years ago, they started to 
think the same way, and I’m not sure what happened. Their tail 
got caught in the gate coming out of the chute. But they were 
talking, Mr. Speaker, about offering to the public shares in these 
Crown . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. He talks about a healthier economic base is 
what’s going to be left. You bet you, he says. Well I’ll tell you 
it can’t be much worse that it is right now, although I don’t 
think it’s going to be any healthier. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: in the 1986 provincial election 
campaign, I didn’t hear you mention one word to the people of 
Saskatchewan that you were going to privatize Power. You 
didn’t tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan in the 
1986 provincial election one  

word that you’re going to privatize SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), that you were going to touch the public 
utilities. You didn’t say in the 1986 provincial election that you 
would privatize the potash corporation or Sask Minerals or 
anything else. You never campaigned on that. You do not have 
the mandate to do what you’re doing which is destroying 
SaskPower and the heritage to the province of Saskatchewan. I 
say to you, let the people decide, call an election on this issue 
right now. Call an election right now! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
appreciate the hon. members can get enthusiastic about 
emotional topics; however, I remind them again that that should 
not include unparliamentary language from their seats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that I 
understand the enthusiasm, particularly of the member for 
Regina Rosemont. I don’t think that he, in an election, the 
emotional levels of an election scenario, Mr. Speaker, would be 
that of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I ask order from the hon. members. I 
ask order from them as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t think he’d be campaigning 
much around Rafferty, in any event, Mr. Speaker. But let’s talk 
about — let’s talk about mandates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember, and I was sitting exactly in that chair in 1975, Mr. 
Speaker, and Bill 1 and Bill 2 of that session, Mr. Speaker, dealt 
with the nationalization of 50 per cent of the potash industry in 
this province. Not one word of that nationalization was 
mentioned in the election campaign of 1975, Mr. Speaker, not 
one word, but they did it anyway. 
 
Now what happened? What happened subsequently, Mr. 
Speaker? They had a change of heart, but they didn’t tell 
anybody. But they had this secret little agenda, Mr. Speaker, 
that they were going to privatize newsprint, privatize market 
pulp, privatize the heavy oil upgrader, privatize, Mr. Speaker, 
natural gas. Look at it. It’s right there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, natural gas. Look, it’s right there. Mr. Speaker, 
natural gas. Don’t talk to me about mandates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spill of Oil at Island Falls 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the look on their faces tells 
all about whether they think they’re winning or losing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have a question to the same minister, 
the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan  
  



 
April 21, 1989 

972 
 

Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, are you aware that on April 
15, 1988 there was a spill of some 250 gallons of transformer 
oil containing polychlorinated biphenyls, more commonly 
known as PCBs, Mr. Minister, at the Island Falls generating 
plant near Sandy Bay, and that the oil leaked into the Churchill 
River through the plant’s drainage system? And can you 
confirm, Mr. Minister, the minister in charge of the power 
corporation, can you confirm that this spill was never reported 
to the Department of the Environment’s spill registry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the information that the 
member is presenting to this House is not factual information. 
It’s completely wrong. What actually happened in that spill that 
the member is recalling from 1988 — and it happened in April 
of 1988 — there was between 15 and 20 litres of ordinary 
lubricating oil that leaked from a switch. There were no PCBs 
in it. It was strictly lubricating oil, and it did leak into the river, 
which is unsatisfactory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I will then ask a question of 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Since the minister in charge of the power 
corporation, which did not report the spill, because it’s not 
shown in the records of the spill registry which have been 
thoroughly investigated and checked, Mr. Minister, I will go to 
the Minister of the Environment and I will ask him whether he 
is aware of the fact that in fact there were PCBs 
(polychlorinated biphenyls) in the oil. And I hold here a report 
of an analysis done by PPM Canada Inc, PCB management, 
clean-up and destruction of samples that were taken on that site 
by my colleague, the member from that area, Cumberland, 
which showed that in fact there were PCBs in the oil, Mr. 
Minister. And either you’re uninformed, although you should 
be, or you are misleading the House about this issue. Now . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the information that the 
member is trying to put across in this House is not factual. I 
checked as recently as yesterday on this issue, and the data that 
was brought forward by the staff in the Department of 
Environment, in their inspection of that particular spill, 
indicates that the oil that was spilled was strictly lubricating oil. 
It was not PCB contaminated. And, Mr. Speaker, any time you 
have a spill that is under 50 litres of lubricating oil, it is not 
required to be reported to spill control. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I question the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, it may very well be lubricating . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order. 
Would the hon. members allow the member from Regina North 
East to continue with his questioning without vociferous 
interruptions. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t see that 
you were up. I just want to repeat that whatever the oil that was 
there, Mr. Minister, the fact of the matter is — if it’s lubricating 
oil or cooling oil — the fact of the matter is that it had, 
according to the test results, PCBs in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you 
stop this continuous cover-up in your department by yourself, 
and will you undertake today to put some of your inspectors on 
an airplane, send them up to Sandy Bay so that there can be an 
investigation on all of the things that have taken place there, 
including the fact that there are barrels of PCB-containing oil 
stored on the site, barrels which are corroding and which have 
the potential of draining further into the Churchill River and 
doing more damage? Will you give that undertaking to the 
House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I will assure you again that 
there was no PCB-contaminated oil spilt into the Churchill 
River. And as far as the inspection of the site, the site has been 
thoroughly inspected by the department staff. It was inspected 
in October and it was inspected again early in the new year; the 
site is fine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just like to ask the hon. 
members to give the member from Cumberland an opportunity 
to put his question. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister. 
That side of the House doesn’t care what happens to 
environmental . . . (inaudible) . . . in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Would the Minister of 
Finance please allow the hon. member to put his question. 
 
Order, order, order. Would everybody . . . the member from 
Meadow Lake, would he also give . . . Order. Order. Let’s just 
everybody relax and allow . . . Order. Let’s allow the member 
from Cumberland to put his question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — These members still don’t care what happens to 
the people in northern Saskatchewan or the workers in northern 
Saskatchewan in regards to a 250 gallon spill of PCB 
contaminated oil. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — We’re not talking about the lubricating oil spill, 
we’re talking about the PCB spill of 250 gallons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  
 April 21, 1989 — May 8, 1989 
 

973 
 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Is the minister aware that there’s been a lot of 
serious medical health problems, including skin disorders, 
headaches, and nausea, and many other forms of illnesses that 
have affected the people from the community and also the 
workers in that dam. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I might inform you that the 
hon. member from Cumberland was given the opportunity to go 
to the site with the staff from the Department of Environment at 
the time that they did the tests. And at that time that was found 
that the oil that was spilled was not PCB-contaminated oil but 
rather there was between 15 and 20 litres of ordinary lubricating 
oil. The member is raising an issue that is not factual. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Power Corporation Act. 
 
The division bells rang from 10:33 a.m. until 1 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I have not been notified that the House 
is ready to proceed with the division currently under way. 
Therefore, in accordance with past practice, the bells will be 
turned off and this sitting is suspended until 9 o’clock a.m., 
Monday, April 24, 1989. 
 
The division bells then continued to ring until 2:08 p.m., 
Monday, May 8, 1989. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Devine Pickering 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Neudorf 
Gerich Kopelchuk 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays — 26 
 
Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Atkinson 

 
Rolfes Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Lingenfelter Hagel 
Tchorzewski Pringle 
Koskie Lyons 
Thompson Calvert 
Brockelbank Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky Koenker 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Energy 
Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Saskatchewan Energy Corporation. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Devine Pickering 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Neudorf 
Gerich Kopelchuk 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays — 26 
 
Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Atkinson 
Rolfes Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Lingenfelter Hagel 
Tchorzewski Pringle 
Koskie Lyons 
Thompson Calvert 
Brockelbank Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky Koenker 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(1415) 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

974 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act respecting the Regulation of Rates of 
Service with Respect to the Distribution of Gas in 

Saskatchewan by Provincial Gas Limited 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Regulation of Rates of Service with respect 
to the Distribution of Gas in Saskatchewan by Provincial Gas 
Limited. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Devine Pickering 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Lane McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Neudorf 
Gerich Kopelchuk 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays —26 
 
Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Atkinson 
Rolfes Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Lingenfelter Hagel 
Tchorzewski Pringle 
Koskie Lyons 
Thompson Calvert 
Brockelbank Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky Koenker 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kinistino on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for leave to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, 31 grade 7 and 8 students from the Aberdeen 
School. They are sitting in your gallery. They are accompanied 
by their teachers, Ross  

Graham and Belinda Snow. I will be meeting with them at 3 
o’clock for pictures and refreshments, and I would ask all the 
members to please help welcome the Aberdeen School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I, too, ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to guests and 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of students from 
Robert Usher Collegiate in Regina. There’s 14 of them involved 
in the program of academic and creative enrichment, and I’ve 
already met with this group, discussed some of the proceedings 
that are going on today. I was unable to tell them what is going 
to transpire from here on in as all the rules seem to be out the 
window for now. But anyway I enjoyed the meeting with them, 
and I ask all members to join me in welcoming the group from 
Robert Usher. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to other members of the . . .  
 
The Speaker: — I assume you are requesting leave to do this? 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’d like to introduce to you, and through you, 
a constituent who is visiting Regina this afternoon, Maxine 
Wawryk, and I’d ask all members to greet her in the appropriate 
manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, in resuming the debate on 
Bill 20, the Bill to sell off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, I want to say what an unusual set of 
circumstances this is to rise in this House to speak to a Bill 
without first having subjected the government to questions in 
question period, without first having had the opportunity to 
table petitions. The people of Saskatchewan are asking, what 
are they hiding? 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

975 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I believe the 
subject matter is the debate on the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. I am 
unable to hear the Minister of Finance. I would like the 
opportunity to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My understanding 
of the rule is that we’re talking about Bill 20, An Act respecting 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. The hon. member has 
brought in matters not related to the particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and I suggest that the hon. member begin to follow the 
rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak to that 
point of order. I was listening carefully to the member. He had 
given, I think, one line where he talked about the government 
not allowing question period today in the Assembly, and 
presenting of petitions. And I think that that is perfectly in order 
as part of his comments that he was going to make. 
 
I’m sure that if the minister would wait for more than half a 
minute to see where the member is going with his speech, he 
would see where presenting of petitions, when it comes to 
privatizing corporations in this province, has a great deal to do 
with the potash corporation. 
 
So I would just say to the member that wait, and once he 
concludes his remarks about the lack of opportunity to present 
petitions today and ask questions, that he will in fact get on to 
the potash issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I have heard the point of order. I would just 
like to draw this to the attention of the House. There is no room 
for the introduction of petitions today. Being after 2 o’clock, 
routine proceedings started where we left off, and therefore we 
continue from there. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I raised those 
comments because the people of Saskatchewan are outraged — 
outraged about this Bill, outraged about privatization. And if 
there’s anything that’s clear from the last few weeks, it is that 
the people of Saskatchewan want no more part of privatization. 
They want no part of this potash sell-off Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — They can hide, Mr. Speaker, they can 
hide behind the skirts of Legislative Assembly rules, but they 
can’t run for ever. And they can hide today and they can try and 
hide tomorrow, but I tell you, a day of reckoning will come for 
them. There will be accountability — if not today, if not 
tomorrow, then there will be during the next provincial election 
when the people will say no to this Bill, no to this government, 
no to selling off Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill that we’re 
addressing is a Bill to sell off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to foreign investors and other big-business 
investors in Canada. And I guess the question that the people of 
Saskatchewan have been asking themselves: is this something 
that we really want? Is this something that we really need? Is 
this a Bill that will help build the future of this province? Is this 
a Bill that will deal with the real problems of today? 
 
The real problems of today, Mr. Speaker, are things like 
unemployment, things like people leaving the province. This 
government talks about how the privatization, the selling off of 
Potash is going to help our young people, how it’s going to 
produce jobs. We don’t know how that’s going to happen. The 
people of Saskatchewan don’t know how that’s going to 
happen. But I tell you, people leaving the province is a real 
problem in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d only need to refer you, Mr. Speaker, that in the first three 
months of this year more than 9,000 people left this province in 
search of jobs in other jurisdictions, in other provinces. They 
looked for job opportunities elsewhere. And that’s contrasted 
. . . that’s the first three months of this year, as contrasted with 
13,000 who left Saskatchewan in all of 1988, or 8,000 who left 
in all of 1987; more people leaving this province than coming to 
it in search of jobs and economic opportunities. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are asking themselves, how 
does the sell-off, how does the sell-off of the potash corporation 
address that? How will it provide jobs for our young people, 
and especially for our young people? Because it’s young people 
primarily that are leaving Saskatchewan, and leaving it in 
droves. 
 
And it doesn’t deal with the real needs and the real wants of 
Saskatchewan people. It doesn’t address the many problems 
that beset them. It doesn’t deal with the many challenges that 
they face. The people of Saskatchewan are concerned, not only 
about unemployment but about agriculture, health care, the 
economy, the provincial debt. 
 
Yet this Bill, and other privatization Bills that the government is 
spending so much time on, does not begin to deal with these 
problems. It doesn’t deal with the real issues that face 
Saskatchewan people. And it’s almost as if this government has 
put a bag over its head and has refused to listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan, refused to listen to their concerns, refused to 
address their needs, but has a bag over their head or some 
blinkers and says, these are the things that we believe in, no 
matter how irrelevant they may be to the problems facing 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
That’s how we look on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. That’s how the 
people of Saskatchewan look on this Bill. And I will venture to 
say that if this government carries on, carries on in this vein and 
with this type of Bill to ignore the people of Saskatchewan, 
there is just simply no doubt in my mind that come the next 
provincial election these people will be told they will be turfed 
out of office. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

976 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Even in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, even in rural Saskatchewan the people are telling me 
that the thing that concerns them is the lack of jobs for young 
people, the drought, the world price of wheat, maintaining the 
family farm, financing farm debt, the cost of farm inputs, 
retaining rural services and businesses, the need for farm 
management training, interest rates. They’re telling me that 
those are the concerns that we have. 
 
And I say to them, but the government is proposing to sell off 
the potash corporation. I know, they say, but how does that help 
us? And the answer is that it doesn’t help them, Mr. Speaker; it 
doesn’t help them at all. And this government is not only 
turning its people on all of the people of Saskatchewan, but 
very much so on the people of rural Saskatchewan who, as we 
all know, face some real and serious difficulties as they try to 
grapple with the many challenges they face to get a crop in, to 
get a crop off, to get it sold, to keep the family farm afloat. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan are asking themselves, how will 
this Bill help them? And it doesn’t help them, Mr. Speaker; it 
doesn’t help them. This is a Bill that’s put forward by an 
ideologically driven government, a government that only sees 
its own agenda, knows that it doesn’t correspond to the agenda 
of the people of Saskatchewan, but couldn’t care less. 
 
They are in so deep now, Mr. Speaker, they are in so deep, and 
I guess they’re taking to heart the words of their Premier and 
saying, never say whoa in the middle of a mud hole. But they 
are in a mud hole. They’re in a mud hole of privatization, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they’re in, and sinking fast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would venture to say that if you were to ask the 
people of Saskatchewan or tell them that the Premier is 
planning to sell a major portion of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to a foreign company, would you be in favour or 
opposed to the sale? I would venture to say that three-quarters 
of the people of Saskatchewan would oppose that; that they 
oppose the selling off of the potash corporation to foreign 
investors; they oppose selling off, selling off — very strongly 
— our assets, our future, our ability to generate profits to help 
in things like health, education, and social services. That they 
oppose selling off that ability for the people of Saskatchewan to 
do that, and that they oppose this government on this sell-off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look at the Tory record, the PC record, 
with regards to privatization. And I would point out that this is 
not something that they really like to talk about very much; that 
they prefer to talk about the future; that they don’t want 
Saskatchewan people to judge them on their record. Even in this 
sell-off of the potash corporation, they don’t talk about, based 
on their experience, why it’s going to be good thing for 
Saskatchewan. What they talk about is the future and why it 
would be a good thing. 
 

They invite Saskatchewan people to ignore the past. They invite 
Saskatchewan people to ignore the privatization wave which 
has already taken hold of parts of Saskatchewan and parts of 
government operations. And they say, well we want you to 
ignore that; we want you to concentrate on our words and what 
we promise you for tomorrow. 
 
It was remarkable, remarkable, Mr. Speaker, that when the 
minister who moved the Bill spoke to the Bill, spoke to it for, I 
believe, for some 20 minutes — all of 20 minutes. One would 
have thought that given the magnitude of this Bill, given the 
massive sell-off of Saskatchewan interests, that the government 
might be prompted to say more on this particular Bill and why 
they felt it was so necessary to sell it off, and what their 
experience has been to suggest that this would be a good move 
for Saskatchewan people. They didn’t do that. No, the minister 
talked blithely, briefly about things such as a new economic 
direction building in Saskatchewan and diversifying here; 
companies building and expanding. That was the minister who 
moved it. 
 
The Premier puts it even more succinctly. At his big dinner, the 
“meet the Premier dinner” where the guests were charged $125 
a plate or so, where you had the crème de (la) crème of 
Saskatchewan society, the big business interests represented, 
the Premier said this about the future — the Premier said: 
“We’ve got a tiger by the tail on a downhill drive and we’re 
going for it.” That’s to quote the Premier. And one of my 
colleagues says, well this is a variation on “give ’er snoose, 
Bruce.” 
 
Well if that’s all the Premier can say about his potash Bill, that 
we’ve got a tiger by the tail on a downhill drive and we’re 
going for it, Mr. Speaker, again I want to say that this is a 
government that is not proud of its record on privatization, not 
proud of it’s record, and will ignore what it has done in the past. 
 
I want to turn to some examples of that, Mr. Speaker, and one I 
want to turn to, and a very topical one, deals with the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I want to deal with the 
record of privatization, what we have experienced in 
Saskatchewan, and why I think this Bill is a bad Bill, because I 
have to go on their experience, I have to go on their record, as 
do the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And a part of that record, Mr. Speaker, is the sell-off of the 
SaskPower building in Moose Jaw. In 1988 it was confirmed 
that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the PC 
government sold the SaskPower building in Moose Jaw to a 
local firm for $280,000 and then entered into an agreement to 
lease back half of that building, half of the building — not the 
whole building — lease back half of that building from that 
same firm for $37,000 a year plus half the total operating costs 
of the building for 10 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Total $53,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And it works out to $53,000 a year . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — For half a building. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — For half a building that the  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

977 
 

government sold for $280,000. 
 
Now this is not something that’s made any sense to the people 
of Moose Jaw, the people of Saskatchewan, but it did seem to 
make sense to that government, that you take something that 
you own and you sell it one day for $280,000, and then turn 
around and rent half the building back for $370,000 plus 
operating costs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, that’s a scam. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That’s a scam, Mr. Speaker, a 
straightforward, outright scam; either that, or it’s another 
example of their questionable economic policies. I think one 
that was best . . . or one that we called nerdonomics. 
Nerdonomics, Mr. Speaker, deriving from the editorial in The 
Globe and Mail which, when commenting on the Bill to sell off 
the potash corporation, The Globe and Mail in an editorial was 
moved to ask: was this Bill to sell off the potash corporation? 
And I quote them: “Is this the Waterloo of socialism or the 
Revenge of the Nerds?” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House and the people 
of Saskatchewan are afraid that this is more revenge of the 
nerds. Another example, if you will, of nerdonomics, where you 
take something that you have, sell it for a ridiculously low 
price, and then rent it back for a much higher price, and lose 
money in the process. Nerdonomics, Mr. Speaker. Nerdonomics 
— a word that will for ever be associated with this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that particular sell-off with the SaskPower 
building in Moose Jaw, to my mind, ranks high and exemplifies 
this government’s attitude towards its sense of responsibility 
towards taxpayers’ dollars — that they would take something, 
undervalue it, sell it off, and lose money in the process; rent it 
back for more than they sold it for. It’s just an absolutely 
ludicrous state of affairs, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely ludicrous. 
 
And it’s of course by no means the only example, only example 
of privatization that we’ve seen from this government. This is a 
government that also early on, after it was elected in 1982, 
decided that it would sell off our Highways’ equipment and fire 
many Highways workers and turn it all over to the private 
sector. And of course the people of Saskatchewan are in a 
position to judge for themselves just how effective this 
government has been in terms of maintaining their highways, or 
even for that matter of fact, and in terms of improving their 
highways. It’s been a horrible record, Mr. Speaker, as the 
people of Saskatchewan will attest to. 
 
This is another case, I would submit, of Tory privatization, 
driven by their philosophy, by their ideology, with no regards as 
to the effect it might have on the people of Saskatchewan. And 
certainly, in the case of Highways’ equipment, it’s very clear 
that it has not had a good effect on Saskatchewan highways, has 
not had a good effect on Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
And this is also the government, Mr. Speaker, that when they 
fired the workers, had all this government-owned equipment, 
millions and millions and millions of dollars worth of 
equipment — $10 million, I believe . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, no, 14. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Fourteen million dollars worth of 
equipment, and then attempted to sell it all off in one day in a 
market that was at that time already glutted with equipment of 
that sort; took the position that we’re best off to sell it all in one 
day. And lo and behold!, Mr. Speaker, they got 10 cents on the 
dollar. Then instead of selling $14 million worth of equipment 
for $14 million, they sold it for $140,000 — more nerdonomics, 
Mr. Speaker, more nerdonomics. 
 
I don’t think that the people of Saskatchewan will forget, if only 
because it’s more recent, the sell-off of Sask Minerals. This is a 
mineral company just outside of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, that 
since it’s inception in the late ’40s, mid-’40s, has returned a 
profit, a dividend to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, with the 
exception, I believe, of one year. Every year has shown a profit, 
profits that have been able to go back into the general revenues 
to help the government of the day to either keep taxes down or 
to have money available for things such as health care spending 
and education spending — general government spending. 
 
Now I think the people of Saskatchewan know that those are 
not things that this government values highly, because as you 
look at their privatization and then look at sort of the 
government’s record, you get an idea here of rapidly escalating 
taxes over the years, and rapidly de-escalating quality of 
services for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s this 
government’s record. 
 
Now one would think that if you had a part of your operations 
that was able to make some money, that you would retain that, 
that you would retain those profits to help you in your general 
operations. But that’s not the approach that this government has 
taken. They sold it off for virtually no profit, and there’s a big 
dispute about what the profit actually was. There seems to be a 
half a million dollars missing. But money being missing is not 
something that surprises us with this government, Mr. Speaker 
— nothing that surprises us. 
 
And incidentally, as another concern we have as they head into 
privatization and selling off things, it’s a question of who they 
sell it to and where the money goes. And I’ll deal with that 
later, Mr. Speaker, but that is a very grave concern, a very grave 
concern of the people on this side of the House and a very grave 
concern of the people of Saskatchewan, that as this government 
sells off government operations, the money somehow ends up 
in the pockets of their friends. That is a concern that the people 
of Saskatchewan have. That is a fear that they have. 
 
I want to just mention another example of privatization, of a 
government deciding to end a government operation and turn it 
over to the private sector. Because again this is part of the 
privatization record by which this government must be judged, 
by which the people of Saskatchewan must be able to decide 
now whether or not the potash Bill should be supported or 
whether it should not be supported. 
 
One cannot simply take the vague statements of: we’re  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

978 
 

building here and we’re planning there and diversifying here, 
and we’ve got a tiger by the tail there, and we’re going on a 
downhill drive there. We can’t take those kinds of assurances 
from this government, Mr. Speaker, take those kinds of 
assurances, and on that basis pass judgement on this Bill. We 
must, as in an election campaign, we must look at the 
government’s record. We must not only look at what it is that 
they’re planning to do, but what it is that they’ve done — what 
it is that they’ve done. 
 
(1445) 
 
And in that context I want to talk about the dental program, the 
children’s dental program. Because I would submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is another example, another example of 
privatization in Saskatchewan. And it’s a privatization, I would 
submit, that has not been supported by the people of 
Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan see it as a wrong 
kind of move to make. Because here we had a program that 
hired hundreds — hundreds — of dental therapists who were 
situated in communities around Saskatchewan, living and 
working in those communities. And the government decided 
that, well, we’ll fire all those people. We’ll fire all those people 
because we want the work that they’ve been doing to go to 
dentists, and suggesting that because they fired those 300 
people, and basically saying to hundreds of communities that 
you’re no longer going to have a dental therapist living there; 
saying to those communities that you need not worry because 
the slack will be taken up by private dentists; that private 
dentists will now move to each and every small community in 
Saskatchewan; and that this is better, better than dental 
therapists. 
 
Well we know the record, Mr. Speaker, and that is important. 
And that is what I’m encouraging people to examine and to 
look at — the record of this government when it comes to 
privatization. We know that the record of the children’s dental 
program was anything but what the government said or what 
they promised it would be. 
 
So I want to make this clear for the public, to take very 
carefully what this government says about what it is they’re 
doing and how it’s going to be good for our future; how it’s 
going to be good for the future of the young children in 
Saskatchewan; how it’s going to be good for our economy, to 
put that into some context of what it is that they’ve done in the 
past, because the record does not support their statements today. 
 
The record does not support the statement of the Minister of 
Finance who moved this Bill and who talked about a new 
economic direction; about building in Saskatchewan and 
diversifying here; about companies building and expanding. 
And I sometimes wonder . . . and of the course the Premier, 
about a tiger by the tail on a downhill drive and we’re going for 
it. 
 
Because the record is something else. The record is anything 
but an economy going on a downhill . . . well it might be going 
on a downhill drive, Mr. Speaker, but it’s anything but an 
economy that’s picking up speed, if that is what the Premier 
intended to say in his remarks. This is anything but an economy 
that’s picking up speed; that privatization or the selling off of 
the potash corporation  

does not suggest to us or the people of Saskatchewan that the 
economy will pick up speed. In fact I think the contrary is true. 
 
I think that the people of Saskatchewan get more of a sense that 
this has been a government that is characterized by pushing a 
rope up a hill — very difficult and very slow — and getting 
nowhere, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of this government 
when it comes to the economy, and it’s by that record that this 
government must be judged. 
 
It’s by that record that people must look at the sell-off of the 
potash corporation and decide for themselves as to whether or 
not this is a good thing, because the people of Saskatchewan 
know. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, it accounts for, at least in 
some recent public opinion polls, why the majority of 
Saskatchewan people oppose the sell-off of the potash 
corporation to foreign interests. They’re opposed to that 
because the people of Saskatchewan have caught on to your 
record; they’ve caught on to the PC record. They know that the 
PC record of privatization has not meant prosperity and a better 
future and a more diversified economy. The PC record of 
privatization has meant higher taxes, lower services, greater 
unemployment, reduced economic opportunities. That is the 
result of PC privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this, as I suggested at the outset, is a government 
that’s driven by their ideological agenda, and by that I mean a 
government which has its own fixed ideas, fixed ideas about 
how the Saskatchewan economy should operate, about how the 
government should operate. It’s an idea that’s as old as the hills; 
it’s an idea that was born in 17th and 18th century capitalism, 
an idea that the government has no responsibility, no role 
except to put some minor constraints on the barons of industry 
as they set out to make profits for themselves, and that 
somehow this kind of capital leadership will provide for all of 
the people of the province. Of course, that’s not something that 
we’ve seen here. That’s not something either, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ve seen in Great Britain. 
 
And I refer to Great Britain, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government’s ideas about the economy, this government’s 
ideology about the economy and the role of government is, to a 
very great extent, borrowed, borrowed from the Maggie 
Thatcher Conservative government of Great Britain — a 
government that has over the years presided over a massive 
increase in unemployment, a massive de-investment in the 
British economy, a massive decrease in services for the public, 
and a wilful, rigid, harmful, cruel Conservative ideology and 
manner of operating government; a philosophy, I suppose, that 
is best characterized by first come, first served, Mr. Speaker; 
that if you’re wealthy and powerful and you’re able to elbow 
your way to the front of the line, well then you’ll get the best 
services in terms of health care in Great Britain; that if you can 
afford . . . if you can afford the very best in health care, then 
you’ll get that. But if you’re poor, if you’re dispossessed and 
you cannot afford the very best, then it’s the back of the line — 
and I might say, the back of a very long line — in Great Britain 
in terms of gaining access to government services, services that, 
I might say, in Saskatchewan we take for  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

979 
 

granted; take for granted because we see them as a basic right; 
services such as heath care, which we perceive to be a basic 
right of Saskatchewan people, that everyone should have equal 
access to those services. 
 
The Conservative government of Great Britain, which this 
government looks to for leadership in Bills such as the potash 
sell-off, that governments such as the one in Great Britain takes 
a different approach; that again if you have the money you can 
be first come, first served; if you don’t have the money, it’s the 
back of the line. 
 
And that is an ideology, Mr. Speaker, that is foreign to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s not something that the people of 
Saskatchewan want. It’s something that they’ve rejected and it’s 
something that surely, come the next provincial election, that 
they will say to this government that notwithstanding your 
massive advertising campaigns, bought for and paid for with 
their own money to try and convince us otherwise, we see 
through, we see through the charade. We see through what it is 
that you’re saying. We will have no part of it, and we will vote 
you out in this provincial election campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I talked earlier about how 
this privatization would help the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
think I made it clear that the people of Saskatchewan don’t see 
it as helping them; that the people of Saskatchewan have far 
different needs, far different challenges than the government 
proposes to spend time on; that the people of Saskatchewan are 
crying out for leadership on things such as the economy, are 
crying out for leadership on a number of issues. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why weren’t you out in the legislature? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And the member asks, why weren’t we 
in the legislature? Well I want to ask the member, if that’s his 
case, why was it that the government refused to subject to 
question period? Why was it that the member and his 
government refused to allow us to table petitions? Why is it that 
the member, why is it that that member and that government 
refused to come forward today with an Interim Supply Bill so 
that we might vote the money that’s needed to support 
government services and programs? Where were you? Where 
were you? 
 
Where are the farm Bills? Where were the farm Bills that the 
people of rural Saskatchewan had been desperately crying out 
for? Where is the tangible, tangible support that the people of 
rural Saskatchewan need in their hour of need? 
 
Where are the Bills to help small business? Where are the Bills 
to help young people who are being driven from this province, 
who are desperate, desperate, Mr. Speaker, who need jobs, who 
need jobs so that they can have some kind of future? Where was 
the government legislation to help them? Why haven’t you 
provided that? Where has it been? Why haven’t you spoken 
directly to the needs of Saskatchewan people? Why are you 
ignoring them? Why are you proceeding with your own agenda 
in selling off the Potash Corporation to foreign investors? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The member asks questions about 
priorities and needs. I want to remind the member that he was 
on the radio show this morning, “The Action Line,” and that he 
received 12 phone calls — the radio show in Weyburn. And of 
the 12 phone calls, 11 were opposed, 11 were opposed to his 
government’s privatization agenda. Only one could be found to 
support him. Only one could be found to support him. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite ask about priorities, 
we also ask about priorities. And I would suppose, Mr. Speaker, 
that the two main priorities in this province are not being 
addressed by this government now. They say that the two main 
priorities are something that will be addressed by selling off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the message that you’re giving to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that when it comes to rural Saskatchewan and 
the needs that people have, when it comes to the lack of jobs for 
young people in rural Saskatchewan, the drought, the world 
price of wheat, maintaining the family farm, financing farm 
debt, the cost of farm inputs, rural services and businesses — 
this government has turned a blind eye. 
 
This government has said that it’s more important for us, more 
important for us to proceed with a Bill to take up the time of the 
Legislative Assembly and to take up the time of the people of 
Saskatchewan to talk about a Bill to sell off — sell off — the 
potash corporation as if this is somehow going to deal with the 
crisis in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no greater crisis in Saskatchewan today. There is no 
greater crisis than what is happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
You were supposed to be the friends of rural Saskatchewan. 
This is a government that supposedly built a reputation on 
helping the people in rural Saskatchewan. Now you’ve turned 
your backs on them; you ignore them. You want to deal instead 
with your agenda of selling off everything in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that this reputation of being the 
friends of rural Saskatchewan is one that’s worn thin, that it’s 
only a veneer. I think this is a caucus, a PC government caucus 
and a cabinet that sits around and they tell each other every day 
about what a good job it is that we’re doing for rural 
Saskatchewan. And they’re too busy telling each other what a 
great job it is that they’re doing, too busy doing that as opposed 
to listening to the people of rural Saskatchewan to get some 
sense of what it is that people want. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan want you to come forward 
with legislation, with a program to address the crisis in rural 
Saskatchewan. And what have you given them? You’ve given 
them Bills. You’ve given them Bills to sell off the potash 
corporation and more Bills to sell off the power corporation, 
and you say that that’s going to help rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I have news for you that that is not going down well with 
the people of rural Saskatchewan. And the people of  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

980 
 

rural Saskatchewan oppose you — oppose you most strongly — 
in what it is that you’re doing. And they oppose you strongly 
too, in speaking to this Bill, they oppose you strongly in the 
selling off of the potash corporation, because they perceive this 
to be a sell-off to foreign interests. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I suppose the people of Saskatchewan, more so than any 
other group in rural Saskatchewan, understand the importance 
of ownership, in that ownership gives you some levers in terms 
of manipulating your own future, in terms of building your 
future as opposed to being a tenant, or to being someone who 
simply rents and has no say in that future. The people of rural 
Saskatchewan understand that, and I think is one of the reasons 
that, more so than any other group in Saskatchewan, they 
oppose your government; they oppose your government in 
selling off the potash corporation to foreign interests. 
 
They oppose it strongly because they understand what it’s like 
to not have any farm land, to have that sold out from under 
them. They know that you have no future unless you have some 
form of ownership in rural Saskatchewan, and that is something 
that you people don’t understand. And that is something that the 
people of Saskatchewan, of rural Saskatchewan, oppose you 
most strongly on. 
 
You know, this government is one that, again, invites people to 
look at their statements . . . at a time that they introduce a Bill 
such as this and then ask you to take their statements at face 
value, because their statements are about how good things will 
be if this Bill goes through, and that that’s an accurate 
representation, an accurate representation of events to come. 
 
Well we’ve had a lot of this, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a lot of 
this government saying one day that somehow things are going 
to be miraculously better. And that’s simply not turning out to 
be the case. I don’t think that there’s one person watching the 
legislative proceedings on the television today and listening to 
this debate on the sell-off on a potash corporation, I don’t think 
that there is one person watching who does not remember that 
shortly after the election of the PC government in 1982 that the 
Premier was running around and saying, we’re open for 
business; we’re open for business, as if somehow the province 
was closed to business before; as if somehow there was nothing 
happening in Saskatchewan before that. But with the election of 
the PC government, notwithstanding how well things were 
going in 1982, things were going to be even better yet. 
 
I think the Premier even made comments to the effect that we 
can afford — by “we”, meaning the Conservative government 
and himself — that we can afford to mismanage the economy 
and still come out ahead. But he said, we’re open for business, 
and if we’re doing well now, we’re going to do even better 
tomorrow. 
 
But that did not turn out to be the case. Things went the other 
way. We went downhill, Mr. Speaker; we went rapidly 
downhill. And when he found that to talk about we’re open for 
business wasn’t succeeding, he came out with other lines. 
 

He started to talk about, well, we’re going to build and diversify 
the economy. Forget about we’re open for business; we’re now 
going to build and diversify. And what has happened? What has 
happened, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think the statistics speak for themselves, that while the 
Premier was talking in 1986 in the election campaign about 
building and diversifying and painting a rosy picture of what 
Saskatchewan might be like and inviting the people of 
Saskatchewan to ignore the immediate past, inviting them to 
ignore the record — and I might say that is not something that 
the people of Saskatchewan will do again. They will not ignore 
the government’s record again, because in the next election the 
government’s record will be very much, very much a part of the 
agenda, and it’s because of that record that the people of 
Saskatchewan will defeat them in the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — But I want to just go back to the 
Premier’s words when he talked about, we’re going to build and 
diversify; we’re going to build fertilizer plants here; we’re 
going to build chemical plants here; we’re going to build a 
pharmaceutical plant here; we’re going to build this in Swift 
Current; we’re going to do this there; we’re going to do all 
these wonderful things for you, the people of Saskatchewan. 
Just believe me, just trust me, he says. 
 
Well, you know it’s difficult, it’s difficult at the best of times 
for the public to judge, to judge a record, but there’s some basic 
facts, some basic facts that they can turn to which will tell them 
how well the Saskatchewan economy is doing and whether or 
not we’re improving or whether or not things are getting worse. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to 
you that one indication of that record, one indication of that 
record, and I think a valid one on which the people to judge . . . 
for the people to judge this government, is the matter of 
out-migration. And the record . . . Now I want to take us back to 
1986 and the provincial election, after of course 1982 and 
where the Premier talked about: we’re open for business and 
things are going to get better. And when he found out that that 
wasn’t the case, he said the next election, well we got to use 
different words, so we’re going to talk about building and 
diversifying. 
 
And he talked a lot about building and diversifying and how 
things are going to get better. But I wanted to point out to you 
that in 1987, shortly after he said those words that things are 
going to get better, 8,000 more people left the province than 
came to the province in search of jobs, in search of economic 
opportunities — 8,000. The net out-migration, 8,000 people. 
Now they might say, well obviously we didn’t have enough 
time, we didn’t have enough time for our program of building 
and diversifying all over the place to take hold. We didn’t have 
enough time to get the message out and for the various sectors 
to respond. Surely there would be progress. 
 
Well if the progress was to be one year later, I want to point out 
that the net out-migration was 13,000 people,  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

981 
 

Mr. Speaker — that 13,000 more people left Saskatchewan in 
1988 than came to Saskatchewan in search of jobs and 
economic opportunities. So in ’86 he said: the future is 
unfolding before us; we’re going to build and diversify and 
everything’s going to get better. And in ’87, 8,000 more people 
left the province than came to the province looking for jobs. 
And in 1988, 13,000 more people left Saskatchewan than came 
to Saskatchewan looking for jobs. 
 
Well, they say, you’re not patient enough; you haven’t waited 
long enough. Well, Mr. Speaker, the record, the record in 1989, 
this year, gives us all great cause for concern because in the first 
three months of this year 9,000 people — 9,000 people, more 
people — left Saskatchewan than came to Saskatchewan in 
search of jobs and economic opportunities — 9,000 in the first 
three months alone. 
 
We will set a new record; we will set a new record in 
Saskatchewan for people leaving the province in search of jobs. 
We will set a new record this year. Not since the 1930s will we 
witness a year like this one, in terms of people leaving. And this 
is from a government that invites you to take their words at face 
value, from a government who says, ignore what’s happened in 
the past, concentrate on our words for the future, and take that 
as some real indication of what might happen and what the 
future might hold. 
 
Well it just doesn’t wash. It just doesn’t wash, Mr. Speaker. The 
people of Saskatchewan have been fooled enough; they won’t 
be fooled again. This is a government that believes it can fool 
all of the people all of the time, but the people of Saskatchewan 
are saying, you might have fooled us a couple of times but you 
won’t fool us again, and you might have fooled us in 1982 and 
you might have pulled another trick out of the bag in 1986. 
 
But I invite you, I invite this government in the next election to 
run again on the future, to talk about how well things might be 
in the future, and I invite you to ignore the past because we will 
lose no opportunity to remind the people of Saskatchewan of 
your sorry, dismal record and invite them to make a choice on 
that basis. And I think the answer will be: out goes the 
Conservatives, in come the New Democrats. It’s time for a new 
tomorrow! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Weyburn might well talk from his seat again. I’m sure he 
doesn’t want to talk from the chair in the radio studio again 
because the response there for his government’s record is a 
dismal one. His response there for selling off Saskatchewan has 
not found a supportive audience, neither has this government’s 
message generally for selling off Saskatchewan, for selling off 
the potash corporation, for selling off the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. These initiatives of selling everything off have 
simply not met with positive response from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think most people of Saskatchewan are aware of a poll that 
was taken by the Angus Reid corporation, Mr. Speaker. And 
just to emphasize the depth of feeling on the  

part of Saskatchewan people, the depth of feeling on the part of 
Saskatchewan people about selling off their province, I want to 
review some of the results of that Angus Reid survey just in 
case there are some people out there who aren’t aware of what 
the results were. 
 
And just in case the government couldn’t afford to get a 
subscription to the daily paper to find out what the results were, 
I want to just briefly go through some of the results. And not 
just with respect to the potash corporation, or the sell-off of the 
potash corporation, but more generally about questions about 
privatization, Mr. Speaker, because I think it shows, I think it 
shows very clearly the depth of feeling that Saskatchewan 
people have about any perceived attempts by this government to 
sell off their heritage and to sell out their future. 
 
One of the questions that was asked in this poll, Mr. Speaker, is 
that people were asked: overall would you say you personally 
support or oppose the Saskatchewan government’s plans to 
privatize SaskEnergy by making a public offering of shares in 
the company? Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that 67 per cent of 
the people oppose this government, 67 per cent of the people 
oppose the government in their plans to sell off the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
And that’s something that, you know, that this government is 
never really fully honest when it comes to describing things 
because in that particular case they talk about privatizing 
SaskEnergy or selling shares in SaskEnergy and say, well it’s 
got nothing to do with SaskPower. Well they may fool 
themselves, they may fool themselves, but they do not fool the 
people of Saskatchewan who understand that SaskEnergy is no 
more than a part of SaskPower. And they can’t fool them. 
 
The other question I wanted to turn to, Mr. Speaker, is the 
question that was asked about: what about the privatization of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; did you support or 
oppose that policy decision? And here is the results, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The results are that overall, 50 per cent, 50 per cent oppose, 
oppose the sell-off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; 28 
per cent, 28 per cent support the government in selling off the 
potash corporation. 
 
Now earlier I talked that there was a slight difference here 
between rural Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And I’ll give the member for Wilkie an opportunity to get on 
his feet and to participate in the debate, and I might say that 
would be very welcome, because in this debate, this debate has 
been characterized by their silence; this debate has been 
characterized by a mover who spoke for 20 minutes about a 
fundamental, vital decision that has grave consequences for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the other members have sat on 
their fannies and have sat silently except to heckle from their 
seats, but not to stand in their place — not to stand in their place 
— and to defend what it is that they’re doing. 
 
And I say to the member for Wilkie, I say to the member from 
Shaunavon, and I say to the other members, get up from your 
seats; get up in this Assembly; defend what it is that you’re 
doing; explain to the people of Saskatchewan  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

982 
 

why you want to sell off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to foreign interests. Explain that if you will. 
 
(1515) 
 
But please do more than simply sit in your seats and disagree 
with what is being said. This Assembly gives you the 
opportunity to rise in your place and to make your comments 
and to defend your actions, unpopular as they may be. 
 
And getting back to that, Mr. Speaker, the question was asked 
about the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and did you support or oppose that policy 
decision. And we know that 50 per cent opposed, opposed the 
privatization and the sell-off of the potash corporation; 28 per 
cent supported it. But now here’s . . . The interesting thing, Mr. 
Speaker, is this: that 50 per cent, that these are a group of 
people who claim to represent all of Saskatchewan and ignore 
the fact that people in urban and rural Saskatchewan simply 
oppose, oppose very strongly, what it is that they’re doing. 
 
And I think it’s reflected . . . as well as, in terms of whether or 
not they approve or disapprove of the actions of the Premier and 
the actions of my leader, the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Riversdale, where people are asked: do you 
approve, or do you generally approve or disapprove of the way 
each leader has handled himself in these debates. And when it’s 
asked of the Premier, 50 per cent say we disapprove, 40 per 
cent say we approve. But when it comes to the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, 58 per cent say we 
approve; 58 per cent say we approve of the actions of the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the 
Premier. And this is a Premier that was supposed to be so 
popular with the people of Saskatchewan, but I don’t know. 
 
I suppose that the people of Saskatchewan have finally, finally 
caught on to his act, and they finally made a decision and have 
come to the conclusion that a Premier has to be able to do more 
than cheer-lead. A Premier has to do more than simply run 
around like a cheer-leader waving his flags and saying: golly 
gee, we’re open for business; we’re going to build and 
diversify; we got a tiger by the trail on a downhill drive and 
we’re going for it; don’t say whoa in a mud hole; give her 
snoose, Bruce; that I want you to ignore the past; I want you to 
ignore the government’s record; I want you to ignore that. Just 
treat it as if it were some black hole and it doesn’t exist. It’s not 
there. I want you to share my vision of the future. I want you to 
concentrate on the days ahead. Don’t look at what we’ve done 
here; that’s just nothing. Don’t look at that, but look at the 
future with us and look at my words and what it is that we’re 
saying. Look at what I’m saying about building and 
diversifying. 
 
Well I think the people of Saskatchewan have finally caught on, 
finally caught on. Now the Premier may be able to go to China 
or India or Japan or South Korea and all those places; he might 
be able to go to all those places, Mr. Speaker, and talk there 
about giving her snoose and going downhill on a tiger and all 
that kind of stuff. He might be able to explain things in his 
optimism, in his own inimitable fashion there, but I think that 
he’s worn out his welcome with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

The people of Saskatchewan know that there’s more than 
simply words that are required from a true leader, that a leader 
to be successful has to show good action, that there has to be a 
positive record. And they don’t see any positive record when it 
comes to that government; not with that sorry bunch, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker. The results of that poll, the results of that poll 
where it suggests that the public opinion and the approval rating 
of the Premier is greatly reduced, greatly reduced, it is simply 
no surprise to us any more, who have to put up with his 
shenanigans in the House. This we in the opposition know, 
know more than most, how difficult it is to get the Premier to 
speak in English, to say things that are clear and 
straightforward, so that he might be judged by what he said. I 
think the Leader-Post put it best the other day that the Premier’s 
a master of talking his way around anything and everything 
And we certainly agree with that, that the Premier is a master of 
speaking his way around things. 
 
But it’ll be interesting to see how he speaks his way around this 
sell-off of the potash corporation to foreign interests. It’ll be 
interesting to see how he explains that one in clear, 
straightforward English to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And will he explain it to them in clear, straightforward terms? 
Will he say, I invite you to look at my record as a Premier; hold 
my head up high and say, look at my record, and on that basis 
judge what might happen with the new sell-off or the new 
privatized potash corporation? Or will he mumble again and 
talk around things and say, well, look at the future; don’t look at 
the past; don’t judge my record; look at my words. That’s what 
the Premier will likely end up doing. That’s his record in this 
House. 
 
And we as an opposition know that very firmly, Mr. Speaker, 
because we rise in our place every day, with the exception of 
today, to ask the Premier questions, to ask him questions to 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan his government’s 
policies and his programs, and to answer questions about 
government’s action. And he speaks around them, and he 
refuses to answer. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would not be surprised, in fact I feel very 
strongly and I would go out on a limb to make the prediction 
that when the next election rolls around, this government is 
finished. This is a government that’s gone, and this is a 
government will not come back. This is not like the cat in the 
award-winning National Film Board cartoon, the cat that went 
away, but came back. They thought he was a goner, they 
thought he was a goner, but the cat came back. Well they won’t 
be saying that about the PC Government after the next election, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So earlier, Mr. Speaker, I talked about how this sell-off of the 
potash corporation, how this sell-off of the potash corporation 
would help the people of Saskatchewan. And I suggested that 
the people of Saskatchewan were of the opinion that this 
sell-off of the potash corporation would not deal with the major 
issues facing them, and the major ways in which a government 
might be able to respond to their needs in a tangible way. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

983 
 

Again, number one, is the farm crisis. This is a government that 
had the opportunity in the many days preceding this one in this 
session to come forward with legislation to help the people on 
the farm, to help the family farm, but didn’t do that. Instead 
they came with legislation to sell off everything. 
 
This is a government too, Mr. Speaker, that had the opportunity 
to come forward with legislation that might put into place 
programs that would provide some job opportunities, 
employment opportunities, for young people in Saskatchewan. 
But it chose not to do that. In fact, if you look at their budget, it 
has chosen to go the other way. It has chosen to cut funding for 
programs that might provide job opportunities for young 
people. They’ve cut spending for the Opportunities student 
summer employment program by 22 per cent in their budget. 
 
And I say to them, if you want to get on with the business of 
this province, get on with the business of this province, 
withdraw this sell-off Bill, withdraw this sell-off Bill and come 
forward with an interim supply, come forward with an interim 
supply so that we might vote more money, vote more money for 
youth employment programs to put young people to work in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what we would like to do, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not 
something that has made any impression on the government. 
It’s not something that they see as a priority. And a priority 
must be judged by what it is that the government does, not by 
what it is that they say they might do. 
 
And to judge by this legislative session, to judge by the 
legislation that they’ve put forward, their priorities are to sell 
off everything. Their very first Bill, the very first Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, introduced in this legislative session — now was that a 
Bill to help farmers with interest rates? Was that a Bill to help 
farmers with input costs? Was that a Bill to help with the farm 
debt? Was that a Bill to help young people find jobs in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, this was a Bill about privatization, a Bill 
about selling everything off. That set the tone for this session. 
This will for ever be known as the sell-off session when the 
government’s ideological agenda became clear, and that is to 
sell off, sell off everything that the people of Saskatchewan own 
as quickly, as rapidly, and as much as possible. That’s their 
agenda for this session, Mr. Speaker. It sure isn’t to deal with 
the farm crisis, and it sure isn’t to deal with the unemployment 
crisis that young people are facing in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan are puzzled. They’re wondering 
how it is that this particular Bill to sell off the potash 
corporation will help them or how any of the sell-off Bills will 
help them, how the Bills to privatize everything is going to 
improve things. 
 
But I bet you one thing, Mr. Speaker, I bet you one thing, and 
that is that somewhere along the lines these sell-offs will help 
some of their friends. These sell-offs will help some of their 
friends. That’s something that the people of Saskatchewan also 
believe. 
 

And that’s not a question that was asked in any poll, but I 
would venture to say that if you were to ask the people of 
Saskatchewan, if you were to ask them one of the questions — 
and while the Premier is writing questions, so will we — one of 
the questions might be: do you believe that friends of the PC 
Party will benefit from the sell-off of Saskatchewan assets? 
 
I would venture to say the majority of people will agree with 
that; that they agree that there’s something rotten back there; 
that when they sell off these things to their friends that 
somehow there’s going to be some benefit for the PCs. That’s 
something that the people of Saskatchewan believe. And you 
can bet, Mr. Speaker, you can bet that somehow, somewhere, 
some friends of the PCs and the PCs will benefit from this 
sell-off of Saskatchewan asset. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like the reason that I come to that conclusion, the 
reason I come to that conclusion is by looking at their party in 
the very recent past, not just in Saskatchewan but across this 
country. And when you look at the PC Party, not only here in 
Saskatchewan but in Ontario and Quebec and other parts of the 
country, you will come to the conclusion, as I have, that the PC 
Party, the PC Party in recent years is a party that’s known for 
crooks, grifters, and con artists. Grifters, Mr. Speaker, with a 
“g.” A swindler if you like, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this party 
is — a party of crooks and swindlers. That’s what it’s become 
known as. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster — why is he on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think if you’ve been listening to the member opposite 
from Regina Victoria, he’s been accusing members on this side 
of the House of being crooks and, etc., swindlers . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — . . . and I would suggest, although I had to 
repeat those words, I will not be repeating those words in the 
future, but I’m going to ask the Chair to ask the member from 
Regina Victoria to withdraw those unparliamentary remarks and 
apologize to the members opposite. 
 
(1530) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. A point of order has been 
raised by the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I find that 
the language is unparliamentary, and I would ask the member 
from Regina Victoria to apologize to the House. Order. I’d ask 
the member to apologize. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m not sure which words I should 
apologize for. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member for Regina 
Victoria specifically said the government members were crooks 
and swindlers, so I’d ask the member to apologize. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I said that the PC Party 
were well-known for crooks and . . . 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

984 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I asked the member for an 
unequivocal apology. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly would 
apologize if I meant to imply that the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster or any . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. You implied the members of 
the government. I’d ask the member for an unequivocal 
apology. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Okay, Mr. Speaker, I’ll apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear, I want to make it clear 
why it is that the people of Saskatchewan think and know that 
this party, the PC Party, is an unsavoury bunch. They know that 
this party, the PC Party, is unsavoury; that there have been far 
too many PC Party members, elected and otherwise, that have 
been caught on the other side of the law in recent years. That’s 
something that they know from the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you can use whatever words one wants to apply to that. 
You can use whatever words you want, but the fact remains that 
too many members of the PC Party have been caught on the 
wrong side of the law. 
 
I want to just draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, and I put this in 
the context of the people of Saskatchewan are not only looking 
at the potash Bill and what it means, but what might happen as 
a result of that Bill and who benefits, where some of the money 
might go. 
 
They have a very clear impression of their federal counterparts, 
a very clear impression of their federal counterparts where 
cabinet ministers, federal cabinet ministers, resigned for reasons 
ranging from violation of conflict of interest guide-lines to 
criminal charges of bribery and fraud. That’s the federal 
cabinet, the federal PC Party. They’re all part of that; they’re all 
part of that same PC Party. They will remember names such as 
André Bissonnette. They will remember names such as Michel 
Côté who was fired, who was fired as minister of Supply and 
Services for failing to disclose personal loans . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know if the 
members opposite . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Does the member have a point of 
order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I’m speaking on my point of order, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I don’t know if the member opposite realizes, 
but he’s way off track on the public participation of the potash 
Bill. And I would ask you to make a ruling and get him back on 
track, because if you would go back in verbatim you’d know he 
is not on the Bill whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
address this because I suspect that this may arise again. The 
member from Regina Victoria was speaking to the reasons why 
this Bill was being brought forward and the ends to which the 
Bill will serve. That is in order, Mr.  

Speaker, and I suggest that the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd’s 
point is not well taken. Members can always talk about the ends 
being served by the Bill and what means are intended to be 
attained, and that’s all the member from Regina Victoria was 
doing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve been listening very closely to the 
debate and the member has been relating to the points he was 
making, so I would say the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve always taken the position that if the shoe fits, wear it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to deal with 
the impression that Saskatchewan people have, not only of this 
Bill but generally of privatization, the concerns that they have 
with this PC government as it attempts to sell off their assets, 
that they have a sense of a government and a PC Party that has 
had too many members operating on the wrong side of the law; 
that they have a sense that the PC Party will find ways to 
benefit from this privatization; that the friends of the PC Party 
will find ways to benefit from this privatization, and is one of 
the reasons that they’re opposed, opposed to the sell-off of the 
potash corporation, as they are opposed to the sell-off of all 
Saskatchewan assets. 
 
And I went on because . . . I went on to name some of the 
federal cabinet ministers, the PC Party, who are well known to 
the people of Saskatchewan, people such as Michel Côté who 
was fired as minister of Supply and Services for failing to 
disclose personal loans; Sinclair Stevens who was found to have 
violated conflict of interest guide-lines 14 times while industry 
minister — industry minister, and this Bill is about industry, 
Mr. Speaker, very much about industry — or Tory MP Michel 
Gravel, Mr. Speaker, who went to trial on 50 charges including 
breach of trust, fraud against the government, and bribery, Mr. 
Speaker, a PC member, a member of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
And that’s not all, Mr. Speaker; there have been other instances 
in the news of late. I refer you to the Leader-Post of February 
22, 1989, where it is shown that a PC riding president has been 
charged, has been charged with fraud and bribery in connection 
with his contacts with government officials. It says that: 
 

Suburban business man Joseph Hamelin has been ordered 
to appear in court May 8 in South Shore, Longeuil, to 
answer the charges, Crown attorney Marcel Patenaude 
said Tuesday. 
 

And it says here that Hamelin is past president of the federal 
Progressive Conservative St-Hubert riding association and 
former president of the party’s Chamblis association. 
 
And he’s accused of having defrauded the federal government 
by using, for electoral purposes, people hired under a federal 
program to establish an air ambulance network. The charges say 
people paid under the federally subsidized program were put to 
work by  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

985 
 

Hamelin going over voters lists. 
 
Well isn’t that a cute little indictment on the PC Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And here’s another one, again in the Leader-Post, where a 
former MP pleads not guilty. This is concerning former member 
of parliament Edouard Desrosiers, who pleaded not guilty 
Tuesday to charges of fraud, breach of trust, and using forged 
documents. These charges against Desrosiers, who held the 
east-end Montreal riding of Hochelaga-Maisonneuve for the 
Tories from 1984 to 1988, were laid after a three-month 
investigation by the RCMP. 
 
And we turn to the Leader-Post of April 15, Mr. Speaker, 
where it says, “MP faces corruption charges.” Corruption 
charges, Mr. Speaker, where: 
 

Conservative MP Richard Grisé was charged Friday with 
three counts of fraud and eight counts of breach of trust in 
connection with alleged kickback schemes involving 
federal government contracts and cheques, police said. 
The three fraud charges, involving a total of $4,000, and 
three counts of breach of trust are related to a kickback 
scheme in which the MP is alleged to have had employees 
from a friend’s company put on a federal payroll, court 
documents say. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is shameful. It’s an indictment on the PC 
Party. 
 
You know, there is also Saskatchewan PCs, such as Geoff 
Wilson, the Member of Parliament for Swift Current. You 
know, this is a case of where a man has gone to jail supposedly 
for accepting bribes. Supposedly for accepting bribes to do 
certain work, a man has gone to jail; bribes that were provided 
by this member of parliament. Except they don’t call it bribes; 
they say these are payments. And he gets off scot-free. Well not 
scot-free; he’s been fined by his own law society, Mr. Speaker 
— fined $10,000 by his law society for operating outside of the 
ethics becoming a lawyer in Saskatchewan. A Saskatchewan 
PC, Mr. Speaker. Under-the-table payments, no less, Mr. 
Speaker, under-table payments — bribery. 
 
How many times have we mentioned that word — bribery and 
corruption, Mr. Speaker, conflict of interest. Of course there are 
other people I don’t want to talk about who don’t deal with 
bribery and corruption; people such as the PC member of the 
legislature in Winnipeg who was sent to jail for pushing drugs 
on young children. And of course our very own very sad case of 
Colin Thatcher, the PC member who was sent to jail for murder, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I did want to draw to the attention of members opposite that 
you have a real problem of perception here with the 
Saskatchewan public, that if somehow you think you can sell 
off these things and hide the fact that somehow this isn’t going 
to find its way into the PC Party’s friends’ pockets, that you’ve 
not been very successful. Because the perception out there is 
that as you attempt to sell off Saskatchewan assets, that your 
friends are going to benefit. Your friends always benefit. 
 

And I suppose you believe that you should benefit your friends 
— friends such as Peter Pocklington, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of 
privatization, this is a big friend of the PC Party, one who has 
benefitted very much from PC economic diversification 
initiatives. And this potash sell-off is something that they call 
an economic diversification. 
 
Well again I want the people of Saskatchewan to review the 
record, review the record of what it is that this government has 
done to diversify the economy. And I want to bring their 
attention again to one Peter Pocklington who’s been given 
millions, millions of taxpayers’ dollars to diversify the economy 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, this point that the member from 
Regina Victoria has brought forward to this floor of the 
legislature in this debate makes no sense to the Bill that we’re 
debating here on the floor of the legislature. And I’d ask you for 
you to put him back on track please. It has absolutely nothing to 
do with Peter Pocklington or anybody else; it’s to do with 
public participation of the potash Bill. And I would ask you to 
rule, sir. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member for 
Regina Centre, I would suggest to, Mr. Speaker, is dealing with 
the Bill. The member for Regina Victoria — I’m sorry. The 
member for Regina Victoria is suggesting that members 
opposite are too prone to act out of self-interest and too slow to 
put the public interest first. Now the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd may not agree with that point, but it was put, I 
think, in parliamentary language, and it’s certainly on point. I 
would suggest, Mr. Speaker, the member’s on point and ought 
to be allowed to continue without the repeated interjections of 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd. 
 
(1545) 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order, and let me 
just say this in answer to it. Certain latitude is granted members 
when they’re speaking on a Bill; however, at the same time I 
believe hon. members should keep in mind that there are limits, 
that what they are saying should be related to the Bill that they 
are discussing. And we can’t assume that if member talks for 15 
minutes or half an hour or whatever, you know, on some 
peripheral topic, that eventually it will be related. I think that it 
should be clear to the hon. members that the issue the member 
is dealing with is related to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was dealing 
with the whole question of the public perception of who will 
benefit from the sell-off of the potash corporation. And I 
believe there to be a very healthy scepticism, a very healthy 
scepticism about what it is that this government is up to; that 
the public of Saskatchewan are sceptical of who may benefit 
from the sell-off of the potash corporation, based not only on 
nefarious characters who seem to have become very much a 
part of  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

986 
 

the PC Party, not only in Quebec but also here in Saskatchewan, 
that the public of Saskatchewan are asking themselves some 
real questions about who benefits. 
 
And when the people of Saskatchewan ask themselves who 
benefits in the economic diversification that this government 
talks about, they also talk about Peter Pocklington and his ties 
to the PC Party. And again that this is a case of where a 
government helps its friends, and very definitely Peter 
Pocklington is a friend of the PC Party. 
 
I only need refer you, Mr. Speaker, to prove that point, refer 
you to the Calgary Herald of Thursday, April 6, where the 
headline says, “Oilers helped fuel Tory machine.” Where it says 
here — and I want to make clear this connection between 
Pocklington and the PCs — the PCs and economic 
diversification and potash and who benefits. And it’s clear that 
their friends benefit, Mr. Speaker. But in any event, this article, 
to prove the point, says here, quote: 
 

The Edmonton Oilers and other companies owned by 
entrepreneur Peter Pocklington, gave the Alberta 
Conservative Party $12,200 last year. 
 
The National Hockey League club contributed $4,050 to 
the Tories in 1988 and, and with other Pocklington 
companies, were among the party’s largest corporate 
donors, figures provided by the office of Alberta’s chief 
electoral office show. 
 
Pocklington’s Gainers meat-packing company, which 
received $71 million from the government last year for 
various expansions, gave $3,550. His Palm Dairies Ltd., 
which received a multi-million dollar line of credit from 
the province’s treasury branches, gave $4,600. 
 

So I want to make the point, Mr. Speaker, I want to make the 
point that in all these economic diversification things that the 
Premier has talked about, when he talks about building and 
diversifying, he talks about building up his PC Party and getting 
rich off the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I saw on the part of some 
members, or I heard some exclamations of surprise that Peter 
Pocklington would give this kind of money to the PC Party in 
Alberta. And I’m sure that they’ll be going back to the PC Party 
treasurer here and saying, how come Alberta got so much and 
we didn’t get as much? They’re a greedy bunch, Mr. Speaker, a 
greedy bunch. 
 
But that’s the point I wanted to make is that any time that you 
transfer large amounts of money, someone benefits. It’s our 
belief and it’s our ideology when money is involved that the 
people of Saskatchewan should benefit, that the benefit should 
flow to those who need it, should flow to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, should flow to the young people who are 
looking for jobs, but not to the friends of the party, not go to 
nefarious characters who live off the public purse. 
 

One might ask in light of this, Mr. Speaker, how many of the 
members opposite will be guaranteed a job after the defeat by 
the PCs as a form of kickback at the expense of the taxpayers. 
Is that the undertaking that’s received by members opposite, 
that if you lose an election, don’t worry, you’ll get a job? 
Because that’s how we interpret it. It seems like every member 
of the PC Party that was defeated in 1986 has received some 
job, has received a little goody here or there. 
 
No wonder that the public is sceptical. No wonder that the 
public looks at this privatization, this sell-off, and says: who’s 
going to benefit; where’s the moneys going to go? 
 
An Hon. Member: — More Tory millionaires, that’s what they 
want to make. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — My colleague says, more Tory 
millionaires, Mr. Speaker, and indeed that may well be the case, 
more Tory millionaires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to one aspect of the sell-off of the 
potash corporation that is very troublesome for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I suppose more than any single thing, more 
than any single factor is a reason that so many people in 
Saskatchewan oppose this Bill, oppose this government and its 
handling of this Bill, oppose the sell-off of the potash 
corporation, and that is that the government has made it clear 
that the potash corporation will be sold off to foreign investors. 
 
They’ve said that 45 per cent, a minimum of 45 per cent of the 
company, will be sold off to foreign investors. We’re not sure 
where those foreign investors will come from. Perhaps they’ll 
come from India and China and Japan and South Korea, where 
the Premier went on his trip to try and sell our corporation. 
Perhaps those are the people that will be buying it. Maybe it’ll 
be the big American potash companies, the mining interests, 
owning another part of Saskatchewan, owning another part of 
Canada. 
 
We’ve always believed on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that in the long run, in the long term, it benefitted the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it benefitted the people of Canada to own 
things, as opposed to being tenants in their own land. That it’s 
better to own your resources, that it’s better to manufacture 
here, that it’s better to build here, as opposed to selling off to 
foreign interests, because we’ve had too much of that. 
 
Well that’s something that’s very troubling about this particular 
Bill, and it’s something that the people of Saskatchewan oppose 
very strongly about the Bill, the fact that a minimum of 45 per 
cent will be owned by foreign interests. One might suggest that 
that is a question that the government may want to also have 
their panel review with the people of Saskatchewan, this panel 
that’s going around to explain the SaskPower sell-off, that we 
might also want to ask them to explain to people . . . or ask 
people if selling off half of our potash corporation is going to be 
good for Saskatchewan, and whether the Saskatchewan people 
agree that 45 per cent of the potash corporation should be sold 
off to foreign interests. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

987 
 

You know, in a very real way, Mr. Speaker, in selling off to 
foreign interests . . . And I want to just come back to one 
technical point, or explain one technical point, and that is this 
business of 45 per cent, and to make it clear, to make it clear 
that when 45 per cent of this company is sold off to foreign 
interests, sold off to foreign interests, that we will be unable — 
we, the people of Saskatchewan — will be unable to reduce that 
number for ever, or at least as long as the U.S.-Canada trade 
agreement is in place, because one of the provisions, one of the 
provisions of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement is that 
where, in an instance such as this, a public company sells shares 
and a percentage is set for foreign ownership, that that 
percentage can be set but that that percentage can never be 
reduced again. 
 
So that for ever and a day, for ever and a day, 45 per cent of the 
new Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, if this government 
has its way, will be owned by foreign interests, will be owned 
by foreign interests, heavily influenced by people in Chicago, 
New York, Tokyo, and other parts of the globe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to put that into context. Like, for example, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1988, in 1988 the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan had reported profits of $106 million. Those are 
the figures that were provided in the potash corporation annual 
report. That $106 million in profits — this is after taxes and 
royalties and so on that any other company might pay — there 
was $106 million in profit — profit — profit that came to the 
people of Saskatchewan, people of Saskatchewan who are 
owners, all of whom are owners, all of whom have a lifetime, 
non-transferable lifetime share in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Their profit was $106 million. 
 
Now if 45 per cent — 45 per cent of a future potash corporation 
is owned by foreign investors, it will mean that nearly $50 
million — $50 million — will be leaving the province to go to 
foreign shores. That’s what this government is proposing. 
 
What can we do with $50 million, Mr. Speaker? I look at the 
cruel and intemperate actions of this government in cutting out 
the children’s dental program, of cutting back on the 
prescription drug plan, of the long waiting lists at our hospitals, 
at the school closures in Regina, at the lack of money for 
education, at universities that are bursting at the seams and are 
having to put on quotas for students. 
 
I look at the farm crisis, I look at the need for jobs for young 
people in Saskatchewan, and I ask myself, and the people of 
Saskatchewan will surely be asking themselves: isn’t there 
something better we could do with $50 million than to send it 
out of province and to send it out of country? These profits are 
moneys that are and could in the future be used to help support 
government services and programs and to keep taxes down. 
 
And there is another thing that we might be able to do with this 
$50 million, Mr. Speaker — that as opposed to selling off the 
potash corporation, we keep the revenues flowing in. As 
opposed to sending profits out of province, we keep them here 
and reduce taxes in this province. 
 
Now wouldn’t that be a wonderful thing, Mr. Speaker?  

Wouldn’t it be a wonderful thing to reduce taxes in 
Saskatchewan? I know it would be a new thing for the PC 
governments. They believe that taxes are something that only 
go up, unless it’s for their big-business friends. Then they 
believe something else. 
 
But wouldn’t that be a wonderful thing, to reduce taxes for the 
people in Saskatchewan? Wouldn’t it be a wonderful thing, Mr. 
Speaker, to do away with this tax that they’ve put on on 
non-profit groups and charitable organizations and so on who 
have to make money through bingos? Wouldn’t it be nice to say 
to those groups: we believe and support what it is that you’re 
doing; we want to help you in the worthwhile things that you’re 
doing for Saskatchewan people; and instead of taxing you, we 
want to take away that tax and we want to take some of the 
profits that we make from the potash corporation to help you in 
the good things that you do for Saskatchewan people and to 
make it work for Saskatchewan people, to make it work for 
people here at home. Wouldn’t that be a wonderful thing, Mr. 
Speaker, to do that? 
 
But they won’t do it, Mr. Speaker, they won’t do it because they 
believe in nerdonomics. The Globe and Mail wondered whether 
this whole battle over the potash corporation was the last 
Waterloo for the New Democrats or whether this was the 
revenge of the nerds. Well we look at it, Mr. Speaker, and say 
that it’s more revenge of the nerds, that it’s nerdonomics. And 
only a group of nerds that you see in the front benches, Mr. 
Speaker, would come up with the idea to take something . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I think that 
unparliamentary language is something that we’re seeking to 
avoid in this House, and I would ask the hon. member to 
withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Is this the front benches, Mr. Speaker, 
or the nerds? 
 
(1600) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the request was clear to the 
hon. member, and I don’t thing there’s much point in this type 
of a debate on the issue. I simply ask the hon. member to 
withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I certainly would apologize, Mr. 
Speaker, for the use of any unparliamentary language. 
 
The Speaker: — And withdraw it as well. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I certainly withdraw it as well, Mr. 
Speaker, and I do that unequivocally; I do that unequivocally. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — But again, whatever adjectives one 
wants to apply to it, one has to wonder about the logic and 
wisdom. The logic and wisdom, Mr. Speaker, are quantities that 
are in short supply on the front benches into the back benches 
of the PC government. One has to worry . . . wonder about the 
logic and wisdom of taking  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

988 
 

something that we own, made a $106 million in profit last year 
— made $106 million in profits last year — to sell it off and so 
that in the future we don’t have those kinds of profits. Now 
what logic or sense could there be in that? 
 
Well, you know, maybe there’s one little logic and sense in 
here, and that is that if they’re able to sell it and if they’re able 
to get in hundreds of millions of dollars, then they just might be 
able to build up a little kitty before the next election, Mr. 
Speaker. They might just build up a little kitty before the next 
election and try and bribe the voters of Saskatchewan and say, 
we got all kinds of money. Here is what privatization had done 
for you. We’ve got cash sticking out of all of our pockets. 
 
What do you want? Tell us what you want so we can buy your 
votes. Tell us what you want so we can buy the next election. 
Maybe that’s the reason behind their particular economics in 
this case, Mr. Speaker, is to get the money, get the money so 
that they can go to the voters and say, we have all kinds of 
money here. And what is it that you want; what is it that you 
need so that we can buy the next election campaign. Just tell us 
because we’ve got the cash right here. 
 
You know there’s only one problem with that, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s only one problem with that. When the election’s over, 
everything’s gone; when the election’s over, everything’s gone. 
We won’t be getting the $100 million a year any more. Half of 
that, $50 million, will be going out of country. And who knows, 
the other half may all leave the province as well, because that’s 
what this Bill does. This Bill says that 100 per cent or all of the 
company can be sold to out — of-province investors, but that at 
least 45 per cent will go out of country. 
 
That’s the question here, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think that 
they’re going to fool the people of Saskatchewan on this one. I 
think the people of Saskatchewan are seeing through this one, 
they’re seeing . . . They know that prior to the last election that 
this government seemed to have all kinds of money, seemed to 
have money for everything, that things like a deficit were not a 
problem. 
 
They know that in looking at this sell-off of the potash 
corporation and any money that might be made from that sale 
. . . They remember the last election, they remember a 
government saying, well we got money for everything; what do 
you want? You want money for this? You got it. You want 
money for that? You got it. Debt, deficit — not a problem; not 
until after the election it wasn’t. 
 
After the election it was a very major problem. Prior to the 
election we had a deficit of $389 million. After the election we 
had a deficit of $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sell-off of the potash corporation means that 
the people of Saskatchewan will be losing future profits. It 
means that a government that is desperate for re-election needs 
to sell off the potash corporation to get some cash so it can do 
things like, see now we’ve reduced deficit; do things like, see 
now we’ve got money to spend on you, and it’s all a result of 
our building and diversification, all those things that the 
Premier talked about. 
 

No, Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. Speaker. Any money that they have 
will not result from enlightened economic leadership in 
Saskatchewan. Any money that they have will result from the 
sell-off, the sell-off of Saskatchewan assets. That’s where the 
money will come from. 
 
And we oppose them on this, Mr. Speaker. We oppose this 
sell-off of the potash corporation. We oppose the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan assets to foreign investors. We oppose it because 
a corporation such as this has the potential and has shown that it 
can provide profits to the people of Saskatchewan, profits 
which can be used by them in the long run, can be used by 
future generations to support government services and 
programs, can be used in things such as reducing taxes. 
 
You know, it’s no accident, Mr. Speaker, that prior to 1982 
when you had a New Democratic Party government, that taxes 
were much lower than they are today. Taxes were lower, with 
the exception of the oil companies of course; taxes were higher 
there. And this government has changed that. 
 
I guess that’s an interesting indictment, just as an aside, about 
government priorities and where taxes should go. But prior to 
1982 taxes were lower here. And that is because we had things 
like a potash corporation which made profits, profits which 
could be used by the government to help support services and 
programs without going to people and saying, we need more of 
your tax money; we’ve got to be in your pocket again; we need 
the money to pay for health and education and welfare; as 
opposed to taking the position that why don’t we get the profits 
in the potash corporation and from Sask Minerals to help pay 
for these things? 
 
No, this is a government, Mr. Speaker, that through waste and 
mismanagement has driven this province into the greatest fiscal 
crisis that we have ever experienced. This is a province that is 
teetering on the edge of bankruptcy because of PC waste and 
mismanagement. This is a province that has a huge accumulated 
deficit, on the average higher than all jurisdictions in Canada, 
and they need the money. 
 
These people are desperate. The PCs are desperate. They know 
that they cannot go to the public again with that sorry fiscal 
record and explain to the people what has happened. They need 
money, and their only hope for getting money is to sell off the 
potash corporation, Mr. Speaker — to deny the future, to deny 
the future and to save their present. That’s what this Bill is all 
about. That’s what they’re hoping to do. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, come the next election campaign, 
whether or not the potash corporation sell-off goes through, 
whether or not they have the money, the people of 
Saskatchewan will see through their charade, will recognize 
their attempts for what they are, and will turf the Tories out of 
office and restore a New Democratic Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — A party and a government that is 
committed to the future, not only to the PC Party and its  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

989 
 

friends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I just want to say in terms of foreign ownership and 
foreign domination, the reason that the government of the day 
set up a potash corporation in the first instance was to avoid 
foreign domination. It was to do things to ensure that instead of 
having head office jobs located in Chicago or Milwaukee or 
New York, that head office jobs would be provided here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that has happened, Mr. Speaker. That has happened. There 
have been many head office jobs created by the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, jobs that would not be here, jobs 
that would not be here if the government had not acted as it did 
in those years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because the Saskatchewan people have a 
strong ownership position in the potash industry that we see 
many head-office jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this is a government that proposes to change that. They 
want to sell it off again. And they say that, well, we’re going to 
keep the head office here in Saskatchewan. Well it would be 
kind of like Wawanesa Mutual, Mr. Speaker. Wawanesa Mutual 
is a life insurance company that has its head office in 
Wawanesa, Saskatchewan. But if you want to ask about how 
many people are employed in Wawanesa, Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, in a Wawanesa Mutual company, it’s a different story. 
There are many more that are employed in head offices 
probably . . . or in major branch offices, Mr. Speaker, in 
Ontario, but certainly not employed in Wawanesa, Manitoba. 
 
And that’s what will happen here with the potash corporation, 
Mr. Speaker. Out-of-province investors, foreign investors will 
own and control the potash corporation. They’ll say that, look, 
the real action in terms of potash is to be here in Atlanta, 
Georgia, so therefore some of our operation should move to 
Atlanta, Georgia, or move to Chicago, move to where . . . the 
home of the futurities markets in North America. They’ll say 
that’s where the action is so that, no, no, we’ll keep the head 
office there, but we’re just going to move some of our 
operations out of town and out of country. That’s what’ll 
happen, and Saskatchewan people will lose more jobs. 
 
And again, you know, when you look at the crisis facing 
Saskatchewan and what it is that Saskatchewan people need and 
demand, and given the state of our economy, what we need 
from this government, and what people want from all 
politicians at this time, is leadership in turning the situation 
around so that we can provide hope and optimism for the future; 
so we can provide hope and optimism for our young people; so 
that we can provide direct jobs for our young people; that we 
can provide economic opportunities for the great mass of 
Saskatchewan people. That’s what . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That’s what Saskatchewan people want, 
Mr. Speaker; that’s what they want. They don’t want more 
foreign domination of their industry; they don’t want to set the 
stage for selling off Saskatchewan assets; they don’t want to set 
the stage for future job loss in  

Saskatchewan. They want to be able to retain those jobs. They 
want to be able to say to young people, study hard, go to school; 
there’s head office jobs here in Saskatchewan; there’s jobs here 
with good, good wages. They want fairness and honesty. That’s 
what they want, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want more foreign 
domination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of the potash corporation is a good one. 
This is a corporation that has made profits in many of its years, 
with the exception when the PCs were running things, when the 
potash corporation showed some reverses. But in the main, in 
the past the potash corporation has made money for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. There is every reason to believe 
that in the future the potash corporation will make money. And 
even the PC government believed that at one time, because they 
carried through with major expansion plans in the mid-1980s, 
because they believe that there’s a market for potash, and I 
believe that they are right. 
 
I think that there is a strong future market for potash, a strong 
future market for Saskatchewan’s resources. And I think that 
there is a real prospect of strong profits for Saskatchewan 
people from a resource that they own, a resource that they feel 
will help them in the future to do things such as reduce taxes 
and maintain services and programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the real reason that the government wants to 
sell off the potash corporation is because they’re desperate for 
money. These people have been . . . or are the epitome of a 
group that believes that waste and mismanagement is the order 
of the day. Nowhere else in Canada have we seen a jurisdiction 
go from the position that Saskatchewan has; of a jurisdiction 
that since 1944 had never, never shown a deficit. From 1944 to 
1982, there had never been a deficit in Saskatchewan, with two 
exceptions — I think in 1962 and ’63, or in the early ’60s when 
there were some real problems in the agriculture economy. And 
I think the deficits were in the single or double digits of 
millions and ultimately were absorbed in the ensuing years. 
 
But other than that, you know, the record has been a proud one, 
has been a strong one, through thick and thin, through bad 
times, through good times. There has always been a surplus in 
Saskatchewan until the PCs came around. That’s when they 
started doing things like giving tax breaks to the oil companies; 
that’s when they started doing things like pumping up the 
money for advertising, and I’ll get to that in a minute; that’s 
when they started doing things like giving away money to their 
friends, the Pocklingtons and so on. 
 
(1615) 
 
And it built up a deficit, an accumulated deficit, in record time 
and one that is a source of amazement — amazement — to 
people outside Saskatchewan. How could you take your 
province that was so rich and abundant in resources, that has 
been managed so well by CCF, Liberal, and NDP governments 
. . . And I say Liberal; I want to give credit due where it’s due, 
Mr. Speaker. And then you come to a PC government, a PC 
government, and all of a sudden things go the other way. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

990 
 

Well that explains, Mr. Speaker, why they want to sell off the 
potash corporation, because they have mismanaged, because 
there has been waste. They want to sell off the potash 
corporation to build up an election fund so they can go to the 
people in the next election and say, here is our money; here is 
what we can do with your money once we’re re-elected. But 
they won’t be telling the people — you can bet, Mr. Speaker — 
that we will . . . that they sold off a major asset and that we’ll 
not be getting future profits from any potash corporation in 
Saskatchewan and all those profits will be going out of province 
and out of country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned waste and mismanagement. You 
know, one doesn’t really have to go very much beyond this 
Chamber to see the waste and mismanagement every day. We 
on this side of the House — and this is not something that the 
people who watch the proceedings on television will know — 
but we every day sit here and see the government appointees, 
the government hacks and flacks, political appointees, every 
day during question periods, filling the galleries, wasting 
taxpayers’ money, filling the galleries to sit here to see how 
their ministers might answer a question, if they answer a 
question. 
 
This is a government that we know that spent $90,000 in the 
1986-87 fiscal year, spent $90,000 on a Toronto research outfit 
and media outfit to teach them how to comb their hair and how 
to dress. At least that’s what the member for Regina Wascana 
told us in the committee the more we raised questions about this 
kind of expenditure — teaching the cabinet ministers how to 
comb their hair and how to dress so that they look appropriate 
for the TV cameras. 
 
We don’t have to go very far, Mr. Speaker, to see the waste and 
mismanagement around here. The people of Saskatchewan 
don’t have to go very far to see the waste and mismanagement, 
the waste and mismanagement which has led to the deficit crisis 
that we have in Saskatchewan and which has forced this 
government to the brink of having to sell off the potash 
corporation so that they can get a quick fix of cash, a quick fix 
of cash to help them with their election fund for the next 
campaign so that they can turn around and buy the voters with 
their own money, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this is all about. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan don’t have to go very far to 
see that waste and mismanagement, the waste and 
mismanagement which is leading to this sell-off of the potash 
corporation. They can sit at home tonight, they can sit at home 
tonight — they don’t have to venture from their chair, you don’t 
have to venture from the chair that you’re sitting in now to see 
the waste and mismanagement tonight, because if you turn the 
channel, if you turn the channel to the hockey game or one of 
the other Saskatchewan channels, one of the other 
Saskatchewan stations, the chances are very great that you will 
see government ads; you will see the millions of dollars that this 
government is spending on advertising. 
 
You will remember a couple of weeks ago, to generally 
encourage you to feel good about public participation, to feel 
good about privatization, to make you feel good about selling 
things off, and I understand now, a series of  

ads to make you feel good about selling off SaskEnergy — no, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan don’t have to go very 
far, don’t have to go very far to see the waste and 
mismanagement. They can see it in their own living rooms. 
 
The question is, who benefits from that, Mr. Speaker? Is it the 
public of Saskatchewan, John Q. Public, feel better because 
they’ve watched an advertisement on public participation, 
privatization, selling things off? I ask the people: do you feel 
better after watching that advertisement? Did you feel better 
about your province? Do you feel better about the prospects of 
jobs for the young people in your family? Do you feel better 
about the prospects for the family farm? Do you feel better 
about the prospects for your small business? Do you feel better 
about the prospects for reducing taxes? Do you feel better about 
those things after watching the government ads? 
 
You know, and this is no small thing because the figures show 
to us, Mr. Speaker, that in the last fiscal year this government 
probably spent in the neighbourhood of $16 million — $16 
million, Mr. Speaker — on advertising, on self-serving 
advertising; on telling the people things like public participation 
is good for you; you know, on telling the people things like free 
trade is good for you; on telling the people that things are good 
for you even if the people don’t believe in them, pushing their 
ideology down their throats with the people’s tax money. 
 
So every time you see those ads, every time you see those ads 
about public participation and you see those ads about 
SaskEnergy and you see those ads about what a wonderful 
place Saskatchewan is, you have to ask yourself how many 
dollars of mine are going into those ads? 
 
And that’s waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. Those are 
dollars that could be better used to support government 
programs. Those are dollars that could be better used to lower 
taxes in Saskatchewan. Those are dollars that could be used in 
any number of ways. If the government just simply cut back 
from $16 million worth of advertising every year to $10 million 
worth of advertising, we’d be able to retain the children’s dental 
program, and then some. 
 
So you have to question, who benefits? And again the people 
should ask themselves, when I see the ad on public 
participation, am I benefitting from this? Or are my pockets 
being picked again so that this government can shove some silly 
message down the throats of Saskatchewan people? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this government is known far and wide 
for its phenomenal spending on advertising and its phenomenal 
waste and mismanagement. And it’s no wonder that they’re 
having to sell off the potash corporation and selling off so much 
of Saskatchewan so that they can get some money to buy their 
way into the good graces of Saskatchewan voters. Not that it’s 
going to work, mind you. They’ll find that out in the next 
election campaign. They’ll find that out that when they go to 
the people and say, look, we’ve got all kinds of money here; 
mind you, we don’t have anything left; we don’t have any 
assets left and we wouldn’t be able to do it again. People  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

991 
 

of Saskatchewan aren’t going to buy their line. They’re going to 
go to the ballot boxes and they’re going to vote the PCs out. 
That’s what they’re going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of the advertising, they’re just simply spending 
millions of dollars. It’s a phenomenal waste of taxpayers’ 
dollars. I think the public is like a friend of mine who I saw the 
other day, and he said, you know, I was watching the hockey 
games and there they were, those government ads — 
government ads on public participation, public ads on 
privatization. He said, every time I saw one of those ads I feel 
like my pocket’s been picked. And his pockets had been picked. 
Every time you see one of those ads, it’s your money that’s 
being used to pay for that. 
 
And I want you to think, I want the public to think about, you 
know, taking that money and what better ways there might be to 
use that money. Aren’t there better ways to spend that money? 
To spend it on Big Sisters, to spend it on hospital construction, 
to spend it on reducing hospital waiting lists, to spend it on 
sheltered homes for battered women who so desperately need it. 
There’s many, many fine and good ways that that money can be 
spent — any way except self-serving government advertising, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I raise the question of advertising because it’s a 
phenomenally extravagant example of government waste, Mr. 
Speaker, of a government wasting the taxpayers’ dollars — 
wasting the taxpayers’ dollars, and during the course of time 
spending themselves into a deficit crisis, spending themselves 
into a fiscal crisis which could only be resolved, in their eyes, if 
they’re to be re-elected, by selling off our assets to get the 
money. 
 
You know, this is not something that’s going down well with 
Saskatchewan people. It’s almost like if you have a farm and 
through mismanagement you build up a big debt. You sell off 
part of that farm to get the cash that you need to keep it going. 
Well there’s only so many times you can do that, Mr. Speaker, 
or you won’t have anything left. And you’ll be a serf, you’ll be 
a tenant on your farm. 
 
Now I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, that rural people especially 
understand and oppose this sell-off of our assets to foreign 
people. 
 
You know, this is a government that used to attack the New 
Democratic Party on something called the land bank, and said, 
you’re turning Saskatchewan people into tenants as opposed to 
owners. You’re a government that really doesn’t know how to 
deal with the question of intergenerational transfer of farm land; 
how to take a farm that’s owned by someone — they want to 
sell; they don’t have any buyers — and the son wants to buy. 
They don’t have the money. You have no program for doing 
that other than through the land bank. 
 
You know — and I readily concede that there may have been 
improvements needed to that land bank — but I want to look at 
the facts, Mr. Speaker. And one of the reasons that rural people 
oppose the sell-off, because one of the things that’s been 
happening in rural Saskatchewan is with respect to land tenure, 
and that there’s a whole new class of serfs and tenants out there, 
because in land  

tenure there have been noticeable changes. 
 
The number of farmers having total ownership of their farm has 
declined from 34,135 in 1981 to 29,416 in 1986 — mostly years 
of PC government. In 1981 the level of farm land ownership 
was 66.1 per cent, involving 43.3 million acres of land. By 1986 
the percentage of farm land ownership has declined to 62.1 per 
cent, involving 40.8 million acres, Mr. Speaker. During the past 
five years, approximately 2.5 million acres of land have 
changed from that of ownership to rented status, or an amount 
equal to two and a half times the total which was held by the 
land bank previous to 1982. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is not a government that, notwithstanding 
the things that it says, has any very strong feelings or certainly 
any very strong programs to promote ownership, to encourage 
Saskatchewan people to retain ownership of their resources. We 
see it in the area of farm land that there’s just been a 
phenomenal shift, Mr. Speaker, of people moving from those 
who own their farm to those having to rent the farm because of 
economic circumstances. And it comes as no surprise therefore 
to rural people that the government would take this approach 
with other assets that we own, to take the potash corporation, to 
sell it off; to take the power corporation, sell it off. But they 
oppose it more strongly because they feel it more deeply and 
understand it more, Mr. Speaker, and they oppose, they oppose 
this selling off of what it is that we own; they oppose the selling 
off of our heritage, and they oppose the selling off of something 
that just might be employed to provide a better future for their 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks by simply saying 
that the people of Saskatchewan do not understand what benefit 
there might be in the long run of the sell-off of the potash 
corporation; that the people of Saskatchewan do not understand 
the government’s fixation with the sell-off of everything; that 
they see far more important priorities, far more important issues 
that the government should deal with; that they’re crying out for 
leadership and help when it comes to the farm crisis; that young 
people and families everywhere in Saskatchewan are crying out 
for help and leadership in terms of stimulating the economy so 
that young people might be helped to find jobs, so that young 
people might be helped to develop some equity, so that young 
people might be helped to develop their families and to move 
forward. 
 
Because those are major crises in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t make these things up. The members opposite know that. 
The people of Saskatchewan know that. They know that there’s 
a crisis on the farm. They know that young people . . . they all 
know of young people somewhere in their extended families 
that are looking for jobs. They know that unemployment for our 
young people is 25 per cent. 
 
(1630) 
 
They’re asking for leadership and concrete help and action on 
those items. They don’t ask for a sell-off of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. They don’t ask for a sell-off of 
something that might in the future make profits  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

992 
 

and will make profits that can be used to provide services and 
programs for young people. They ask for the retention of a 
corporation that has a head office in Saskatchewan and provides 
employment opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
They ask the government to be with them and to help them in 
their hour of need, and their need has never been greater, Mr. 
Speaker; their need has never been greater. They’re asking for 
help now, but this government has taken a position that they 
want to priorize privatization. Their first Bill of this session was 
about privatization. Not about the farm crisis, not about youth 
unemployment; their first Bill was about privatization. So the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking themselves, why won’t the 
government deal with the problems that I see as being important 
to deal with? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan also object, Mr. Speaker, to the 
selling off of something that we own to foreign interests, and 
know that once we sell off 45 per cent, that for ever and a day, 
with the Canada-U.S. trade agreement, that foreign interests 
will always own 45 per cent of the potash corporation; that in 
the past we took the position and we as a government and we as 
a party have always taken the position that we want to promote, 
we want to promote Canadian ownership; we want to promote 
ownership at home. 
 
But this is a government that through its policies and programs, 
whether it be on the farm, has seen a remarkable reduction in 
the amount of land that is being owned as opposed to the land 
that is being rented; has seen an increase in the amount of farm 
land that is being rented as opposed to being owned. This is a 
government that is taking us back to previous times when 
foreign industries seemed to own everything in Saskatchewan 
and everything in Canada, and a trend that we fought against 
because we believe it’s important for people to own their own 
things, to own . . . to have access to their own resources. But 
this is not something that the government wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is characterized by waste 
and mismanagement and is now desperate to find ways to 
search for money, to locate pools of capital and money that they 
can take with them to the next election campaign, because they 
know that the people of Saskatchewan are sceptical of their 
fiscal record, of their record of ever-increasing deficits, their 
record of a record accumulated deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They know a government that is spending millions of dollars on 
things such as government advertising, and they see that as 
waste; they see it as mismanagement. They would like the 
government to take this money and to put it in more appropriate 
things, and it’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that over the years that 
we’ve accumulated this massive debt, and that now the 
government must sell off what it is that we all own, that we all 
own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all own the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, each and 
every person in Saskatchewan. Each and every person in 
Saskatchewan has a lifetime, non-transferable share in the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. We all benefit from that. 
This government wants to end that kind  

of relationship. It wants to make some people be the owners; it 
wants to make the rest of us being tenants in our own house, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there’s a very healthy scepticism about 
this party and what it now stands for. This is a party that was 
known for honesty. This is a party that was once represented by 
John Diefenbaker. This is a party that was known for its 
integrity. But they see the list of federal PC members and 
Saskatchewan PC members. They see these people operating 
outside the law. They see the charges of corruption and bribery 
and conflict of interest, and they ask themselves, who will 
really benefit? 
 
Who will really benefit from this sell-off of Saskatchewan’s 
assets? How can we trust this government in the sale of our 
assets? One might trust another government, Mr. Speaker, one 
might trust another government, but certainly we can no longer 
trust the PCs when it comes to stewardship of our tax dollars. 
They’re not to be trusted in this case, Mr. Speaker. And that is a 
real concern that the people of Saskatchewan have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks by encouraging 
the government to take another look at the potash corporation 
debate to sell off the potash corporation. If the government 
really believes that they have public support on this issue; if 
they really believe that this is something that the people of 
Saskatchewan want; if they really believe that selling off the 
potash corporation is going to benefit Saskatchewan people, 
then why don’t they put it to a vote of the Saskatchewan 
people? Why don’t they hold a plebiscite on the issue? 
 
They don’t have to put their government on the line. I know that 
they’ll get defeated if they take it to a general election, but why 
don’t they hold a plebiscite on the issue? Why don’t they seek 
the input and advice of Saskatchewan people and ask the 
Saskatchewan public to pass judgement? Do you want the 
potash corporation sold so that you can get a quick fix in time 
for the next election? Or would you prefer the Saskatchewan 
people to be able to retain ownership in this important industry 
and ensure profits for all time? What position is it that you want 
to take? 
 
And I’m not suggesting to the government that they need fall on 
that issue. Just simply put it to a plebiscite of the voters. Give 
every man, woman that’s of voting age an opportunity to pass 
judgement on this Bill as to whether or not they want the 
government to proceed in this manner. 
 
This is no small thing, Mr. Speaker. This is a major, major 
enterprise. This involves hundreds of millions of dollars, if not 
a billion dollars, of Saskatchewan people’s assets — or $2 
billion of Saskatchewan people’s assets, things that we own. I 
think they should be consulted. And if the government lacks the 
courage to go to a general election to ask the people in a general 
election on this, at least put it to a plebiscite. Let’s ask the 
voters what they think as to whether or not they want the potash 
corporation to be sold off. 
 
I ask them to do that. I ask them to take that opportunity,  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

993 
 

that offer, to gracefully back down on this issue, because they 
know from the polls that the people don’t support them. They 
know, and they don’t have to put their government on the line, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope they come to their senses. I hope that they 
will recognize, as do the people of Saskatchewan, that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is a profitable corporation, 
is one that has made profits for the people in the past; has the 
potential to make profits in the future; likely will make profits 
in the future; can be used by the people of Saskatchewan to 
raise moneys that can help to support services and programs 
that are desperately needed, to reduce the tax burden on the 
average person. I hope they come to their senses, understand 
that and withdraw this Bill, or put it to a plebiscite of the 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a pleasure to take part in this, what I guess probably 
may be a historic debate. And I would like to indicate to you 
that I listened quite well to what the member from Regina 
Victoria had to say while he was speaking in this debate. 
 
And other than the fact that of a stonewalling factor that I’ve 
envisioned from the member from Regina Victoria, I would say 
and suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that his remarks to the Bill of 
public participation on potash has, I guess, probably in all 
summation, if you wanted to sum up the amount of words and 
the amount of participation that he put into the Bill, directly 
related to the Bill, I would say that you could have said all of 
what he said in about two minutes. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that as I get into my remarks on 
the potash Bill here, you will, as well as the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, will begin to understand exactly 
what the truth is about the most common sense approach that 
any government can take with public participation. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP opposition 
have for now, the last hour and a half or so, been continually 
suggesting that this is a sell-out of Saskatchewan potash mines 
and the Saskatchewan company. I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that if it was an ideology of this government that we’re 
just going to privatize anything for the sake of privatizing it, 
well then, Mr. Speaker, the arguments would be totally different 
and the arguments would be, sir, that just exactly the point of 
standing up here and saying, well they’re wrong and we’re right 
and this is it. 
 
I want to lay out the facts to you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to lay 
out the facts to you exactly why it is common sense, it is a 
business approach, and the right thing to do for the province of 
Saskatchewan through public participation in our potash 
industry here in Saskatchewan. And I want to point out to you, 
number one, is basically the expansion and the diversification 
that can be created through public participation in potash. And I 
also want to indicate to you,  

Mr. Speaker, that not only through this diversification and 
expansion in potash, that it also gives long-term security for 
jobs for our young people here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The members opposite speak out of two sides and three sides 
and four sides of their mouths, and let me tell you, they have 
awful large mouths. I want to indicate to you that at one 
particular time they’re criticizing this government because there 
are not enough jobs in this province, and then on the other hand 
they come in and say, well you’re expanding, and so through 
this expansion you’re giving away our resources, you’re selling 
out Saskatchewan, and you’re not doing anything. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they just can’t have it any way that . . . their 
arguments just don’t hold any water. I’m telling you, Mr. 
Speaker, that if they used that kind of a pail and went to a river 
to draw water, by the time they got back to their camp, that pail 
would be empty. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, is that when I have 
looked, when I have looked over at the members opposite and 
what they’ve had to contribute over this last while and the 
concern they’ve had for the people of this province over the last 
couple or so weeks, it has been a shame of this democracy. It 
has been a shame of this legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that — 
and I thank you for bringing members opposite to order — and 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that I was wanting to 
begin to debate all the Bills in this legislature and get on with 
the job and get on the job of public participation in the potash. 
 
One thing I want to talk to you about, Mr. Speaker, is basically 
of what the members opposite have been saying, and I want to 
bring some facts back in and the truths back into this floor, into 
this legislature. I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and as 
my colleague had indicated, and not to give him too much 
credit for putting words in my mouth. But I want to indicate to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan do definitely deserve the true facts of what this 
government is actually doing through public participation in 
this province. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people . . . of a 
story my grandfather used to say, that the people that had to 
holler and call people names and try and attract attention 
through that kind of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Garbage. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, garbage, yes. That’s a good word. Then 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that as he had indicated that there 
was not much substance to what those people were doing other 
than trying to attract some attention and to try and get some 
support for that kind of behaviour. It doesn’t work. 
 
  



 
May 8, 1989 

994 
 

The people in our province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are 
much more intelligent. They’re thinkers and they’re doers. 
They’re shakers and they’re doers. And I give that credit to 
those people out there. They’re free thinkers, Mr. Speaker, and 
they want a free society. They do not want to be under the 
thumbs of the NDP. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that when we started public 
participation, and as the members opposite had indicated, that 
they say they go out . . . The NDP say they’ve heard from the 
people and they’re opposed to public participation. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to talk to you about the success in my remarks 
and my speech as I go into it in great detail. 
 
But I want to indicate some of the things that the member from 
Regina Victoria had indicated, because I did not cover that in 
my speech. And the more positives are in my speech, Mr. 
Speaker, so I want to indicate a few of the untruths that were 
mentioned by the member from Regina Victoria. I want to 
indicate to you that the member from Regina Victoria had 
indicated that on the 106 million, I believe, profits of the potash 
corporation, that if it was foreign owned or something like of 
this substance that they are so much against, that there would be 
approximately $50 million leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. Not the case, Mr. Speaker. Not the case. 
 
The member opposite again has brought out this calculator that 
does not know how to add and subtract and put costs into any 
kind of a business. And I can rightfully see that, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s because there’s not one of them across the floor of this 
legislature that have either been a successful business man or a 
successful farmer or successful in anything, other than the fact 
. . . I can’t understand how they ever became successful getting 
into this legislature. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that $50 million is 
not going to leave this province; that if they would look and 
take a look at the amount of interest the potash corporation has 
got to pay, has got to pay because of the NDP’s investment in 
potash in this province, is basically . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I don’t think we need 
hollering in the Assembly, and it certainly doesn’t do much for 
the decorum of the Assembly. And I ask for your co-operation 
in allowing the hon. member to continue. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
indicate to you that this $50 million is not going to be leaving 
the province of Saskatchewan. This $50 million is basically 
going to go — and that’s only half of it, because if we added it 
up, out of that 106 or 8 million dollar profit, approximately 
$100 million will go to pay for the interest on the debt of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the only way that money is going to leave the province of 
Saskatchewan is to the people that have invested where that 
money was borrowed from. And if the money was borrowed 
from foreign investors, from foreign banks, which they were, 
then it is not this government that went out and borrowed that 
money, but it was the NDP government in 1976, Mr. Speaker. It 
was  

the NDP that went to the U.S. and went over to Europe and 
borrowed these dollars to purchase these potash mines. So a 
hundred million dollars a year is leaving this province because 
of the NDP’s borrowing outside of Canada and outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, put it in its proper perspective — who owns these 
potash mines? Who owns these potash mines? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I will indicate to you, it’s not the people of 
Saskatchewan that own these potash mines, but it’s the banks 
that own these, and the foreign banks that own these potash 
mines, because there isn’t enough assets in these potash mines, 
Mr. Speaker, enough assets because of the blundering, the 
blundering, foolish management of the NDP when they were 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re in here as a government, Mr. Speaker. The Progressive 
Conservative government has got to clean up that mess; we’ve 
got to manage the province; we’ve got to build for the future, 
Mr. Speaker. The NDP can’t stand that because the NDP know 
that they will never return to this Assembly as government, Mr. 
Speaker, as long as we, as long as we show the public that this 
is the right thing to do. And this is what I’m going to show to 
you through my speech — that this is the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as those members were out there talking about 
public participation and the demise of the province of 
Saskatchewan, the last couple weeks they were out there trying 
to drum up support, well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you 
that I was in my riding, I was in my riding. 
 
And those people opposite, the member from The Battlefords 
happened to be into my riding. And I think I have a . . . I think I 
had a paper . . . I’ll get back to that later, Mr. Speaker. But 
anyway, he was up there trying to drum up support in my riding 
because of their little escapade they were on. But I want to 
indicate to you it didn’t work; it absolutely didn’t work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to turn this thing now, and I want to show you how 
it’s not working and it’s not working in potash. I want to say to 
you that the people in this province, as I had indicated earlier, 
are ready for the industry to expand. They’re ready for the 
industry to diversify and to create these jobs. These young 
people are hungry for jobs, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want the 
job to choose them any longer; they want to be able to choose 
the job again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what this kind of public 
participation in potash and any other of the corporations that we 
have been looking at, have been working, and I will point that 
out. But the member from Regina . . . I want to clear up just a 
couple of points before I get into my speech, Mr. Speaker, 
because the member from Regina Victoria had, as I was saying, 
had been misleading the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he had indicated that we are spending something 
in the neighbourhood of around $16 million in advertising, and 
that a friend of his was upset because this advertising had come 
on during a hockey game or whatever. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
would think that $16 million, if that is even the number . . . I’m 
not quite aware,  
  



 
May 8, 1989 

995 
 

but if that would be the number and the maximum number of 
bringing information to — and the proper and the factual 
information — to the public of Saskatchewan, instead allowing 
them to go out on some sort of a strike mode of the Assembly 
and then go out and tour the province and mislead the people. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s money well 
spent, because I can remember back under the days of the NDP 
administration when they were advertising in massive, massive 
millions, I believe it was well documented, well over the 
hundreds of millions of dollars with the families of Crown 
corporations and bragging about what the great things it was 
doing for the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
And I will also get into that, Mr. Speaker, when I get into my 
speech as to actually what the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan had contributed to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
And I’m sure that when the people have a chance to hear this, 
Mr. Speaker, they are going to just shake their heads at the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the point of order? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I recognize other times in this Assembly you 
have called this side of the House to order for using 
unparliamentary language, and I distinctly heard the member 
from Rosthern call across “big lie” to this side of the House. 
And I think that it’s incumbent upon you, Mr. Speaker, to also 
call those members to order when they use unparliamentary 
language, not just to focus your attention on this side of the 
House. And I would like you to ask the member from Rosthern 
to withdraw those remarks and apologize to this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I listened to the point of order, and if the hon. 
member is challenging the Speaker’s ruling, the judgement, of 
course, is completely out of line. And I might just remind the 
hon. member that I did not hear what he heard, and that can 
happen, and it has happened before. 
 
However, regarding the issue of unparliamentary language, yes, 
that is an issue that all members in the House should adhere to. 
And whether they’re standing on their feet or sitting in their 
seats, hon. members should avoid using unparliamentary 
language . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that the 
NDP opposition will do anything they will to interrupt my 
speech because they don’t want to hear the facts, and so they’ll 
pick out some word that they think they heard. And I’m sure I 
never heard my colleague from Rosthern indicate anything, but 
I’m sure that your ruling is well taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Regina Victoria had 
indicated that instead of all this . . . dollars going to advertising. 
And I wanted to bring this to your attention, is that he’s afraid 
that the facts and the truths that get out  

there to the Saskatchewan people will be accepted, and he’s 
afraid of this. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I can understand 
why he’s afraid, and you’re going to, as I had indicated, see this 
as I release my items from my speech. 
 
He had indicated that these dollars should be well more spent 
on other things such as Big Sisters. Well, Mr. Speaker, when he 
mentioned Big Sisters I made a quick note of that, and I wanted 
to indicate to you that it was not until 1984, under this 
administration, that the lobby of the Big Sisters group out of 
Lloydminster had come to me and asked for government 
funding and help which they had previously asked the NDP 
opposition for years and years and years and never got it. Mr. 
Speaker, I was pleased, and I was very pleased to be able to say, 
yes Big Sisters, we now will support you and see that you’re 
assisted in your very worthwhile organization. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and I was very pleased 
to hear this comment from the member from Regina Victoria as 
he says that the NDP are now in favour of . . . to promote 
Canadian ownership in this province. They’re in favour of 
promoting Canadian ownership in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re in favour of having now the industry 
opened up to Canadians in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was certainly amazed by that because as he was talking about 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform, and I want to inform 
you about the fact that the member from . . . all the NDP 
members are . . . when in referring to agriculture, refuse . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Quite frankly, I’m having great 
difficulty hearing the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 
and it’s obviously because of some very loud interruptions in 
the House, and I just ask for your co-operation. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well I want to just indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that through the Canadian ownership that the member 
from Regina Victoria was talking about and through suggesting 
that NDP Party now agree with Canadian ownership in 
Saskatchewan, is that they still have not recognized that within 
the farming industry . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


