


















































June 9, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 9, 1989 
 

1765 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure 
for me today to welcome a group of students from Waldeck, 
Saskatchewan. The school is one in which my son attends, and 
my nephew. It’s a real good school. It’s got good teachers, good 
kids, and I want to welcome them here. They’re accompanied by 
Mr. Hustak and Mrs. Pat Dyck Bunkosky. My neighbour, Barry 
Beisel is the driver of the bus, and I want to have all of the 
members of the Assembly welcome them here today. Thank you 
very much for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to introduce through you, and to this Assembly, a group of 
students from James O’Begg School, which is only about eight 
miles down the road from the Waldeck School. These students, 
this morning, they are about 20 in number and they are seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. They have with them their teacher, David 
Franz. They have a couple of parents, I believe, in Donnalee 
DeKowny and Gary Whitney. I don’t have the name of the bus 
driver, but the bus driver is with them. They got here safely, and 
the bus drivers in Swift Current will get them home safely too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome these students, 
and I will look forward to meeting with them outside on the lawn 
today at approximately 11 a.m. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Unemployment in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the Premier 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, today’s figures released by 
Statistics Canada show the shocking fact that unemployment in 
Saskatoon is now at 11.4 per cent, one in nine, the second worst 
in all of Canada. The only city with a worse record of 
unemployment, Mr. Premier, is Sherbrooke, Quebec, with 11.6 
per cent. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier; I ask you: how do you explain the 
inability of your government to get the economy of Saskatoon 
and, for that matter, all of Saskatchewan rolling again? How do 
we explain that to the people of Saskatchewan, and in particular 
to the 11,000 who are looking for work in the city of Saskatoon 
today? How do you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, we go through these 
statistics monthly. Every month the members of the opposition 
come and complain after they’ve wasted another month of House 
time so that the programs of this government cannot continue. 
What we have is that Saskatchewan has moved ahead of 
Manitoba, and it’s behind only Alberta and Ontario in 
employment. We are 

making progress, and there’s a sign here that diversification is 
working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question to the Premier again, Mr. Speaker. 
The minister says we come to complain, and you bet your boots 
we come to complain, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Premier, for two years now your economic development 
policy has been just one thing: the sell-off and the give-away of 
our resources. And the steady rise of unemployment in 
Saskatchewan is proof positive that your plans are not working. 
 
And I ask you, sir, I ask you, Mr. Premier, when will it end? 
When will your government come up with some real workable 
ideas for job creation and economic development in the province 
of Saskatchewan; and when will you scrap your failed 
ideological plan to piratize the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, in the last month 
employment went up 20,000 over the prior month; of that 20,000 
there were 4,000 more women employed in Saskatchewan than 
there were a month ago. Clearly the policies of this government 
are working. And if we got this legislature working again, we 
could bring in more policies that would have even more people 
working in this province. 
 
So what we have is this government trying to build Saskatchewan 
and the members of the opposition trying to tear down everything 
that’s being done. They’re trying to stand on the other end of the 
province while we’re pulling this province into prosperity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, a new question again to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, if your government’s plans are working so well, 
why does the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment have to take questions directed to you? Why are you 
hiding from the questions directed by the opposition about your 
record of employment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — You know, Mr. Premier, that last year 
Saskatchewan had by far the worst record in Canada for loss of 
people from the province of Saskatchewan. And I ask you, sir, to 
be accountable and to stand in this House and to explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan just what your new and real ideas are to 
get the economy working and to get people in Saskatchewan 
working again. Will you answer that question, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have introduced 
legislation in this House; we have initiated projects in the   



 
June 9, 1989 

1766 
 

city of Moose Jaw and close to them; we have gone, Mr. Speaker, 
to create diversification and water projects and fertilizer projects 
and wire and cable projects; tourism, Mr. Speaker, in the city of 
Moose Jaw; diversification in this province through two 
upgraders, through a paper mill, through Saskatchewan Place for 
tourism. And every single, solitary one of those, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Moose Jaw North has opposed — every single, 
solitary one of them. 
 
For 54 days in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, to help people here 
bring in agriculture legislation which will help them save the 
home quarter, help them refinance the farm, helps in 
diversification and processing and manufacturing in the meat 
business, and all the things that we can do through 
high-technology, and every single time, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Moose Jaw North, and as the paper says, the 
Romanow radicals, have rejected it and voted against it. 
 
Even $1,400 per man, woman, and child on a Health budget — 
rejected by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. They know that 
they . . . I can hardly wait to see, Mr. Speaker, hardly wait to see 
that the rain could come down and interest rates can come down, 
because it’ll make people feel better. They’d vote against rain if 
they had the chance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplement to the Premier again, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Premier, your words sound impressive when you say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, supplement to the Premier. 
I listen to your words and I look at your track record, Mr. 
Premier. If your plans are working so well, why do we have this 
shameful record of unemployment in Saskatchewan, and why are 
people fleeing the province of Saskatchewan in record numbers, 
going to other provinces looking for hope and for a future for 
themselves and for their families. Will you explain your record 
in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when it was difficult in 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan with 22 and 23 per cent interest 
rates, the members opposite did nothing, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have put, literally, in combination with the federal government, 
hundreds of millions and billions of dollars into agriculture, and 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that. 
 
And in this legislature right now we have proposals and we have 
legislation that will help save the home quarter, help save towns 
and villages, will help diversification, processing and 
manufacturing, and Mr. Speaker, all they do is sit there and 
debate day after day, the nonsense, Mr. Speaker, of they’re 
against every single solitary process — manufacturing, small 
business, diversification project — that this government has 
introduced for small business, for towns, for villages, and rural 
people, Mr. Speaker. People have been hurt in rural 
Saskatchewan, and we 

want to defend them, and they will not vote in here. 
 
Whether it’s Canada Packers, Mr. Speaker, in Moose Jaw, 
whether it’s Intercontinental Packers, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon, 
whether it’s the small businesses in Yorkton, the processing and 
the manufacturing that can build this province, the NDP 54 days 
in a row stand there and vote against it, Mr. Speaker; voted 
against the budget, vote against health care, vote against social 
services, stand in their place and hijack this legislature, and say 
they are for the people, Mr. Speaker. They have no idea how to 
help the people; that’s why they’re sitting over there, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s why they’ll stay over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Business 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question of 
the Premier. I wonder, given his last answer, whether or not later 
this day we could move to Bill 41, The Act to amend The 
Agricultural Credit Corporation Act. We would very much like 
to move to it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Given the Premier’s bravado today, and I 
think against the advice of Nancy MacLean, getting involved in 
question period against his better wishes, I wonder whether you 
would move to Bill 41 this afternoon or interim supply, anything 
but the bell-ringing and the SaskPower privatization issues which 
you’re pushing in this session. 
 
Can you think about moving to Bill 41 or interim supply later this 
day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I sent a proposal in a letter to 
the Leader of the Opposition today, and said that this House has 
sat for 54 days, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition is unprepared to 
vote, Mr. Speaker — unprepared to vote. And the government’s 
agenda, Mr. Speaker, which is agriculture diversification, health 
care . . . Mr. Speaker, I want the children in this legislature to 
listen to the opposition, listen, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I recognize 
the Premier. Order, order. Order, order. 
 
I think if hon. members would stop hollering from their seats 
when the Premier’s on his feet, perhaps the Speaker could hear 
what he’s saying. That’s why I’m on my feet for the third time 
since he’s risen, so we could hear what the Premier’s saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the children of this province 
will be working in the fertilizer plants, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 
building in Moose Jaw and close to Moose Jaw. The children of 
this plant want to see the   



 
June 9, 1989 

1767 
 

agriculture legislation passed. The children of this province want 
to see the kind of legislation that we could do to protect farmers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the opposition will only sit here and threaten, Mr. Speaker 
— 54 days, $30,000 a day. Over a million and a half dollars has 
been spent by the taxpayers of this province, and the members 
opposite sit there and will not pass and not debate, Mr. Speaker. 
They will not vote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They call from their seats, Mr. Speaker, and they say, it’s two 
years into your mandate; call an election; we don’t want to vote 
in this legislature. That’s what they say. 
 
They don’t want to vote, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the 
government’s agenda. We had a budget, we had a Speech from 
the Throne, we outlined legislative things that we were going to 
do in this province, and we expect elected members in this 
legislature to debate, Mr. Speaker, and to vote. And they have 
rejected that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I call them today — vote! You vote in your place today and be 
counted, and we can get on with all the legislation that the people 
of Saskatchewan want to see. Don’t be political cowards; stand 
in your place and vote in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dental Care for Children 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you set 
the agenda in this House. You can move on to any business that 
you want to, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of 
Health. And talking about children and their families, Mr. 
Speaker, this weekend is the second anniversary of one of the 
most disgraceful events in the history of health care in this 
province. 
 
It not only marks the anniversary of your government’s 
dismantling of the school-based children’s dental program, but it 
also marks the anniversary of cruel, heartless firing of some 400 
dental workers. 
 
Three years later, Mr. Minister, what has your government done 
to live up to the statements made by your Premier in November 
of 1987 when he admitted that your dismantling of the program 
had been a mistake and that a program would be instituted to 
bring proper dental care to the children of our rural communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the children’s dental plan that is out and across 
Saskatchewan now and that is serving rural students . . . The 
members opposite will often say, and you will have heard them 
before in this House, and I will have heard them before, and they 
talk about the fact that rural students, rural children do not now 
have access to dentists and dental care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural students and rural families do have 

access to dentists and dental care, and rural students and rural 
families are taking advantage of that access. And, Mr. Speaker, 
rural people now have . . . in ’87-88, 67,000 students registered 
in the dental plan, and rural students, 62,000 received services; 
92.3 per cent of all those students receiving services . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the incidence of students going and children going to 
the dentist in rural Saskatchewan is stronger than it is in urban 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, stronger than it is in urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And, Mr. Speaker, one other reminder. 
Those members — and I remember it well and some others here 
will remember it as well — they thought it would be the greatest 
issue going in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election. A major 
issue — we’ll talk about, in their terms, the lack of access to 
dental services by children of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, a 
far-flung and rural area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was not an issue as they tried to present it, and as 
a matter of fact that area, for example, has the highest incidence 
in the province of children taking advantage of their access to 
dental services and to using dental services, and they do have 
good dental health among the children of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I want the children in the gallery 
today to hear the real facts with respect to the dental program, 
that according to your department, Mr. Minister, there are now 
34 satellite rural clinics, as opposed to 578 satellite clinics in 338 
communities. And out of these 34, there’s something like seven 
being served by the same dentist. 
 
Fact: there were 188,000 children eligible under the old plan 
compared to 142,000 under your program. There were 167,000 
using the old program compared to 126,000 using your plan. 
 
Fact: the percentage of those who were eligible for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the hon. member should 
be getting to her question. She had plenty of time to set the stage, 
and she should be getting to her question. I’m sure she realizes 
that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to ask the 
minister how he explains these facts, so I’d like to give him a 
couple more to explain. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members can’t give a speech before they 
ask their question, and I think that’s what you’ll be doing if you 
present more facts. So I’d just ask you to get to your question. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Okay. Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the 
percentage of those who were eligible for service under your plan 
who completed dental service is 78 per cent compared to 92 per 
cent under the old plan — I’m talking completes, Mr. Minister, 
not utilization — completes — and in view of the fact your 
government   



 
June 9, 1989 

1768 
 

dismantled the best children’s dental program in North America, 
and you failed, you have miserably failed to replace it with a 
comparable plan, how do you explain these numbers, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I hope all members in the 
House will notice, and I’m sure they do coming from the member 
who has just taken her seat, how she emphasizes the word in her 
own dramatic way, the word “fact” and she says, fact and fact. 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard facts from the member before, facts 
like: this gentleman is on the waiting list in Saskatoon. When I 
found out that that gentleman was on the waiting list in 
Edmonton and not on Saskatchewan at all, that was a fact as well 
on another day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on several occasions to the 
House, the member will bring facts to the House which turn out 
not to be facts. And that needs to be pointed out to the House 
today. And it’s well-known across the province now, and 
becoming more well-known as it relates to her statement of 
today, and as it relates to her terminology about satellite clinics 
and her suggestion that the children’s plan, the former children’s 
plan, where a therapist would visit a school in some of the 
smallest communities on one occasion in the course of a year — 
one occasion in the course of a 52-week year — and that member 
has the audacity to call that a satellite dental clinic for the people 
of that community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that speaks directly to her use of the word “fact.” It 
is not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, satellite dental clinics that are now out in rural 
Saskatchewan that were not there before — that were not there 
before — in fact, in some communities who have never had a 
dentist before, those satellite clinics are providing services, not 
only to the children of rural Saskatchewan but to their parents 
and to their grandparents who want to remain living in rural 
Saskatchewan and give their services and receive their services 
in rural Saskatchewan. Those, Mr. Speaker, are the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the facts are that I speak to people 
— this is a new question, Mr. Speaker — I speak to people on a 
regular basis in rural Saskatchewan who say that they have 
extreme difficulty in getting their children to dentists and that it 
costs them substantially more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, people from Gravelbourg have told 
me that it costs them to drive into the city in order to get adequate 
dental care. It costs them in gas, it costs them expenses. 
 
Mr. Minister, you brought up the Gravelbourg situation and for 
better than a year now your government has promised that they 
. . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Question period shouldn’t be a debate, and I believe that’s what’s 
happening between these two members. Would the hon. member 
get to her question, and the minister will answer the question and 
not in a long way. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us whether or not 
there is a new dentist in Gravelbourg today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the 
community of Gravelbourg. On two occasions — I believe it’s 
two occasions — in this House, I have said and I say again: there 
are two dentists; there are two dentists who are prepared to go to 
Gravelbourg at any time, one who lives in Assiniboia, Mr. 
Speaker, one who lives in Assiniboia and practises there, and one 
who practises in Regina who will set up a satellite clinic in 
Gravelbourg. That is the case, and that has been the case for some 
time. That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 
 
The other fact is that the community of Gravelbourg, through 
their committee led by their mayor — who the members opposite 
know well — has said no, no, we will not have a satellite clinic, 
we will have a full-time dentist in Gravelbourg or nothing, to 
enhance their political agenda. Fine, if they want to enhance their 
political agenda, but let’s talk about the children who could use 
the service if the satellite clinic could be there. 
 
That’s number one, Mr. Speaker. The second point is the 
following . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d like the minister to . . . 
Order. I’ve been asking members to shorten their questions and 
answers. It’s true that you can answer a question, you can take a 
great deal of time to answer a question — I’ll give you a few 
seconds to wrap it up. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And the other point, Mr. Speaker, 
speaking of Gravelbourg, that’s the same member who carried a 
letter around which she said was fact, which said five hospitals 
in this area will close. She said this is a fact. It was not a fact, and 
the people knew it was not a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Silver Lake Farm 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister of 
privatization. Mr. Minister, can you tell this House why your 
government saw fit to sell the Silver Lake farm to a group of Tory 
supporters and reject the bid of the local community area to 
purchase the farm for the economic benefit of that community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as most people know, there 
were four government farms in northern Saskatchewan: one at 
Cumberland House; one at Ile-a-la-Crosse, two at Green Lake, 
one being the central   



 
June 9, 1989 

1769 
 

farm and one being the Silver Lake farm. 
 
Three of those farms were turned over to the communities, turned 
over to the communities. In the case of Green Lake, the Silver 
Lake farm was turned over for $1; the assets were about 
$600,000. The second farm, that was the Silver Lake farm, was 
put out for public tender or bid, and the village of Green Lake bid 
along with a number of other bids — 13, I believe, in total. Theirs 
was not the successful bid. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, again a question to the minister of 
privatization. What did the . . . the value of the operation was 2.5 
million. What did the Tory supporters pay for that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where he gets 
the term “Tory supporters” from, but I’ve indicated to this House, 
when the deal is totally complete, all the legal work, I will be 
tabling the amount of the bids, but not until that has taken place. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would like to know exactly how much they paid 
for it and whether or not they were the lowest bid, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just repeat again, 
when that deal is completely closed in all aspects of it, I will be 
making that public knowledge. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, a new question. You have made 
. . . you gave 12 million acres of land to Weyerhaeuser in the 
surrounding area. The people made economic development 
proposals to you, and they’ve bid on the thing. The Premier has 
taken apart and shot down the Metis at every situation that he can 
get. I want to know whether or not you will support the Metis 
community and re-examine that bid again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think a $600,000 asset 
for $1 is certainly a fairly good deal for that community. 
 
The Speaker: — The time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce another 
school group. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I missed a very 
large group from Swift Current this morning in your Speaker’s 
gallery on this side. It’s a grade 5 class, Mr. Speaker, from Ashley 
Park School. There’s 36 students in number and they have with 
them their teachers Zang Mah and Louise Kozlowski, and three 
chaperons, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve witnessed a very active question period, and that usually 
brings up a question period from the students with the MLAs. I 
would ask all members to please welcome them today and wish 
them a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 
seek leave of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. We’re not at orders of the day; we’re 
only at ministerial statements. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 
beg leave to, pursuant to rule 39 . . . Mr. Speaker, I rise . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. What’s the point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member from Moose Jaw South was 
just on his feet wanting to raise an important issue before orders 
of the day, and you ruled him out of order, then recognized the 
Premier before recognizing our member, and I wonder how that 
would work. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw South rose at an 
inappropriate time. But on orders of the day, the Premier was on 
his feet and I recognized him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Premier was on his feet, and 
I asked the Premier why he was on his feet. Order, order, order, 
order. Order. Order. There is a procedural remedy where the 
member can move a motion that the member for Moose Jaw 
South be heard. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

 That the member for Moose Jaw be heard. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Moose Jaw South. 
 
The Speaker: — Seconder? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I second that motion. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Civil Crisis in People’s Republic of China 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move a 
motion with respect to the civil crisis in the People’s Republic of 
China. 
 
Saskatchewan has had a long-standing and friendly relationship 
with China, beginning in the 1960s with the first sales of 
Canadian wheat. Since that time, Mr.   



 
June 9, 1989 

1770 
 

Speaker, trade between the province of Saskatchewan and the 
People’s Republic of China has increased to more than $1 billion 
annually. China is our second largest trading partner, and our 
trade relations are important to the provincial economy here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Less than four weeks ago, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. On this particular rule, the hon. 
member must ask leave. The hon. member, in order to put the 
motion, must give a very, very brief explanation. Now we had a 
situation of that, I believe it was yesterday, and where we asked 
for the motion to be put. And I believe that we should follow that 
procedure so that the hon. members know what they’re giving 
leave for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the hon. members 
and the Speaker did not hear me when I first stood and I said, I 
rise pursuant to rule 39 to ask leave of the Assembly to move the 
following motion, a motion of urgent and pressing necessity in 
this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Perhaps I’m not making myself clear. Would 
the hon. member put the motion so the hon. members on this side 
could hear what the motion is, and then they can either give leave 
or reject it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked for 
leave pursuant to rule 39 to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the violence, oppression and 
the loss of life of peaceful demonstrators calling for 
increased democracy within the People’s Republic of China. 
This Assembly extends its deepest sympathies to the 
families of those killed and injured, and joins the universal 
appeal for an end to further violence against Chinese 
citizens. 
 
This Assembly further urges the Chinese government to 
demonstrate tolerance and openness in resolving this crisis 
and restoring peace to that country. This Assembly urges the 
federal government to exert all efforts to raise this issue at 
the United Nations and at other international forums, and to 
press for international opposition to these violent acts and 
for the restoration of peace and respect for the human rights 
in the People’s Republic of China. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Less than four 
weeks ago, the chairman of the People’s Congress of the People’s 
Republic of China, Mr. Wan Li, stood in this House for the first 
time in Canadian history — and as far as I know, Chinese history, 
Mr. Speaker — at the heart of our democratic system and spoke 
about the friendship and the co-operation between our two great 
nations. 
 
A symbol of his respect for democracy and openness and truth 
and freedom was expressed here, Mr. Speaker, before you and 
before the people of Saskatchewan in this 

Legislative Assembly. We take it seriously, Mr. Speaker, when 
invited guests come to this Legislative Assembly, and we expect 
those that speak in this Legislative Assembly to respect the 
democratic traditions. 
 
Up until that time we were pleased with the progress that the 
People’s Republic of China was making towards openness and 
towards democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan deplores the 
current situation in China. We condemn the violence with which 
the government is suppressing the people. We call for an end to 
the military action, and a return to a peaceful resolution of this 
civil crisis. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I met with the Prime Minister of Canada 
and urged him to direct Canada and all Canadians to raise the 
issue at home, locally, and abroad, and at the national level, to 
raise it in the United Nations, and other international forums. In 
addition, I assured him that Saskatchewan is willing to relax the 
rules and assist with extension of visas for Chinese students and 
visitors in this province. 
 
Over the last two days, Mr. Speaker, I have met with Chinese 
students, Chinese-Canadian associations in Saskatoon and 
Regina. They shared their pain and their concern with me, Mr. 
Speaker, and I felt their anguish for their families and their 
friends in China very deeply. I indicated that we would do 
everything possible we could to help them get news from home, 
and contact their friends and relatives and loved ones in the 
People’s Republic of China. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in each of our meetings, these individuals advised 
me that they wanted the Government of Saskatchewan to impose 
strategic sanctions against the Government of China. Mr. 
Speaker, we want to help the people in China, but we do not want 
to aid the abuse of human rights. 
 
We are not willing to impose measures which will hurt the 
Chinese people, Mr. Speaker; we want to help them. We will not 
oppose measures which will allow them to go hungry or impede 
their ability to grow food. So any actions imposed must be 
weighed very carefully, Mr. Speaker, against the potential injury 
to the people in China themselves. 
 
In response to this call, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
willing to consider other options such as the temporary embargo 
of technological and information exchanges, like in 
telecommunications, for example. We will consider delaying 
cultural and educational and sports exchanges. All these things 
are currently under consideration at the local, and indeed the 
national level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Government of China must know that using violence to 
suppress its own people is unacceptable in the eyes of 
Saskatchewan and Canada, and indeed in the eyes of the free 
world. 
 
So I do move, seconded by the member from Swift Current, the 
Minister of Energy: 
 

  



 
June 9, 1989 

1771 
 

That this Assembly condemn the violent suppression and 
the loss of life of peaceful demonstrators calling for 
increased democracy within the People’s Republic of China, 
and that this Assembly extends its deepest sympathies to the 
families of those killed and injured, Mr. Speaker, and joins 
the universal appeal for an end to further violence and 
persecution of Chinese people. 
 
This Assembly further urges the Chinese government to 
demonstrate tolerance, openness, and truth in resolving this 
crisis and in restoring peace to the country. This Assembly 
urges the federal government to exert all efforts to raise this 
issue at the United Nations and all other international 
forums, and to press for international condemnation of these 
violent acts and for the restoration of peace and respect for 
human rights in the People’s Republic of China. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the seconder of the 
motion wished to speak. 
 
The Speaker: — I didn’t see her on her feet, and you were 
standing. If she wishes to speak, she may, if you give her leave. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does he lose his place if he gives leave? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I would like to assure my place in the debate 
following the seconder of the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes. Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member from Moose Jaw South. I was a little slow this time — 
only this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise as seconder of the motion this morning. It, 
needless to say, was with some shock and dismay that 
Saskatchewan people, along with all Canadians, I might add, 
watched and they listened and they read of the events taking 
place in Beijing, China, in the past week. 
 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, that shock and that dismay moved around 
the world, from country to country, province to province, state to 
state, and person to person. And we watched, Mr. Speaker, in 
horror, what can only be called an act of violent suppression. 
 
Our witness to the bloodshed and the killings that began over an 
unarmed, peaceful protest for democracy leaves one with nothing 
but a feeling of outrage. 
 
Last October, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of visiting China 
on behalf of the Saskatchewan government and I spent 16 days 
in that country in places such as Beijing, Guangzhou in the south 
and Guangdong province. And I travelled to what was, by 
Chinese standards, a small city 

of two million people to Changsha in the Hunan province, and 
the Hunan province is a very agriculture province similar to 
Saskatchewan. I also had the opportunity of meeting with 
officials and people in Shanghai. 
 
During the course of the 16 days, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
opportunity of taking an 18-hour train ride into Changsha 
through a lot of country, I think, that most tourists probably 
would not see. I guess if there was anything that was impressed 
upon my mind, it was two things: one was the beauty of the 
country, and secondly was the energy of the people that resided 
in that countryside. 
 
(1045) 
 
We met with local community leaders, most of them being 
farmers, and we learned that while the culture is different and the 
language is different, that in fact those farmers there were not 
much different than the farmers in Saskatchewan. They talked 
about growing conditions, the price for their crops, fertilizers, the 
input costs, and the weather. And we also met, Mr. Speaker, with 
professors and students. 
 
One of the things that we noticed during the course of the visit, 
Mr. Speaker, and it was much talked about by the people that we 
met with, it was the economic reforms taking place in China. 
There were stores — places for people to buy basics such as 
clothing and shoes — that had not been there two years before; 
they no longer had to line up to put their order in at the 
government shops; the market places were busy and they were 
full; and the farmers for the first time, Mr. Speaker, were being 
allowed to sell their products themselves. 
 
I had the good fortune, Mr. Speaker, of having two people from 
China travel with me the course of those 16 days, two 
interpreters, a young woman with the English name of Maggie, 
and a young man that we called Russell. We had many long hours 
of discussion of what was happening in China. And these two 
young people, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, at a very young 
age both served some time in the Red Guard in China. 
 
One day I asked them where it was that they thought the 
economic reforms of China were eventually going to take them. 
And Russell’s comment was: to democracy; to be like you in 
Canada. That is what I want, he said, to be able to decide where 
I want to go and then go; he said, to be able to leave my country 
in freedom and to return to my country in freedom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Canada live in a democracy, we work in a 
democracy, and we raise our families in a democracy. But, Mr. 
Speaker, most of the time all of that is done without thought for, 
or of, the democracy. And I would suggest today, if we have done 
anything to democracy at all in this country, the very worst has 
been the indignity of taking it for granted. 
 
Freedom of speech, tolerance of thought, acceptance of other 
ideas, the freedom to protest, to speak out, freedom of our press. 
An open system and a system for justice and fairness. The 
freedom to vote, to call elections, to have elections, to exercise 
our democratic right. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1989 

1772 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have this today. The Chinese do not. But one 
thing became clear this week, Mr. Speaker — they strive for it. 
And the other thing that was very clear and will be for ever 
imprinted upon the images of our mind is that they died for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I join the Premier in extending sympathy to the 
families of those killed and injured, and I join the universal 
appeal for an end to further violence against Chinese citizens. 
 
In doing so, Mr. Speaker, I am privileged to indeed second the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am confident in 
saying that any member on this side of the House would count it 
a privilege to be the first on this side of the House to speak to this 
motion this morning. Mr. Speaker, I have this privilege, as the 
opposition critic for the Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation, that particular arm of government that deals with 
international aid in our world. And, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in 
this House, all we MLAs were hosted at a reception in this 
building put on by the Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation, a reception that gave we, as members, a window 
on the world — not just our province, not just our nation, but a 
window on the world. 
 
And yesterday at that reception, many of those who were there to 
represent member agencies expressed their own thought and 
concern about recent events in China, and their own thought and 
concern and sympathy, in some cases, for those who have lost 
family and friends, and their particular concern for Chinese 
students and Chinese families living in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after meeting with some of those member groups 
of SCIC (Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation) 
yesterday in the reception here at the legislature with all 
members, it seemed important to me at that time that this issue 
indeed be discussed within the House and be given a priority of 
debate. And so as you will know, Mr. Speaker, I had proposed to 
move this day, before orders of the day, a motion not dissimilar 
to the motion that the Premier has brought to the House this 
morning, a motion that contained some other provisions, but in 
essence and in spirit a very similar motion. 
 
I am pleased that we do have this opportunity in the 
Saskatchewan legislature too, to address the events of the past 
number of weeks in China and, more specifically, to address what 
we as a legislature and representing the people of Saskatchewan 
might do in this regard. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at the close of my remarks, I will wish 
to move one amendment to the Premier’s motion that, in my 
view, falls entirely within the spirit of the Premier’s motion, and 
it’s my sincere hope that this can be made a unanimous motion 
of the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of remarks to the issue, I have prepared 
these few . . . and I do not anticipate speaking at length on this 
motion. I know that other members of the 

government side and other members of the opposition side will 
want to contribute. 
 
Few events, Mr. Speaker, in recent history have so captured both 
the attention and, I think, raised the hopes of people around our 
world as did the student demonstrations in communist China 
these past few weeks. The courage and the determination of the 
young Chinese students, and all of their many supporters, was an 
inspiration, I think, not only to the people of China but to the 
people of the whole world. And to Canadians like ourselves, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe it was a reminder that we too often take for 
granted those fundamental freedoms of our democratic society. 
 
The Chinese students were calling for a free press. They asked 
simply for honest government as they sought intellectual liberty, 
all of those things, Mr. Speaker, which we Canadians assume, 
just assume are rights of citizenship, things that we Canadians 
too often take for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in China, unfortunately that is not the case, and as 
we well know it is not the case in most of the nations of the world. 
True democracies, the true functioning democracies are a 
minority in our world, Mr. Speaker, a minority in the world 
community, and too often we as Canadians forget and take for 
granted our democratic rights and freedoms and just how high a 
price freedom can demand, democracy can demand. And the 
events we have witnessed in China in the past few weeks surely 
would serve to remind us all of that fact. 
 
As we observe those events, Mr. Speaker, surely what we were 
seeing in those early days was a classic example of peaceable 
dissent in the struggle for democracy. When the students in 
Beijing built their goddess of democracy, their own version of 
the Statue of Liberty, when they built that statue in the square 
there was no violence, no violence, Mr. Speaker. When those 
Chinese students stood in front of the tanks and the trucks of the 
People’s Army and prevented the People’s Army from moving 
onto that square, there was no violence, Mr. Speaker, no 
violence. 
 
In fact, as you well know, many members of the Chinese army at 
that time deserted their posts and in fact joined with the student 
protesters. But it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that even peaceable 
defiance is seen as a threat by the totalitarian regime in 
communist China. That regime responded to the peaceable 
dissent with the senseless slaughter that we witnessed. That 
regime turned its tanks, its guns, and its troops on innocent 
students, and we and the rest of the world watched in horror. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in The Globe and Mail on Monday, June 5, the 
editorial writer asks the very significant question why — why 
this slaughter of human lives? And that editorial notes, and I 
quote it: 
 

The slaughter advances no policies, secures no significant 
end except a brief stunned silence over the bodies of the 
victims. China’s hard-liners have made a pact with the devil 
— one of whose names is Anarchy. 
 

  



 
June 9, 1989 

1773 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe to some us, maybe to many of us, Beijing, 
China, may seem to be a world away, but it is simply not, Mr. 
Speaker. Beijing, China, is as close as our two universities, the 
University of Regina here and the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon, where there are students here to study, whose 
husbands and whose wives and whose children, whose parents, 
whose grandparents are yet at home in China. Beijing may 
sometimes seem like a world away, but it is not, Mr. Speaker. I 
venture to say there’s not one of us in this House who does not 
represent constituents who today wonder, and perhaps worry, 
about family in their homeland of China. 
 
Beijing is not a world away. It is but a satellite; it is but a few 
blocks away; it is about two universities away. These are our 
neighbours, Mr. Speaker. These are our brothers and sisters, and 
when our brothers and sisters and our neighbours in this world 
are oppressed, we cannot, must not, and should not remain silent. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe the community of nations 
world-wide, with leadership from our nation and our province, 
should react swiftly and clearly to show that China’s totalitarian 
regime will pay a heavy price for the senseless slaughter of 
innocent people. And we in this province and in this House must 
search for ways to condemn the regime, but not to punish the 
ordinary people of China. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is why we on this side House share the 
position of the government. We do not support sanctions on the 
sale of food or of agricultural products to China, such as the 
export of potash for the growing of wheat. A refusal to trade in 
those types of goods would not hurt any of the totalitarian regime, 
but only reduce the standard of living for many of the same 
people that we would want to assist. 
 
We share the view of the government opposite that there are 
sanctions which could be used and should be used; sanctions with 
respect to new technologies, research and development work; 
technologies and sanctions that could be implemented, and we 
urge the government to implement those kind of sanctions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but there is yet another action which we believe that 
the Government of Saskatchewan can take and should take at this 
point in our history. I want to take just a moment to discuss that 
option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many months now the government of our 
province has been negotiating with the government of 
communist China to sell that regime a portion of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of 
the House disagree strongly with the very principle, the very 
principle of selling any portion of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to any foreign nation, and we remain today 
opposed to the idea of privatizing PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan International). 
 
But if we just put that debate aside, surely, Mr. Speaker, surely, 
even the supporters of the privatization of PCS, even the 
supporters of potash privatization can no longer, surely can no 
longer support the ideal of selling a portion 

of our potash industry to the government of communist China, a 
government that in recent weeks we have seen is willing to gun 
down its young. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to hear last night, after leaving the 
House, I was pleased to hear the Premier of this province on the 
news indicate that he was willing to do just that — willing to 
move to stop all negotiations for the sell-off of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to the government of communist 
China. And so I, at the close of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, will 
want to move an amendment to that effect, and I would hope that 
all members present would be willing to follow the lead of their 
Premier and this amendment in voting for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this is one small way that we as Canadians, 
that we as residents of Saskatchewan, that we as duly elected 
members of this House can send a clear message to the leaders 
of communist China, and perhaps, in doing so, rekindle some 
hope in the hearts and the minds of the world’s most populous 
nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the ordinary people of China must see 
international pressure coming to bear on their leadership if they 
are to be encouraged to continue in the struggle for democracy. 
And I do believe, Mr. Speaker, with the support of the 
international community, the people of China will ultimately 
triumph over their current authoritarian government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those martyrs to democracy that were slain in the 
Tiananmen Square in Beijing, they will inspire demands for 
change that will not be stopped by guns, nor shut up in prison 
cells. Even I believe the most callous member of the communist 
China’s regime will learn finally that real power does not come 
out of the barrel of a gun — that real power does come from the 
hearts of the people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with my amendment that I soon will move, 
and with the motion made by the Premier, I would urge the hopes 
and prayers of all members of this legislature, that in the days, 
the weeks and the months and the years ahead in China, that 
violence will not be met with violence; that hate and anger can 
be overcome; that the violence which we have seen will be 
conquered by the non-violent dissent. 
 
(1100) 
 
So I would close just with a short quote from that man who in 
many ways changed the shape of our continent when he taught 
and preached that doctrine of non-violence, and I refer to Dr. 
Martin Luther King. 
 
And Dr. King, when he won the Nobel prize in 1964 had this to 
say: 
 

Non-violence is the answer to the crucial political and moral 
questions of our time — the need for man to overcome 
oppression and violence without resorting to oppression and 
violence. Man must evolve for all human conflict a method 
which rejects violence, aggression and retaliation. And the 
foundation of such a method is love. 
 

  



 
June 9, 1989 

1774 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion of the Premier, but 
would wish to move this amendment, seconded by my colleague 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
I would amend the Premier’s motion to read: 
 

And further, that the Assembly calls on all the nations of the 
world to unite in condemnation of these abhorrent acts and 
in support of peaceful attempts by the Chinese people to 
bring democratic reforms to their country; and, that the 
Assembly call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to 
end all negotiations to sell any portion of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to People’s Republic of 
China. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The debate continues concurrently. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to enter the 
debate on this motion because I think that it’s very timely, and I 
think it’s very important for the provincial government to show 
some commitment in strength towards helping the students in 
China and towards a resolution of the events that have unfolded 
over the last few weeks. 
 
The events over the last few weeks have, as the other speakers 
have pointed out, shocked many of us around the world, and it 
has saddened us, Mr. Speaker. It makes us realize just how fragile 
our basic democratic fundamental freedoms really are: things 
such as freedom of speech; freedom of assembly and association 
— that is, the right to be with whomever you want at any time 
and to congregate in groups; freedom of the press; the right of the 
press to report the news accurately, as they see it. Freedom from 
arbitrary arrest is another fundamental, basic freedom that 
Canadians and Saskatchewan citizens enjoy, freedom from being 
detained arbitrarily by the police or by armies. 
 
And we enjoy those freedoms as Canadian citizens. And when 
we see a situation unfold, as it did in China in the last few weeks, 
we realize just how fragile our basic and fundamental freedoms 
are. We witnessed some students on hunger strike. They were not 
eating in order to bring to the attention of the leadership in China 
their desire for more free press, their desire for a democratic 
country. They wanted to bring these things to the attention of 
their leadership. 
 
And we witnessed TV clippings of the leadership meeting with 
the students and talking to them about some of their concerns, 
and in the initial stages agreeing that something should be done 
to improve upon some of the problems that they raised. But that 
was in the initial stages, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But then as the demonstration got larger and as the powers were 
threatened because the demonstration was getting larger and their 
power base may be threatened by the call for democracy by the 
students, we saw the leadership sort of disappear from the media, 
and we 

weren’t too sure exactly what was going on as far as the powers 
that be in China were concerned. 
 
But we saw the bravery of the ordinary person, the bravery of the 
ordinary men, women who were in Tiananmen Square erecting 
their version of the Statue of Liberty and insisting on democracy 
for Chinese people. And I think that we have to honour and 
respect those people for the bravery that they showed over the 
last few weeks. But what they were asking for was simply basic 
fundamental freedoms and the right to democracy — 
fundamental freedoms that we enjoy every day, Mr. Speaker, in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it was amazing for us to see people in China challenging the 
government. It was amazing for the western world as we 
witnessed this. And we had a certain sympathy and empathy for 
the students who were crying out for more democracy in their 
country. And so we all watched the events unfold, and we 
watched as things became more tense. And eventually the army 
was sent in, and what we witnessed was a blood-bath, Mr. 
Speaker — a blood-bath. 
 
The freedom fighters, the student dissidents, were accused of 
being counter-revolutionaries by their own government. And 
what they were asking for, Mr. Speaker, were rights that we enjoy 
every day in this country, and they are considered 
counter-revolutionaries. And what we see now in China, Mr. 
Speaker, are the radio waves and the TV stations generating 
Chinese government propaganda, and the freedom of press is 
being restricted in China today as a result of the events that have 
taken place in earlier weeks. 
 
And last night on the media there was a report of a statement by 
Li Peng, the Premier, who met with the army and who is, 
according to the media, accused of having given the order to 
slaughter the young people of China. And he said to the army: 
comrades, you have done a great job. And I say, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is appalling. 
 
And the media coverage indicated that there was not one single 
statement of remorse, no expression of regret for the deaths of 
the young people and the people in Tiananmen Square who were 
mowed down by their own army and by their own government. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that shows an appalling lack of respect 
for people. 
 
A government slaughtering its own people — a government 
slaughtering its own people — young people. And my heart, as 
many of the hearts of my colleagues, go out to the mothers and 
fathers of these young people who were mowed down in that 
bloody weekend. 
 
And then the government has imposed martial law in China, and 
I understand that the human rights atrocities are continuing 
because the students are being rounded up, and in effect, as I 
understand from our media, there is a witch-hunt under way for 
any students who participated in this demonstration. And so the 
human right violations and the human right atrocities in China 
are continuing, Mr. Speaker. And they must be stopped and we 
must express our outrage and horror at the massacre that took   



 
June 9, 1989 

1775 
 

place just a few days ago. 
 
And what we see happening in China is this battle for democracy, 
this battle for freedom of the press, is changing to a battle for 
basic rights such as the right to live, the right to speak your mind 
and not get shot for it. So we see a bit of a change in the dynamics 
that are occurring there as a result of the movement by the army 
and orders from the government. 
 
And all this has happened, Mr. Speaker, when China was making 
significant progress, significant progress economically, and, I 
might add, politically. So what we’ve witnessed in the last few 
days is a step back into the future for China. 
 
Post-Mao China experienced significant regeneration, Mr. 
Speaker. Between 1979 and ’86 the People’s Republic doubled 
its national output. In a 10-year period trade increased by 300 per 
cent, savings by 250 per cent, productivity by some 65 per cent, 
and income by 130 per cent. 
 
But when we have new economic regeneration of this sort and 
new economic thinking, with it comes social and political 
consequences, Mr. Speaker — social and political consequences. 
And with it comes a cry from the people for more democracy and 
more freedom like we enjoy in the West. 
 
And our relationship with China and the Pacific Rim, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very important one, and we cannot ignore it, 
because in fact we are a Pacific nation as well, Mr. Speaker. We 
cannot ignore this relationship. It is important to us. 
 
But I feel that Canada’s policy with China has primarily focused 
on the economic aspect as opposed to the human rights aspect. 
And I feel that Canada has been more concerned with 
commercial interest in China rather than with human rights 
interest. And perhaps we have not done what we should have 
done to encourage China to move towards a more humanistic, 
human rights approach with its people. Perhaps in our desire to 
encourage Canadian commercial interest we have neglected to 
emphasize our concern for human rights in China and other 
Pacific Rim countries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can and we should be more interested in human rights in 
these countries; more interested in their military conflicts and 
their security issues, in their political injustices. Because we are 
a Pacific Rim country, and because, Mr. Speaker, in the overall 
scheme, when young people and students are hurt in China, when 
they are mowed down and killed, it is an offence to all mankind, 
including us here in Canada. 
 
There appears to be a reluctance to accept responsibility, on the 
part of our government, to enhance the human rights in countries 
such as China. And I think it is important by this motion that we 
encourage our government to take a strong stand on this and to 
do it now. 
 
And what I witnessed after this massacre was not a government 
that unequivocally came out and took a strong stand, but a 
government that was talking about the 

atrocities of the army, not the atrocities of the Chinese 
government. 
 
And we have to put the responsibility where it is, Mr. Speaker, 
which is with the Government of China. And according to the 
news media that I saw last night, it is Li Peng, the Premier, who 
ordered the attack and who told the army: comrades, you’ve done 
a great job. 
 
And the Government of Saskatchewan has been negotiating with 
these same people, Mr. Speaker, to sell a portion of our potash 
corporation so that these same people would own a portion of our 
potash corporation. And I believe it is time now for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to say unequivocally, and to send 
an unequivocal message to China, that we as Saskatchewan 
citizens and Canadian citizens and as citizens of the world object 
to these atrocities; we object to the blood-bath; we object to the 
massacre; and for that reason we are going to eliminate any 
further negotiations with respect to China buying 
Saskatchewan’s potash corporation. It is something that would 
not hurt the people themselves, but it would be a strong 
expression of our contempt for the atrocities that took place. 
 
(1115) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — At this point, I just want to quote from Tommy 
Douglas, a quote that has been used on many occasions, but once 
again, yet again, Mr. Speaker, it is relevant to what is taking 
place. 
 
Tommy Douglas said at one point: 
 

The measure of a nation’s greatness does not lie in its 
conquests or its gross national product or the size of its gold 
reserve or the height of its skyscrapers. 
 

And we know that China’s economic condition has been 
improving substantially. Tommy goes on to say: 
 

The real measure of a nation is the quality of its national life, 
what it does for its least fortunate citizens, and the 
opportunities it provides for its youth to live useful and 
meaningful lives. 
 

The real measure of a nation is the quality of its national life. 
And, Mr. Speaker, our national life has quality because we do 
have fundamental, basic freedoms. We have the freedom of 
expression, the freedom of association; we are free from arbitrary 
arrest, and we have freedom of press in this country. And that 
enhances the quality of our national life. That is one aspect of 
enhancement of the quality of our national life. 
 
And we love and we respect our youth, and we try to provide 
ample opportunity for them. And if they speak out against us, we 
try to listen and understand what they’re saying and to deal with 
it in a peaceful and democratic fashion. 
 
And I say that Li Peng and the Government of China would do 
well to listen to some of these thoughts from   



 
June 9, 1989 

1776 
 

many people around the world. 
 
And I say that we have to be aware, we must be aware that China 
is a nuclear power, Mr. Speaker, and as such can pose a threat to 
us all. And this same government that is a nuclear power has no 
compunction, Mr. Speaker, in mowing down hundreds, if not 
thousands, of its own young. And we have to be cognizant of that 
when the Government of Saskatchewan is negotiating to sell off 
potash to China, sell Saskatchewan Potash Corporation to China. 
 
The Chinese leadership must be told about our outrage. They 
must know the world is watching and that the world condemns 
what they’ve done. We in Canada support peaceful attempts at 
bringing about democratic reform. But it is now time for our 
government, with a strong voice, Mr. Speaker, to voice its 
opposition to the acts of violence, to condemn the Chinese 
government for the acts of violence that have been perpetrated on 
Chinese young people and, therefore, on all mankind, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Without in any sense 
questioning your ruling earlier in the day, Mr. Speaker, it was our 
view that our motion ought to have had precedence. 
Notwithstanding that, we did not insist on that because we 
wanted to make it crystal clear that this is an issue that ought to 
transcend the politics of the day, as important as those issues may 
seem at the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winds of change are blowing through eastern 
Europe and Asia in a manner which has not happened in this 
century. We have in the Soviet Union, people voting for the 
Supreme Soviet, electing, city of Moscow electing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Boris Yeltsin. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, thank you. Yeltsin, who was an 
anathema to the politburo. 
 
We have in Poland, elections to their parliament . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sejm. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — . . . Sejm, as it’s called. Something that has 
not . . . probably hasn’t happened before in Polish history in quite 
the way it’s happening now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is it the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martens: — I’d like to have leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the 
Minister of Environment, who is the member for Eston-Elrose 
(Rosetown-Elrose), it gives me a good deal of pleasure to 
welcome a group of students here from Elrose. I don’t know . . . 
they will probably know where Stewart 

Valley is, and I used to play hockey with Stewart Valley. I was 
the goalie, and we went up there a lot of times to play, and 
sometimes you beat us and sometimes we beat you. 
 
But I want to welcome you here to the Assembly, and they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Darilyn Edmison, Barb 
Trayhorne, Danny Bachand, Vaughan Hess, and Linda Simon is 
the bus driver. We want to welcome you here, and I understand 
that you are on a busy schedule, so we just want to welcome you, 
and that you have a good day. And I’d like all the members of 
the Assembly to join me in welcoming you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Civil Crisis in People’s Republic of China (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I was saying, Mr. 
Speaker, the winds of change are blowing through eastern Europe 
and Asia in a manner which we have not seen in this century: 
freer elections to the Supreme Soviet than has ever taken place in 
the history of that country; some delegates elected to the Supreme 
Soviet who were an anathema to the politburo, that who clearly 
represent a different point of view than what has occurred 
heretofore. 
 
Principally, the city of Moscow elected a delegate who, to put it 
mildly, was not . . . was on the outs with those in the central 
committee. In Poland, parliament elected with a clean sweep by 
Solidarity, the trade union which grew into a national movement 
of liberation. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we had all hoped that same winds of change 
would blow through and would affect the largest nation on earth. 
Not only has China nuclear weapons, it also has, if my memory 
serves me correct, between one-third and one-half of all the 
people who live on earth are Chinese. 
 
If these movements which have started in the Soviet Union under 
Gorbachev, spread to eastern Europe, had also spread to China, 
this would be a much safer place in which to live. The world 
would have been a good deal safer. 
 
All of us watched the events in China with interest, with a 
hopeful anticipation. It has never been my pleasure to have spent 
time in China. I know people who have were impressed with the 
progress that China had made on an economic front. The hunger, 
starvation, which was so much a part of Chinese life before the 
Second World War, had largely disappeared. 
 
We had hoped that the Chinese nation was ready to move to the 
next stage of its development, which its communist neighbours 
in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe seemed to be managing 
peacefully, to a democratic government. Regrettably, that didn’t 
happen. 
 
All of us must feel a certain sense of sadness and a sense of a lost 
opportunity to make this world a safer place for us and for our 
children and grandchildren. That which might have happened 
peacefully in China, which might have occurred peacefully as it 
did in the other Asian nations,   



 
June 9, 1989 

1777 
 

now seems to be beyond hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the sense of lost opportunity which 
all of us hoped we might see early in May, in addition to that 
emotion, I think all of us felt a sense of horror at the events which 
actually took place in Beijing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one is hard put to find an example in modern history 
of an army behaving with such brutality towards the people that 
any armed forces protect. Mr. Speaker, one can think of the 
events at the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg. Before the Russian 
revolution, the Czarist troops shot a handful of people, and after 
some years the revolution followed. In Paris in 1968 when 
students and the population of Paris immobilized the government 
all during the summer, a couple of people were shot. At Kent 
State University a few people died. 
 
When one thinks of those events and compares them with what 
happened in Tiananmen Square, one is hard put to find another 
example of such brutality, savagery, and butchery — tanks 
rolling over tents with students inside them, either unable to get 
out or unaware of their danger; troops machine-gunning the 
population like so many blades of grass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the English language is probably inadequate to 
describe our sense of horror, our sense of outrage. We stand with 
those Chinese in China and outside of China who seek to bring 
the liberties and freedom which we know and which we often 
take for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us meet with students, such as are here from 
Elrose. All of us, I think, most of us point out that this is a 
democratic institution. I like to point out to such students that 
Canada, almost alone among democratic nations, achieved its 
democratic institutions without any loss of life. For that we 
should be truly thankful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at a time like this, when hundreds of thousands of people 
have died in China for a small fraction of those liberties that we 
enjoy, we need once again, Mr. Speaker, to give pause to thank 
our good fortune that we were born in this nation and that we 
achieved the institutions we have without any loss of blood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know other members want to speak, and I will not 
take a long time on this. I simply wanted to rise to add my words 
to those which have been so eloquently expressed, to the thoughts 
which have been so eloquently expressed by the member from 
Regina Lakeview and the member from Moose Jaw South. 
 
I want to express a sorrow at the lost opportunity which might 
have been achieved in China, a horror at the carnage, the 
butchery of the 27th Army in Beijing, and the strongest possible 
condemnation of any government, be it communist, capitalist, or 
somewhere in between, which would turn such a savage army 
loose on its population. I know other members want to join with 
me in condemning the actions of the government in Beijing, and 
I take my seat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1130) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I want to rise to add a few 
words to the debate that has already begun on this particular 
issue. What we have witnessed here is a government that’s gone 
too far, gone too far. The Government of China has gone too far 
in this particular issue. I believe it’s a Chinese sage or 
philosopher who said, may you live in interesting times. Isn’t that 
ironic that a Chinese person said that — may you live in 
interesting times. The meaning, of course, could be a blessing or 
a curse. 
 
I think it depends on the times. In this case it’s a mixture, because 
what we saw happening in China was refreshing, and I know that 
we all took hope from the gathering in the square in Beijing. We 
felt that there was an opportunity here for democracy to grow and 
flower in China. It’s important that that happen because China, 
as has been said earlier in this debate, is the largest nation on the 
face of this earth, the largest nation. 
 
When communist countries have been faced with the kind of 
development we saw beginning in Beijing, the difference is 
obvious how they’ve addressed it. The Government of China has 
been harsh and brutal in putting and suppressing the flowering of 
democracy. Other countries that have been mentioned are Russia 
and Poland. The difference is obvious. The governments in 
Russia and Poland have yielded, had yielded to the wish of the 
people. They have not gone too far. The Government of China 
has gone too far. 
 
China has a civilization that goes back thousands of years, 
probably one of the oldest civilizations that earth has 
experienced. And I suppose the societies that have existed in 
those thousands of years in China have, by and large, been rather 
brutal and despotic, and sought to protect themselves from 
outside forces, when they were not outside their own boundaries 
attacking their neighbours. 
 
To do that they built the Great Wall of China, a magnificent 
structure that stretches for miles and miles along the border of 
China. It is said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Wall of China is 
the only man-made object that can be seen from the moon. This 
is what the astronauts reported when they visited the moon, that 
the Great Wall of China is the only man-made object that can be 
seen from the moon. 
 
The Great Wall, to a certain extent, accomplished its goal in 
keeping out the outsiders from China. But today we have a 
different situation. The Great Wall will not keep out the ideas 
from outside of China or those ideas that spring up within China 
about democracy. And the mass communication that we have in 
the world today will pierce any kind of wall of that nature with 
ease. We saw that during the time that the students assembled in 
the square in Beijing. 
 
Ideas are a powerful force, and the ideas of those students — 
whether they were generated internally in China or whether they 
were forces from outside of China, it does not matter — they 
served the purpose of getting the people thinking and talking and 
acting and wanting to   



 
June 9, 1989 

1778 
 

improve their society, to make it more democratic. I know we 
were all hopeful that they would achieve their goal. 
 
I want to say something about . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask leave to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I apologize to the member from Saskatoon Westmount and 
thank him for allowing me this interruption. 
 
We have in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce from the village of Endeavour, the Endeavour 
School, they are 30 students in grades 5 to 8. They are in the city 
touring the legislature and, I’m sure, other parts of Regina. 
 
They are accompanied by teachers Marc Jaques, Don Chorneyko, 
Dennis Thiessan, and chaperons Pauline Strijack, Linda Dolton, 
Ron Young, Tony Roelens, and Carol Walters. 
 
I would like to inform the members of the legislature that I had 
the pleasure early last spring to help these students of Endeavour 
open a brand-new school that they are now taking advantage of. 
 
I would like to wish them a warm welcome to the legislature, and 
I look forward to meeting with you later for pictures and drinks. 
And I hope you have a pleasant day in Regina. Please welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Civil Crisis in People’s Republic of China (continued) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to join 
with my colleague in welcoming the students from Endeavour to 
this Chamber where we’re discussing a very important motion 
before the House, which we by and large find ourselves in 
agreement with, I believe. 
 
I will endeavour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to speak on behalf of the 
amendment which has been offered to the motion which is before 
us. The first part of the amendment merely strengthens and 
reinforces the original motion brought forward by the Premier. 
 
The second part of the amendment reads: 
 

and that the Assembly call upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to end all negotiations to sell any portion of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to the People’s 
Republic of China. 
 

I want to support that amendment by saying this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. In the beginning, I am philosophically opposed 
to selling any portion of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
to any foreign government. My level of anticipation and concern 
rises considerably when I’m selling . . . when I, as part of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, am participating in selling part of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to a government who 
has been so brutal in the repression of the democratic ideals of its 
young people. I abhor being put in that position. 
 
Other nations are making sacrifices, other nations are making 
sacrifices in this same area, and I want to be sure that the people 
of Saskatchewan put something meaningful on the table when we 
say to the people, the Government of China, and to the world, 
that we’re concerned about what happened in China. For 
example, I read in the Globe and Mail, Report on Business, on 
Thursday, June 8, 1989, that: 
 

Hopewell Holdings Ltd., a Hong Kong-listed property 
company, has stopped work on two coal-fired power station 
projects in China. 
 

We’re talking about a lot of money here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
$5.1 billion. This company is holding up over $5 billion of 
projects in China, and they’re saying something meaningful to 
the Government of China that they’re concerned. I won’t go into 
the reasons why they might be concerned — they may be more 
economic than philosophical; however, the fact is there that 
they’re holding up over $5 billion of projects. 
 
The same article in the Globe and Mail goes on to say: 
 

Another casualty (meaning projects — casualty of a project) 
could be Hong Kong’s first domestic telecommunications 
satellite, which involves a consortium of Britain’s Cable and 
Wireless PLC, Hutchison Telecommunications Ltd., and 
Beijing’s CITIC Technology. 
 

So there is another company. And I may draw to the attention of 
the members of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
that the Sask Telecommunications is involved in developing 
projects in China. I think it is incumbent upon us to restrain any 
further development of Sask Telecommunications in China. 
 
In putting forward the resolution about selling part of the potash 
corporation to China, I believe our initial speaker made it quite 
clear that we as members on this side of the House will not 
support sanctions on the sale of food or agricultural products to 
China such as wheat or potash. 
 
Our main concern is that we put something meaningful on the 
table such as the sale of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
to this brutally repressive government in China. Consequently, 
the amendment has been offered, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we 
are saying in the amendment is that we are putting more than 
words on the table. 
 
When I look at the motion that’s moved by the Premier, the 
words are well-meaning. When I look at our amendment, the 
words are well-meaning, but it has the   



 
June 9, 1989 

1779 
 

additional impact of saying that we’ve put something that’s of 
concern to the people of Saskatchewan on the table so the people 
of China know that we’re serious about this — so that the people 
of Saskatchewan know that we’re serious about this. 
 
So therefore I would ask all members to join in the support of the 
amendment which we have offered, which I think quite clearly 
shows that we’re prepared to sacrifice something for those young 
people without arms who gave their lives in the capital of China 
to the brutal suppression of the communist government of China. 
We have to be meaningful in this resolution. Therefore, I support 
the motion; I support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to endorse 
the comments that have been made thus far about the resolution 
with respect to the events going on in China at this moment. 
 
And I want to add to that a little bit, in terms of what it is that we 
can do that will actually be meaningful to the people of China 
and that will actually be meaningful in their cause, in their 
struggle for democracy in China. 
 
It’s obvious, I think, that we in this House all want to assist in 
some way to help the people there, as led by the students and led 
by their intelligentsia, in their struggle to obtain freedom of 
expression and freedom of movement and certainly freedom of 
association — those freedoms which we associate with our 
democracy. 
 
And when you look at it from a historical point of view, Mr. 
Speaker, some writers and historians have written that in order 
for a revolution to take place, or a change in government to take 
place, there are certain elements — there are four main 
ingredients, four elements that have to be in place in the country 
for a revolution to be successful. 
 
And I think in this case we can look at it as a revolution. And a 
revolution doesn’t necessarily have to mean that it’s something 
that involves blood, a loss of blood. There can also be such a 
thing as a peaceful revolution. But certainly it can be thought of 
as going from a totalitarian state to going to a democracy is 
certainly revolutionary, and I want to use the word in that 
context. 
 
What are the conditions? Well the four conditions are: first of all, 
that there has to be a common issue or a common cause for the 
people — and certainly they have the common cause there, the 
cause being democracy; you have to have the leadership able to 
lead the people in the country; there has to be a decay in the 
morale of those that are in authority at the time; and last of all, 
there has to be some way of disseminating the information. 
 
If those four elements — the issue, leadership, the decay on the 
existing authority, and the method of disseminating information 
— are in place, then you can have conditions ripe for a revolution 
to take place. And I want to deal with each one of these very 
briefly, Mr. Speaker. 
 

(1145) 
 
The issue of democratization in China I think is well established 
and that that issue is there. It’s something that has been taking a 
long time to establish in any country. Certainly we know that in 
the French Revolution, prior to the French Revolution, the 
middle class in France had rising expectations, and they got 
together with those that were in poverty, and slowly, after seeing 
what had happened in the American Revolution, they were able 
to generate the same ideas. 
 
The issue, for example, historically, prior to the Unites States’ 
revolution, was the issue of taxation, taxation without 
representation, which they felt was very anti-democratic, and it 
certainly was, and that’s what spawned their revolution, was the 
cause for it. And I believe that the issue in China is something 
that’s equally universal and that the stage is properly set for it. 
 
Secondly, after having the issue, you need, as I mentioned, 
leadership. In this case the revolution is being led in China by 
students, and there is an educated and a capable, very capable 
body that is able to lead in the direction of democracy. 
 
We see, as a matter of fact, that one of the things that’s happening 
is that the existing regime is attempting to destroy this leadership. 
I believe that that was the reason for them bringing the tanks in 
and the soldiers in to the students, so that if you could destroy 
this one tenet, then you can put away and put down this peaceful 
revolution — or at least it was peaceful until the army walked in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as another example where there was a revolution, 
that was the Riel rebellion here right in Saskatchewan. It was put 
down by putting out, snuffing out its leader, Louis Riel, which 
might have otherwise become . . . might have taken longer, or 
there might have been different conditions. 
 
The third tenet of a successful revolution is that somehow or 
other those that are already in authority have to be . . . become 
unable or be disarmed . . . become unable to defend their 
position. This usually arrives from internal dissent within the 
existing authority. That is a difficult thing to achieve. 
 
In the case of China, this was happening to some extent because 
we saw the Chinese students fraternizing with some of the people 
in the army, the people in the army, the soldiers in the army then 
feeling that they really couldn’t turn on their own. Well what 
happened then, of course, is they brought in a different group of 
soldiers that was still — that hadn’t made friends with the 
students or hadn’t been befriended by the students, and who were 
still very loyal to the existing leadership. 
 
Again, historically, if you take a look at the American 
Revolution, the situation there was that the people in authority in 
the American colonies felt more of a moral — or at least many 
of them did — felt more of a moral obligation to the citizens of 
the U.S. than they did to the citizens over in England, and weren’t 
about . . . so the leadership was moved in the direction of the 
revolutions. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1989 

1780 
 

We see a similar thing happening in Poland and in the Soviet 
Union where the leadership there is recognizing that they no 
longer have the moral authority to rule according to the old ways, 
and are slowly trying to make overtures and lean . . . and at least 
give the appearance of leaning towards democracy. Whether or 
not it will happen in actuality, we don’t know. 
 
Again, if we . . . or if we look as an example for our own . . . the 
Riel rebellion, which was quashed here. The leadership of the 
Canadian government at that time was able to call on the 
North-West Mounted Police, who had well-salaried policemen 
and they had well-fed horses, and they weren’t about to turn 
against the government of the day. And of course that revolution 
was put down or quashed rather easily. If, on the other hand, the 
RCMP or the . . . pardon me, the North-West Mounted Police, at 
the time, had felt that their loyalties were not to the government 
but were more with the Metis, things might have been different. 
 
But I raise this point to show . . . to bring out the point that at 
some stage, if we are going to try to help here in any way, we 
have to be cognizant of the strength that’s inherent in being in 
office, in authority, and the need for undermining the morale of 
the existing authorities in order for the democracy to take its 
rightful course in China. 
 
And of course the last tenet here, Mr. Speaker, is the tenet that I 
indicated earlier, the one of disseminating information. Even if 
all of the other three tenets are in place, this revolution still 
cannot be successful if the people in the country are unable to 
communicate with each other, and if the common cause is unable 
to be disseminated throughout the country. 
 
Information is your vehicle of change. It’s very important then 
that anything that we do would be to assist students who are in 
North America, who have contacts in China, to be able to 
continue to be in contact with what’s happening in China. It’s 
important for us to make and maintain certain contacts with the 
people, not necessarily with the authorities but with the people in 
China. In this respect we know that institutions like the Voice of 
America have been important in moulding people’s opinion 
towards democracy in Poland and in the Soviet Union, and I 
expect also in China. 
 
We saw pictures of students in Tiananmen Square pushing their 
fellow students away from the cameramen from the West. They 
were saying, no, let the cameras take the pictures so that the 
people around the world can see, and in that way they know that 
they’ll perhaps get some of the pictures back into China because 
they know that what’s happened there is that their press has now 
been censored. 
 
I think a couple of other examples, Mr. Speaker, would be that 
. . . or at least one other example is where in South Africa, where 
they were on the verge of an internal revolution, and in South 
Africa they are banning the press. One way of suppressing a 
revolution is to cut off the information network. It’s been said 
that revolutions are not won at the barricades, but they’re won in 
the hearts of people, and to get to the heart of somebody you have 
to 

be able to talk to them. 
 
I can only conclude then, Mr. Speaker, that the best help that we 
can give from Saskatchewan would be twofold: first of all, would 
be to keep the information flow going to China. Anything that 
we can do to keep the information flow going to China would be 
valuable. 
 
There are 4,000 exchange students in Canada from China. There 
are 40,000 exchange students in the U.S. If that kind of exchange 
is maintained, then under those conditions we can keep the issue 
of democracy and the spark of democracy alive — help to keep 
it alive. It was through this kind of student exchange that the 
students were able to organize themselves in the first place. We 
saw some of the students, who I expect were in America, build a 
replica of the Statue of Liberty right in Tiananmen Square. They 
had, fortunately, become infected with democracy when they 
were over in our country or in the United States of America. 
 
The importance of maintaining communications was, I think, 
epitomized by the poet Ralph Waldo Emerson, who wrote the 
Concord hymn, and it was sung at the Battle Monument on July 
4, 1837. And I want to read the first verse to you, Mr. Speaker, 
and I quote: 
 

By the rude bridge that arched the flood, 
Their flag to April’s breeze unfurled, 
Here once the embattled farmers stood, 
And fired the shot heard round the world. 
 

He was talking about . . . The shot he was talking about was 
speaking for democracy, making the claim that if democracy was 
established in the United States of America, it would spread 
around the world. 
 
The last comment I would like to make then, Mr. Speaker, what 
we can do to help — I said first of all we should do anything we 
can to keep the information flow going: things like student 
exchanges, things like cultural exchanges. And the last thing I 
think we can do . . . second thing I think we can do is to make 
sure that we are tough on the leadership and that we don’t 
improve the morale of the leadership but that we do anything we 
can not to improve the morale of the leadership in China. And 
the strong thing we can do there, and something tangible and 
definite from the province of Saskatchewan, is to stop our 
negotiations regarding the potash sales with the Chinese people. 
I think that would be the strongest moral suasion that we could 
use there and help the Chinese people in their struggle for 
democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 11:57 a.m. to 11:59 a.m. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 

 Devine Wolfe 
 Duncan Gleim 
 McLeod Neudorf 
 Berntson Gardner 

  



 
June 9, 1989 

1781 
 

 Lane Kopelchuk 
 Taylor Britton 
 Muirhead Shillington 
 Schmidt Lingenfelter 
 Hodgins Tchorzewski 
 Gerich Koskie 
 Hepworth Brockelbank 
 Hardy Upshall 
 Klein Simard 
 Meiklejohn Kowalsky 
 Martin Hagel 
 Toth Pringle 
 Johnson Lyons 
 McLaren Calvert 
 Hopfner Lautermilch 
 Petersen Trew 
 Swenson Van Mulligen 
 Martens Koenker 
 Baker  

— 45 
Nays 

— 00 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 12:03 p.m. to 12:04 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 

 Devine Gleim 
 Duncan Neudorf 
 McLeod Gardner 
 Berntson Kopelchuk 
 Lane Britton 
 Taylor Shillington 
 Muirhead Lingenfelter 
 Schmidt Tchorzewski 
 Hodgins Koskie 
 Gerich Brockelbank 
 Hepworth Upshall 
 Hardy Simard 
 Klein Kowalsky 
 Meiklejohn Solomon 
 Martin Goulet 
 Toth Hagel 
 Johnson Pringle 
 McLaren Lyons 
 Hopfner Calvert 
 Petersen Lautermilch 
 Swenson Trew 
 Martens Van Mulligen 
 Baker Koenker 
 Wolfe  

— 47 
Nays 

— 00 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Business 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the new spirit of 
co-operation which we obviously have here in the Assembly 
now, moving off of rules to debate an important issue, I want to 
move a motion, seconded by the member from Regina North 
East, that: 
 

I move that the next order of business be Bill 41, An Act to 
amend the Agricultural Credit Corporation Act of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

I move, and that would be seconded by the member from Regina 
North East. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 12:08 p.m. to 12:09 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 

 Shillington Goulet 
 Lingenfelter Hagel 
 Tchorzewski Pringle 
 Koskie Lyons 
 Brockelbank Calvert 
 Upshall Lautermilch 
 Simard Trew 
 Kowalsky Van Mulligan 
 Solomon Koenker 

— 18 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I’m afraid 
we can’t hear the members’ response, and we’ll need the 
co-operation of the members. 

Nays 
 

 Devine Toth 
 Duncan Johnson 
 McLeod McLaren 
 Berntson Hopfner 
 Lane Petersen 
 Taylor Swenson 
 Muirhead Martens 
 Schmidt Baker 
 Hodgins Wolfe 
 Gerich Gleim 
 Hepworth Neudorf 
 Hardy Gardner 
 Klein Kopelchuk 
 Meiklejohn Britton 
 Martin  

— 29 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
  



 
June 9, 1989 

1782 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very 
interesting to note the effects of bell-ringing as we’ve just seen 
in the moments that have transpired in this Assembly, and how 
the bells can ring to good effect, but how the government can 
ignore doing anything positive for the people of the province 
when it comes to legislation and dealing with legislation. 
 
Now what we just saw, Mr. Speaker, was a situation in which the 
bells rang to call members to a vote, to vote on what is known as 
Bill 41, and I have it here in front of me. And this Bill 41 is an 
Act to amend the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Act. 
 
And as we know, the Minister of Agriculture, who is the Premier, 
ought to be willing to deal with an important piece of legislation 
in this Assembly as people are called to scrutinize it and examine 
it in this Assembly. As Minister of Agriculture, the Premier has 
a responsibility to deal with this legislation, and simply chooses 
not to. 
 
This government has an agenda which is to privatize SaskPower. 
This government wants to bulldoze ahead with its privatization 
plans willy-nilly and ignore public opinion and ignore the 
democratic process. And it doesn’t really matter what kind of 
legislation and public business this Assembly ought to be turning 
its attention to; when the government has opportunity to deal with 
legislation, it chooses not to. It chooses not to. 
 
And I think that is beginning to be a damning indictment of this 
government, that it rejects the democratic process; that it has no 
will or interest in dealing with legislative matters of any kind of 
consequence. And we see this from the Premier himself, from the 
Minister of Agriculture, who refuses to get up and do an honest 
day’s work in introducing his own legislation as Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And I would even go so far as to say that it’s a 
sad day for Saskatchewan when Saskatchewan farm people can 
get up in the morning and do an honest day’s work, that this 
Premier and Minister of Agriculture can’t get up and deal with 
his own legislation. Why would that be? 
 
Why could it be that this government will not deal with 
legislative matters in front of it? Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a very 
simple explanation for it. This government doesn’t want to deal 
with what amounts to a full legislative agenda. 
 
I’ll just check here for a moment to see how many Bills we 
presently have before us in this Legislative Assembly. The Act 
to amend the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Act, as I’ve been talking about, was Bill No. 41. But we have Bill 
No. 42, for example, which is an 

Act to protect the spousal rights of homesteads. And this too isn’t 
being dealt with because the government has an agenda to ignore 
the legislative process and to deal with its privatization 
preoccupation and to, as a consequence, put forth a motion to 
muzzle the opposition, to muzzle the people of this province, and 
to change the rules for bell-ringing. 
 
And this attempt to muzzle the opposition, to limit the ringing of 
bells affects even legislation from the Minister of Highways. We 
have Bill No. 43, An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act, 
which isn’t being dealt with. And it’s not a particularly long piece 
of legislation, not inordinately complex. 
 
One would think that the Minister of Highways could certainly 
stand up today and begin to deal with this piece of legislation. 
The opposition, I can assure you, is certainly ready to deal with 
it. It’s only nine pages long — actually, it’s only eight and a half 
pages long. 
 
But the question is why, why won’t the Minister of Highways, 
exactly as the Minister of Agriculture Acts, why won’t they come 
forward with their legislation? They’ve had ample opportunity 
this past week to leave behind the subject of bell-ringing. And 
it’s at a point now where the opposition can scarcely understand 
how it is that they refuse to deal with legislative matters that this 
Assembly ought to be dealing with. 
 
It isn’t as if we need to have an amendment to the rule regarding 
bell-ringing. That simply isn’t the case. The public should know 
that there is a rule in another book that is used here in the 
Legislative Assembly, a book of Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and this book has a rule 
to deal precisely with the question of bell-ringing. 
 
But this government, in its blind agenda to sell off the assets of 
this province, feels it must have a bell-ringing motion that limits 
bell-ringing so that it can do what it pleases against the will of 
public opinion, against the overwhelming sentiment of public 
opinion. 
 
When polls show that 67 per cent of the public reject the sell-off 
of SaskPower, the government’s blind drive to privatize 
SaskPower is picked up in this Assembly with the present motion 
we’re debating to change the bell-ringing legislation. And there’s 
just no question then in the minds of the public that the two issues 
of privatization of SaskPower and the ringing of bells are 
inextricably linked together, that it is the tool of this government 
to muzzle the opposition and to limit bell-ringing precisely so 
that it can sell off SaskPower. And the two are linked 
inextricably. 
 
What we’re proposing, Mr. Speaker, is that the government get 
on with the real business of governing the province, to get on 
with real issues of consequence, and to leave behind dealing with 
this book of Rules and Procedures and to deal with the 
legislation, a full legislative agenda that meets the real needs and 
concerns of Saskatchewan people in a way that the bell-ringing 
motion doesn’t even begin to approximate. And this is what’s so 
ludicrous and ridiculous about the motion before us. 
 
  



 
June 9, 1989 

1783 
 

When we have not only an Act from the Minister of Highways to 
amend The Highway Traffic Act, Bill No. 43, but we have a Bill 
to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act, which is Bill 
No. 44, the public would sooner have that kind of real legislative 
issue dealt with than a Bill to amend the bell-ringing and to limit 
bell-ringing to one hour. 
 
Now it may be that in considering an Act to amend The Liquor 
Board Superannuation Act, Bill No. 44, there are serious issues 
at stake, issues of great political consequence. Probably 
inasmuch as the overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan people 
are not superannuates of the Liquor Board itself, this particular 
piece of legislation would not consume public attention. 
 
But let’s assume for a moment that it affected everyone in 
Saskatchewan in the way that the privatization of SaskPower 
would affect them. Then to have a Bill to limit the bell-ringing to 
one hour would be a concern for the people of Saskatchewan, if 
they were superannuates and looking for amendments that 
pertained to them directly. 
 
And if the questions implicit in this particular Bill No. 44 were 
offensive to the people of Saskatchewan, then they would want 
to know about those offensive provisions and sections of the 
legislation. Inasmuch as it pertains to them, they’re entitled to 
know about offensive provisions. They would want to know, and 
they would want to make sure upon hearing what this legislation 
really constituted and how it impacted on their lives, they would 
want to make their feelings and opinions on this subject known 
to the government and also to the opposition. 
 
And it’s precisely this kind of opportunity that the present rules 
of the Assembly allow when the bells are allowed to ring for an 
unlimited duration of time. And to limit the bell-ringing to an 
hour would not give the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity 
to examine this particular Bill No. 44. 
 
Now as I’ve said, there is really a whole pile of legislation that is 
before the Legislative Assembly at this point that merits public 
scrutiny and public attention and ought to be dealt with, but the 
government seems not to have an agenda to deal with these kinds 
of issues and instead wants to deal with the bogus, and in some 
respects, fundamentally silly issue of a rule change. 
 
And the people recognize it as a bogus and a silly issue that is of 
little or no consequence to them personally. While I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this issue of bell-ringing is bogus and silly for the 
overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan people, that’s not to say 
that it’s entirely bogus or silly. There’s a sense in which there’s 
a very serious side to this particular piece of amendment to the 
legislative rules, and that is the issue of democracy that I’ve been 
talking about these last number of hours. 
 
The concept of democracy, Mr. Speaker, is one that is frequently 
talked about here in this Legislative Assembly and is a burning 
concern to both sides of the House. It’s very frequent to hear 
members on either side of the House talk about democratic 
process and democratic rights and democratic institutions. It’s 
not so frequent to hear 

members talk about the provisions for rule changes, or to hear 
members talk about provisions for the ringing of bells. Certainly 
we’ve heard a lot of talk about that subject in the last two or three 
weeks. 
 
But ordinarily we aren’t consumed in this Legislative Assembly 
by procedural questions or detailed questions of rule, other than, 
in ordinary circumstances, to refer them to the judgement of the 
Speaker and the Clerks of the Legislative Assembly who deal 
with these in a far more functional fashion than we do as 
legislators. 
 
But when we do turn to the subject of democracy, it’s interesting 
to note that as often as it’s talked about by both sides of the 
House, it’s one thing to talk about it and it’s another thing to 
practise it, to put democracy into practice. 
 
And in this connection, I would say, Mr. Speaker, that beyond a 
shadow of a doubt the motion that we have before us from the 
hon. member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, the 
proposed motion that the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly be amended after rule 33(1) by changing rule 33(2) to 
call for the bells to be sounded for not more than one hour, I 
would say that this is a test of whether we talk about democracy 
from one side of the House or another, or whether we actually 
attempt to put it into practice — whether we talk about it and 
mouth it and give verbal assent to it or whether we actually are 
serious about implementing democratic concepts and democratic 
procedures. 
 
And it’s in the wisdom of the tradition of this Assembly, of the 
men and the women who have sat in this Assembly over the 
years, that they have held out, not for the mouthing of obeisance 
to democracy but for a practical service of democracy by having 
rules for the Assembly that practise what the members preach 
from both sides of the House. 
 
And that’s as it should be. And we would certainly hope that in 
considering a rule change to limit the amount of bell-ringing, that 
any such change would put into practice the democratic ideals 
that we all talk about and preach, that it would put into practice 
these ideals for the Assembly itself. 
 
And I would go one step further, Mr. Speaker, and say that we 
would hope that in putting these democratic virtues and ideals 
into practice for the Assembly, we would take it one step further 
and put these ideals into practice for the people of the province. 
Because, finally, what we’re talking about in changing the rules 
of the Assembly, that we’re talking about rule changes that either 
do a service to the people of the province or do a disservice to the 
people of the province. 
 
(1230) 
 
And the question might well be asked then, of people across the 
province, what does this particular motion by the hon. member 
from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, what does this particular 
motion, this proposal to change the rules, do to democracy? What 
does it do for the people of the province? 
 
  



 
June 9, 1989 

1784 
 

Does it do a service or does it do a disservice to the people of the 
province? Is it a genuine service to practical democracy and to 
facilitate democratic interaction in the province outside of this 
Assembly? And I think that’s one of the hallmarks of scrutiny 
that this legislation has to bear. It isn’t a question of whether it 
serves simply the democratic process here in the Assembly, but 
we have to ask ourselves, does it do genuine service to the 
practice of democracy outside of this Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in terms as forceful as I can that 
the present rule that we have for this Assembly guarantees — 
guarantees the democratic process outside of this Assembly. And 
that’s why we on this side of the House, as New Democrats, are 
so insistent that this rule change be opposed. 
 
This rule change to limit bell-ringing to one hour must be 
opposed because it does nothing — nothing — to facilitate the 
democratic process outside of this Assembly. And as I say, it’s 
one thing to have a rule change proposed that will affect the 
democratic process within the Assembly; it’s quite another thing, 
Mr. Speaker, when we have a motion like this to change the 
democratic process outside the Assembly. And when it comes to 
that, we simply have to take a stand and say that this proposal, 
this motion to change the bell-ringing and to limit it to one hour, 
has to go. It has to go. It can’t stand up to public scrutiny. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, because of the experience, that 
crucible of fire that the province has gone through in the last 
number of weeks over the SaskPower privatization issue. What 
have we seen, Mr. Speaker, these last weeks, but the democratic 
process full-blown, full-blown not in the Legislative Assembly 
because the bells were ringing and the members were not here 
for the most part, but the flowering and the flourishing of the 
democratic process across this province. 
 
Now to be sure, some members of the Legislative Assembly were 
in the Legislative Assembly while the bells were ringing. They 
were here because fundamentally they saw no need for the bells 
to be ringing — no need at all for any kind of public scrutiny on 
an issue as important as the privatization of SaskPower. Implicit 
in their sitting here in this Assembly while the bells were ringing 
for 17 days, was the assumption, leave it to us — leave it to us; 
we will take care of the issues; we will govern the province; we 
will do what we please. 
 
The members that sat in the Assembly and took that particular 
view of things, that the bells needed to be shut off, and who 
would now advocate a curtailing of the bell-ringing with this 
particular motion from the Minister of Justice, would be doing 
the people of the province a grave disservice in curtailing their 
opportunity to review the actions of this Assembly and subject it 
to a democratic scrutiny. 
 
Now I must say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not without precedent that 
the democratic process has been scorned; not without precedent 
in this Assembly that the people of the province will know that 
the present government has problems with public scrutiny of 
public accounts by the Provincial Auditor. 
 

But the scorn of the democratic process isn’t simply limited to 
questions surrounding the auditor when he can’t see 50 per cent 
of the public spending figures of this government. The scorn and 
contempt for democracy shown by this government has been 
exemplified, I would say, in fact even today when the Premier 
can stand in this Assembly and extol the virtues of democracy in 
China and deny its existence here in Saskatchewan by 
introducing as an item of business for the Assembly today a 
motion to limit the ringing of bells. Now how can that be? 
 
Think of the duplicity in that kind of action, Mr. Speaker, when 
a person can stand and extol the virtues of democracy in China 
and condemn the violence there. And I quote from the motion 
itself that the Premier introduced, “calling for an increased 
democracy in the People’s Republic of China.” 
 
That’s what the motion said — calling for increased democracy 
in the People’s Republic of China, and at the same time — well, 
five minutes later the motion that he brings before this Assembly 
consequent to that one, after that motion, is to limit democracy 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, what duplicity, what hypocrisy! — on the one hand, 
to talk about democracy in China and to give lip-service to it 
across the seas, while right here in Saskatchewan the Premier 
would curtail the exercise of the democratic process. It simply 
goes to show that what the government wants is for people to do 
as they say, but not as they do. 
 
And this begins to be disturbing, Mr. Speaker, when we see a 
consistent trajectory of government actions over the weeks and 
months and years — not just in this Assembly but outside of it as 
well — where the government would want to rein in free, full 
expression of public opinion; where the government wants to 
talk, for example, of public participation, but brings forth a rule 
to limit bell-ringing; to pre-empt the kind of public participation 
that we saw on the privatization issue this spring; when it wants 
to pre-empt and preclude public participation in decision making 
as to whether public utilities should be sold off; and wants to 
introduce tight-fisted rule changes that it thinks the public has no 
understanding of or no regard for simply because they’re 
procedural rule changes for the Legislative Assembly; when it 
wants to bulldoze those kinds of rule changes forward to suit its 
own agenda and not the public agenda. 
 
And the important thing to understand then about this rule change 
that we have before us, the rule change that the bells to call in the 
members shall be sounded for no more than one hour, the 
important thing to know about this change is that it was done with 
— what kind of consultation? It was done with no consultation 
whatsoever. 
 
And isn’t that in keeping with the kind of government action that 
I’ve just talked about moments ago? A government that simply 
doesn’t want to consult with the opposition, let alone the public 
at large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it was interesting . . . it’s more   



 
June 9, 1989 

1785 
 

than interesting; it’s informative to look at the beginnings of the 
democratic ideal in ancient Greece, as I’ve been talking about, 
and to note that it was Plato who had little regard for the 
democratic process himself. 
 
Why did Plato have little regard for the democratic process? Well 
it basically did in his teacher, Socrates. Little wonder then that he 
would have scorn for democracy. 
 
And in his writings he marvels . . . in the Republic he marvels, in 
talking about the democratic city, and writes, quote: 
 

Without experience of it no one would believe how much 
freer the very beasts subject to men are in the city than 
elsewhere (talking about a democratic city). The dogs 
literally verify the adage and “like their mistresses become.” 
And likewise the horses and asses are wont to hold on their 
own way with the utmost freedom and dignity, bumping into 
everyone who meets them and who does not step aside. And 
so in all things everywhere, they are just bursting with the 
spirit of liberty. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — This is Plato, in the Republic, talking about 
democracy, and the horses and the asses of the streets bursting 
with liberty. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is the kind of regard that the 
government has for the people of Saskatchewan. In bringing in 
legislation like this, it has scorn for the people of Saskatchewan 
as if they were horses and asses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And he goes on to say, and I’ll just conclude 
with this note: 
 

And do you note that the sum total of all these items when 
footed up is that they render the souls of the citizens so 
sensitive that they chafe at the slightest suggestion of 
servitude and will not endure it? 
 

Little wonder, Mr. Speaker, little wonder that the souls of citizens 
chafe under servitude and will not endure it. The people of 
Saskatchewan, when they look at a proposal to privatize their 
own public utility, SaskPower, and the concomitant rule change 
to ram that privatization through . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. The 
hon. member has referred several times to the issue of SaskPower 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — . . . and I pointed out to him that he is engaging 
in repetition and I . . . Order, order, order. The hon. member has 
referred to that issue several times. He is engaging in repetition. 
I’m bringing that to his attention. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think . . . I concur 
with your reading. I think that in a fundamental respect that the 
issue of SaskPower is not related so much as the . . . perhaps the 
issue of lawlessness and servitude in a democracy is related to 
the kinds of questions implicit in a rule change to restrict 
bell-ringing. Because what else is it for a government to 
introduce a rule change such as the one that we have before us? 
What else is at the heart of the issue? What else other than 
lawlessness is at stake when the bells are allowed to ring in 
unlimited fashion? 
 
The ringing of the bells then is really, at root, a question of 
tyranny and lawlessness; a question of whether there’s going to 
be public foolishness. And the question becomes whether we’re 
going to have the kind of freedom of public expression that 
behooves public debate and genuine public participation in 
public debate, or whether we are going to constrict that and 
abandon the democratic ideal. 
 
It’s not without scorn for the opinion of the people of 
Saskatchewan that such a rule change is introduced into this 
Assembly. It’s not without scorn for the people of Saskatchewan 
that a government would say, there’s no need for the bells to ring 
more than an hour. That will do quite well; that will suit our 
purposes; that will serve us quite conveniently to have the bells 
ringing for only one hour. It will present only minor 
inconvenience, and then we can get on with doing what we 
bloody well choose. 
 
We saw, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like the hon. member to watch 
his language in his debate. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite sure what you’re 
. . . I meant no . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I am referring to the phrase “bloody well” as 
used by the hon. member. I don’t think that’s acceptable in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I certainly didn’t 
intend that at all. I didn’t intend that at all. 
 
The bell-ringing can have a good effect. We know that 
bell-ringing can have a very good effect when we see how it 
functioned, as it normally does, just this morning when we talked 
about the situation in China and people were called to consider 
the democratic questions implicit in what’s happening there these 
days. 
 
I want to just refer to the famous funeral oration of Pericles, who 
had the reverse point of view of democracy that Plato had, and 
he writes, in his funeral oration: 
 

We live under a form of government which does not emulate 
the institutions of our neighbours; on the contrary, we are 
ourselves a model which some follow, rather than the 
imitators of other peoples. 
 
It is true that our government is called a   



 
June 9, 1989 

1786 
 

democracy, because its administration is in the hands, (get 
this, Mr. Speaker) not of a few, but of the many; yet while 
as regards the law all men are on equality for the settlement 
of their private disputes, as regards the value set on them it 
is as each man is in any way distinguished that he is 
preferred to public honours, not because he belongs to a 
particular class, but because of personal merits. 
 

And I say that these words are well-considered in the context of 
a rule change here where we don’t give regard to the way in 
which people, as individuals, are preferred with respect to public 
honours, because they belong to a particular class or because of 
particular merits that they will have a say, that they will have 
more of a say than other men or women. 
 
I am sure that if Pericles were writing today, (I’ll say this 
parenthetically), he would be using non-sexist language, which 
would be a very democratic thing to do. But . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Changes to rules to include non-sexist 
language in the House. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well the suggestion is made by the member 
from Rosemont that perhaps the rules should be changed with a 
view toward eliminating non-sexist language in the House. And 
that’s something that might well be looked at. And I would like 
to propose to you, Mr. Speaker, that you, as someone who’s very 
conversant with these kinds of matters, give consideration to that, 
and that we have a committee to look at those kinds of changes. 
 
And it’s precisely the lack of a committee that is the problem 
with this particular motion to limit bell-ringing to one hour. It is 
a unilateral action of the government that gives preference to 
public honours of particular men and women because of their 
class or because of their personal merits, and doesn’t look at the 
administration, as Pericles says, of public affairs being in the 
hands, not of the few but of the many. This is what happened 
when the bells rang for 17 days. The administration of public 
affairs was not in the hands of a few. 
 
And this is what undoubtedly enrages the government about the 
present rule, is with the present rule in place, they can’t keep the 
administration of public affairs in the hands of a few. They can’t 
keep the administration of public affairs simply in the hands of 
Executive Council, or the cabinet, or this Legislative Assembly 
if the bells are allowed to ring for unlimited durations of time. 
The debate is moved into the streets, where that debate should be 
taking place, Mr. Speaker. The debate is moved into the streets, 
and in moving into the streets, is passed from the hands of a few, 
the public affairs are passed from the hands of a few into the 
hands of the many. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Power to the people, Pericles. That’s maybe 
what we should call it — power to the people, Pericles. No 
wonder his funeral oration is famous throughout history. No 
wonder it has bearing on the issue that we’re talking about today. 
 

He goes on in this same oration to talk about, in a democratic 
society, about: 
 

. . . our freedom from suspicion of one another in the 
pursuits of every-day life: for we do not feel resentment at 
our neighbour if he does as he likes, nor yet do we put on 
sour looks which, though harmless, are painful to behold. 
But while we thus avoid giving offence in our private 
intercourse, in our public life we are restrained from 
lawlessness chiefly through reverent fear for we render 
obedience to those in authority and to the laws, and 
especially to those laws which are ordained for the succour 
of the oppressed and those which, though unwritten, bring 
upon the transgressor a disgrace which all men recognize. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — These words of the funeral oration talk about 
reverent fear for the laws — reverent fear for the laws. 
 
And we have here a question of the laws of this Legislative 
Assembly and how we should be governed — what kinds of rules 
or laws or procedures we should have here in this Assembly, and 
not just for this Assembly but for the public. And we might be 
well advised to consider the kind of reverent fear we would have 
for the laws, especially, as Pericles says, especially those laws 
ordained for the succour of the oppressed, for the succour of the 
oppressed. 
 
And don’t we know, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to 
privatization of SaskPower, many will be oppressed — will be 
oppressed with higher fuel bills, higher natural gas costs, and 
higher electrical bills. The people of Saskatchewan will be 
oppressed, and that is why we ought to have reverent fear for the 
law of this Assembly as it exists in the present rule. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Power to the people, Mr. Speaker. The bells 
can never ring too long if the people are empowered and if the 
poor and the oppressed are succoured and protected. 
 
What we have is a government opposite who would use its power 
to abuse and oppress the people of the province, to ignore 
democratic process, to curtail the ringing of the bells, and we 
need to consider what kind of society that leads to when we have 
an anti-democratic form of government that wants to keep the 
administration of public affairs, not in the hands of the many but 
in the hands of the few. 
 
For the bells to ring too long is really a question of judgement. 
Who is to judge the appropriateness of how long the bells should 
ring? We have here a situation in which we have two conflicting 
judgements or opinions as to how long the bells should ring. 
 
We have one which is the existing rule that has been judged over 
the years, in the wisdom of our predecessors   



 
June 9, 1989 

1787 
 

in the Assembly, that the bells should ring for as long as the 
public deems appropriate. And we have another judgement that 
says, no, that’s not correct. The member from Kindersley, the 
minister from Justice, would pass judgement along with 
government members and say, no, we need to have a rule that 
would curtail the ringing of bells. 
 
And so the question becomes: how are we to judge precisely how 
long the bells should ring? Well we seem to have two very 
fundamentally conflicting opinions in that regard. We wonder 
then, where would a compromise be? Where could a compromise 
be in a question like this? 
 
I think the answer is really quite simple. The government ought 
to refer this whole matter to committee and let a committee take 
charge of this issue. Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue. I have 
many things to say, but I have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
Assembly to deal with a motion respecting absence from the 
House of a member of the legislature to attend a CPA 
(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) conference? 
 
The Speaker: — It being 1 o’clock, we’ll consider that the 
debate has ended for the day. The minister has asked for leave to 
introduce his motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Leave of Absence to attend Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, by 
leave of the Assembly, seconded by my seat mate, the member 
for Melville: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the hon. member for 
Wilkie, from Wednesday, June 14 through to Tuesday, July 
4, 1989, to attend on behalf of this Assembly, the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association first annual 
seminar in Lusaka, Zambia. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

STATEMENT BY SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Superseding Motion 
 
The Speaker: — Before adjournment of the House, I would like 
to make the following statement. For the clarification of the 
Assembly, I want to make a statement regarding one of the 
proceedings which took place earlier today. 
 
Before orders of the day, the member for Regina Elphinstone 
moved that the next item of business be Bill 41. The motion was 
allowed to be put, without leave, on the grounds that it is a 
superseding motion which does not require leave. 
 

Upon further reflection, I wish to make a clarification regarding 
the future application of this procedure, since it is a procedure we 
have been only using lately. 
 
The purpose of a superseding motion is to set aside or supersede 
a question which is then under debate. In this regard, I refer 
members to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly as 
follows, rule 10: 
 

A motion for reading the Orders of the Day shall have 
preference over any motion before the Assembly. 
 

And, rule 41: 
 

When a question is under debate, no motion shall be 
received unless to amend it; to postpone it to a day certain; 
for the previous question; for reading the Orders of the Day; 
for proceeding to another order; to adjourn the debate; or for 
the adjournment of the Assembly. 
 

I further refer members to Beauchesne’s Rules and Forms, Fifth 
Edition, citation 417 (2)(b) as follows: 
 

 Superseding motions, though independent in form, are 
moved in the course of debate on questions which they seek 
to set aside. They may only be moved when a question is 
under debate . . . 
 

Our rules of the authorities are clear that there must be some 
business before the House in order for a superseding motion to 
be in order. The motion moved earlier today was moved on 
orders of the day when there was no question before the House. 
 
I therefore wish members to understand that in the future a 
superseding motion such as the one moved earlier today can only 
be put when the House is in the midst of debating a motion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of clarification, 
just so I can understand this. There was a procedure used — I 
forget, it may be a couple of weeks ago — by the member from 
Melfort, while we were introducing rule 39’s motions, that we 
move to the next order of business. Would the same application 
apply to that ruling that you made that day? 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s asking the question of a motion 
that was moved approximately two weeks ago. I believe that’s 
what he said. And as I recall it, there was some business before 
the House at the time the motion was presented, the business 
before the House where members were asking for leave of 
motions under rule 39. So there was some business, so according 
to that, that motion should have been in order, the way I recall it. 
 
It being past 1 o’clock, the House stands adjourned until Monday 
at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:07 p.m. 
 
 


