


















































June 12, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 12, 1989 
 

1789 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
to introduce a large group of students from the city of Regina 
from Dr. George Ferguson School. There are 56 of them. They 
are in grades 3 and 4, and they are here for a visit and I believe 
are seated in the east gallery. They will be here for question 
period, and I’m going to be meeting with them for picture taking 
right after 2:30, as well as some drinks in room 218. 
 
I want to ask members in the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
these students here today, wishing them a good educational and 
enjoyable time and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I have two groups I’d like to 
introduce to you now. If you recall, the other day I introduced a 
group of grade 4 and grade 5 students from W. F. Ready School, 
a large number of them. Today I have a smaller group from W. 
F. Ready School, grade 5 students, and while they are not a large 
group, they are a good group, Mr. Speaker, because they asked 
some very good questions, and so a bright bunch of youngsters. 
They are grade 5, numbering 25, Mr. Speaker. They 
accompanied by Mrs. J. Weare and Mrs. Davies. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity to talk to them, and I’m going to have a 
picture taken with them at 2:30. Please welcome the students 
from W.F. Ready School, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — And, Mr. Speaker, the other day I had an 
opportunity to talk about the Dr. Paul Schwann survey, a fitness 
survey that’s taking place over at the University of Regina, a 
physical activity study. We have three adults with us today in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They will be attending the life-styles survey. 
And I’d like to introduce to you today Laura Black, Dick Chapin, 
and Cecil Sanderson in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
Please welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have two 
introductions today. Sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
six grade 10 and 11 students from Allan, Saskatchewan — Allan 
high school. I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30 for drinks and 
questions, and I hope they enjoy question period. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Ernie Melnyk. I ask all members 
to join with me in wishing them a good day and a safe journey 
home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — And also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce Ron Bakken, if you would stand up, Ron. Ron is a 
member of the Co-op insurance board. He’s from my 
constituency. I ask all members to say welcome to Ron Bakken. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Operation of Community Clinics 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, the monthly bulletin of the 
Community Health Services Association of Regina states that 
underfunding has not allowed the community clinic to operate to 
maximum potential. In particular it says: 
 

There is no shortage of patients waiting access to services 
provided by the clinic, but without additional funding to 
expand these services we will not be able to continue to 
accommodate them. 
 

Could you please tell us, Mr. Minister, what is the status of 
discussions between your department and the clinic? And are you 
actively pursuing a solution to this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of the exact 
circumstances of the negotiations or if there are negotiations in 
fact going on or discussions between the two. I’d be pleased to 
take notice of the question and bring back an answer to the hon. 
member. 
 
Ms. Simard: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I should just point 
out, Mr. Minister, that in the bulletin they have stated that: 
 

We have been unable to secure funding from government, 
to secure from government a commitment to provide 
support despite the need and despite our demonstrated 
ability to be able to deliver these services efficiently and 
cost-effectively. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you’re concerned, if your department is 
concerned about the best value for our dollar in health care, I 
would suggest that if you are not pursuing discussions with the 
community clinics that you should do so immediately. And why 
are they getting short . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I waited for the hon. member’s question, 
and it was related to the one she had asked to begin with. And as 
we said before, when the hon. member takes notice then you may 
seek further information, but you may not ask any further 
questions, as such, just to seek further information. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was just a little bit of a question. 
 
The Speaker: — Well, if the hon. member wishes to answer it. 
But the point is . . . I’ll make this point again,   



 
June 12, 1989 

1790 
 

and I won’t allow ministers to respond in the future once they 
take notice and he wants further information. And that’s the way 
question period has to run or else we don’t have a quick question 
period. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has raised 
the question earlier. I took notice earlier. I will take notice of all 
such circumstances surrounding all of this and make note of the 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member is the guest speaker at 
the Regina health services. She’s looking for information for her 
speech. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. Mr. Minister, 
some time ago . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member from Regina 
Elphinstone is speaking to the Chair, and that is not acceptable. 
And I just want to remind the member for Regina Elphinstone 
that if he continues to do this it will not be tolerated. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I asked you about a 
report prepared for the Department of Health that showed that 
community clinics were the most cost-effective method of 
delivering health services in this province. To date we have not 
seen that report. You have not given that report to us so that we 
can examine it. 
 
Will you undertake today to table that report in this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The answer as it relates to today, Mr. 
Speaker, is no, but that’s not to say that I won’t supply it to the 
hon. member at some future date. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
when will you provide us with that information? At some future 
date is not good enough. I’ve asked you about it several times; 
when will we get the report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Probably at some future date, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Storage of Dental Equipment 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct my question 
also to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, it has now been two 
years since your government cruelly fired 411 people in the 
school-based dental program and carted off all their equipment 
that had been built up by the clinics. 
 
Can you tell this House, Mr. Minister, how much of that 
equipment is currently being stored at the Rolloflex building, 
1260 8th Avenue, Regina, the dental warehouse, 3430 7th 
Avenue, Regina, and the Rolar building at 1202 17th Street West 
in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member I 
think knows, the responsibility for warehousing and so on is with 
the property management corporation, but I’ll take notice of that. 
 
And I’m sure that the hon. member doesn’t expect either myself 
or my colleague, the minister responsible for property 
management corporation, to have the exact address, the exact 
address of every piece of dental equipment. 
 
The Speaker: — I once more remind the hon. minister that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You see how long you let him go already. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I once more remind the hon. minister 
that if he takes notice, that he can’t make any further remarks, 
and the minister knows that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a new 
question to the Minister of Health. There are a number of people 
interested in where this equipment is, or where the money is for 
the equipment, number one being the Provincial Auditor is 
interested in this equipment. 
 
I want the minister to confirm that the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation has plans to soon sell off the dental 
equipment stored at the Rolloflex building for scrap. Can you tell 
this House, Mr. Minister, whether you, as the Minister of Health, 
concur in that decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I reported to the House before on 
questions regarding the dental equipment, there’s about $700,000 
of it has been sold. Some of the equipment has been transferred 
to other departments where it could be used, and there is some 
still in storage in various warehouses. The exact amount, I 
couldn’t say at this point in time. But as the Minister of Health 
said, he’ll take notice and report back. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a new 
question to the Minister of Health. If I was directing it to the 
minister in charge of the property management corporation, I’d 
ask what he did with the money, because the Provincial Auditor 
also wants to know what he did with the money. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health is: can you explain why, 
Mr. Minister, if private dentists in the province are just 
clamouring to take over services provided by the school-based 
dental program of the past, and if they’re being rushing to set up 
satellite clinics, and you have three warehouses full of unused 
dental equipment, why are you planning to sell off the equipment 
as scrap, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — First of all, and foremost, Mr. Speaker, 
the facts as presented by that member would probably be similar 
to the facts presented by his colleague on Friday, the fact that 
they are non-facts that are being   



 
June 12, 1989 

1791 
 

presented. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks about the clinics that 
were out, and what they call satellite clinics that were out in 
schools. And as I pointed out on Friday, and on many occasions 
in the past, dental chairs sitting in schools that would be visited 
by a therapist on one day, in many cases, one day out of a 
52-week year — and he says that those pieces of equipment were 
in great use before, and so on. The fact that they sat right there 
and they were used one day — many of them were used one day 
out of a 52-week year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system is working well that is there now. Rural 
Saskatchewan has excellent dental coverage, with the exception 
of about two areas where there’s further afield, where people 
must travel a little further, the south-west part of the province 
being one of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts as presented by the member, what he 
purports to be facts, are just not that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’d like to direct a further question to the 
Minister of Health, a new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
will you assure this House that all of the unsold equipment that 
is being stored, is being stored under proper sanitary conditions, 
and that the investment of millions of dollars by the people of 
Saskatchewan is not being allowed to simply deteriorate in 
warehouses because of your government’s half-baked plan to 
privatize the dental program without making provisions for 
program to replace the program that you cannibalized? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well as the hon. member knows, Mr. 
Speaker, the equipment, disposal of equipment, storage of 
equipment, is under the jurisdiction of the property management 
corporation. The member well knows that, and that’s the best 
place for him to direct his questions. 
 
I can give him this assurance. The dental equipment that is in use 
in Saskatchewan, both rural and urban, is in use in sterile 
conditions. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Final question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Minister of Health. We’re talking about $2.2 million worth of 
equipment which is being shipped over to the minister in charge 
of the property management corporation, which subsequently 
told us he sold off $700,000 worth. Is it your position, Mr. 
Minister, that your privatized dental program has been such a 
dismal flop that you’re unable to sell two-thirds to the available 
dental clinics, those wishing to set up private clinics? As a result, 
this equipment sits rusting in warehouses. Is that your position, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. 
 

D-Mail Services 
 

Mr. Anguish: — My question is to the Minister of Finance, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, you recently sent me a letter entitled 
“Dear Entrepreneur.” You also sent it to several other business 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. And I was wondering if 
today, if you could confirm that you recently . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You sent me a letter, and it was also sent to a 
number of other small-business people in the province, entitled 
“Dear Entrepreneur.” And I’m wondering if you could tell us, 
Mr. Minister, whether or not you’ve entered into a contract with 
one Dave Tkachuk, who’s a former principal secretary to the 
Premier and well-known Tory worker and front man in the 
province, that his firm D-Mail (Services Inc.), sent out these 
letters to some 150,000 people in the province, talking about your 
achievements in government, and can you confirm that the 
contract cost your department somewhere in the neighbourhood 
of 75,000 to $100,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously if the hon. 
member received a letter addressed to “Dear Entrepreneur,” there 
is a big mistake in the mailing list, Mr. Speaker, and very much 
worthy of investigation on my part because we all know how 
little the hon. member knows about business. 
 
And we also know how little the hon. member supports business 
in his own riding as he attacked Gainers and the Vanguard 
(mobile home) Manufacturing, and his attempts to utterly destroy 
the small-business community in the city of North Battleford, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So obviously if he got the letter, there was a tragic error made, 
Mr. Speaker, and I will endeavour to correct that. I will also 
endeavour, Mr. Speaker, to get the rest of the information for the 
hon. member, but I certainly will take a good hard look at our 
mailing list if there was such a big mistake made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the same minister. I’m sure 
that small-business people in the province are very interested in 
what you said. I know that in our business in The Battlefords, if 
we don’t make a profit and we continually lose money, then our 
business will go under. I see that you, as Minister of Finance, can 
make a billion dollar mistake on your budget and you still seem 
to exist till the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So aside from that, I don’t think you should be 
throwing things like this letter in the face of small-business 
people in the province. 
 
Maybe you’d tell us what’s going on here. Did your friend Dave 
Tkachuk need the money, or are you afraid that you’ve failed so 
miserably in convincing people in the   



 
June 12, 1989 

1792 
 

province — that you haven’t really accomplished anything at all; 
that you must send them out these little pieces of political 
propaganda as information from your department at taxpayers’ 
expense? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have already admitted 
that if the hon. member did in fact get a copy, there was a big 
mistake made because we’re all aware of what the chamber of 
commerce in North Battleford have said about the hon. member 
— that he is of no help to the small-business community in North 
Battleford. His own people are saying that. 
 
He has been publicly attacking efforts of this government to try 
and diversify the economy in The Battlefords and North 
Battleford. He has been attacking, Mr. Speaker, all of our efforts 
to try and help the city of North Battleford. We know, as do the 
people of North Battleford, that the hon. member has been 
criticized by the chamber of commerce and his own . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister . . . New question, same 
minister. Mr. Minister, I would invite you to come to The 
Battlefords and tour the business community with me. And we 
can start off by having . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is also infringing on 
the rules and entering into debate, and would he get to his 
question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You see, 
we could have breakfast at a restaurant and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Would you please 
be seated. Second time I’ve brought the hon. member to attention 
not to continue in debate. Would you get to the question. 
 

Polling Services re Budget 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, new question. Can you confirm 
that about a month before you introduced your last budget that 
you had a company called Summerhill Research of Winnipeg, on 
a subcontract from your friends at Decima Research, to do a poll 
of people in this province on specific policies to be included in 
your last budget? And what was their reaction to that? And could 
you tell us how much the poll that Summerhill Research from 
Winnipeg cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan while you’re 
groping around? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m not aware, Mr. Speaker, of any 
such contract or any such polling. I will state, Mr. Speaker, that 
whatever the sources of the budget — and I will give all my 
colleagues full credit — it’s interesting that it must have been 
successful because the NDP have not wanted to talk about it all 
through this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP asked me, I don’t think — 
what? — one question on the budget since it was brought in in 
March, Mr. Speaker. So whatever the sources of the budget, and 
I’m prepared to give the credit to, as I say, my colleagues in 
caucus and in cabinet for a very good budget, a budget that was 
well received by the people of this province. 
 
I’m not aware of any such polling, Mr. Speaker, but let me tell 
the hon. member that it’s taken you three or four months to screw 
up your courage to ask a question about the budget, so whatever 
the sources, it was obviously very successful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — My question is very simply a new question to 
the Minister of Finance. Will you bring in the estimates this 
afternoon? We’ll debate them here in this house today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have . . . I apologize to 
the House for not having responded to the hon. member when he 
invited me to tour North Battleford. I have two problems, Mr. 
Speaker. Having toured North Battleford for the business 
community, Mr. Speaker, if I went with the hon. member it 
would be like the kiss of death on me, Mr. Speaker, because I 
know it’s a bit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister. Will 
you bring in the estimates today in this House? We’ll deal with it 
now, this afternoon, in the legislature — bring them in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve been here long enough to know, 
and I hope the hon. member would begin to learn . . . I gather that 
there are some discussions, Mr. Speaker, and it wouldn’t be 
appropriate for me to inflame the debate. 
 
I will suggest for the hon. member that the people in North 
Battleford are going to be surprised by your sudden concern 
about business. It is something, Mr. Speaker, that has not existed 
before today. I think it’ll be of rather short 
_term nature. 
 
But I gather the matter of the process of what goes before the 
House is being dealt with. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You’re struggling as bad as the rest of the 
government, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, you used taxpayers’ money to ask people in 
Saskatchewan what you should put in your budget, and the 
population still rejects it. Then you used more   



 
June 12, 1989 

1793 
 

taxpayers’ money to tell the business community you’re doing a 
whole bunch of good things for them, and still the people don’t 
trust you. Instead of spending all this money on political purposes 
and accomplishing nothing, why don’t you accept some advice 
which comes free from the growing public opinion that you are 
incompetent and you should resign and call an election before 
you cause this province any more problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if public reaction is the criteria . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If public opinion 
was the criterion that the hon. member would go on, that the utter 
rejection by the business community of the hon. member in North 
Battleford should cause him to take the action that he urges. 
 
Let me indicate to the hon. member that in our budget we have 
the first small-business tax rebate program to help small 
businesses with property taxes and business taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
something that the NDP refused to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have new programs through SEDCO and the 
department of small business and tourism which are designed, 
Mr. Speaker, to try and help small business. 
 
We have five new programs, Mr. Speaker, in our budget to try 
and help bring some stability and viability to the smaller 
communities in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve listed 
those over and over and over again. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that it has to be this government that 
takes the message of those programs to those affected because I 
don’t expect the opposition to do it. The opposition are opposed 
to those very programs designed to help small business, help 
small communities, and help diversify this economy, Mr. 
Speaker. It has to be this government to get that message out 
because I don’t expect the hon. members . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 

Gambling Tax 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wish to raise with you 
another of your popular success stories, the gambling tax. Mr. 
Minister, that tax, according to your speech, was to come into 
effect at the end of this month. A lot of charities expressed 
concern about how it was going to operate. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is: what arrangement do you have in place with respect 
to the implementation of the gambling tax at the end of this 
month? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — All necessary arrangements. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, the time is . . . new 
question. Mr. Minister, the time is past due when you want to be 
a little more forthcoming, if not with the members of this 
Assembly, at least with those who have to pay the tax. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to repeat my 
question. What are the arrangements? What arrangements have 
you entered into with the charities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 
responsible for the gaming authority in Saskatchewan has been 
meeting with the appropriate charities and charitable institutions 
affected by the tax. And I’m informed, as well, that all the 
arrangements based on whether they be for a bingo licence or a 
casino licence or the straight lottery tickets — and I’ve indicated 
that that would be a 10 per cent tax; I said that in the budget — 
that those arrangements have very much all been completed to 
the best of my knowledge. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well some say it’s not true. I happen to be 
advised differently — with one exception, I’m advised, and that 
is the question of the taxing on the casinos, and there are some 
negotiations still going on with the appropriate exhibition 
authorities in that regard. So other than that there is the question, 
not as to the application of the tax, but in the city of Lloydminster 
and Flin Flon as to whether or not the tax would be collected in 
those two cities, given the border position. So to the best of my 
knowledge most of the other arrangements . . . all of the other 
arrangements have been made. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question. Mr. Minister, it’s apparent 
from the lame fashion in which you answered that, that you’ve 
now realized what you were told initially, and that is this is going 
to be a very difficult tax to administer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And unpopular. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And equally unpopular. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, do I take it from the fashion 
in which you groped for an answer the last time, that you’re going 
to be unable to meet the June 30 deadline with respect to this tax? 
Do we now take it that the tax is going to be imposed some time 
in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, the tax will be implemented on the date 
that we set out in the budget. I have told you now on two 
occasions today that all the necessary arrangements, except with 
the two exceptions that I’ve given you, that the systems will be 
in place, that discussions have been going on for some time with 
the appropriate charities, and provincial bodies in many cases, 
and that we are proceeding. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I am pleased to . . .   



 
June 12, 1989 

1794 
 

I have a message from the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to submit herewith, pursuant 
to section 222(1) of The Election Act, a report respecting 
annual fiscal returns of registered political parties for the 
fiscal year 1988. Chief Electoral Officer. 
 

I now table this report. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with some 
disappointment that I return to this subject, the motion by the 
hon. member from Kindersley, that the rules and procedures of 
this Legislative Assembly be changed. 
 
The public will know that in dealing with this particular item of 
business today it chooses not to deal with other items of public 
business — environmental legislation, child care legislation, and 
a host of other popular priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. 
This certainly couldn’t be construed or termed a popular move 
by the government in any way, shape or form. It’s beyond the 
bounds of imagination even to think of a rule to change the 
bell-ringing legislation of this Assembly to be an order of 
business that is high on the popular agenda. 
 
Now we all know that when the government moved to introduce 
this bell-ringing legislation on May 8, it moved to prevent a 
recurrence of the kind of far-ranging public debate that took place 
in April and May of this spring with respect to the privatization 
of SaskPower. And that, quite simply, is the only reason that we 
have this motion before us today, is to squelch public 
participation in debate on public policy. 
 
The public would recognize this move to be highly unusual. 
Never before in the history of this province, or of this country, in 
fact, have the bells rung so long. This is totally unprecedented, 
as we now know. And it’s also, the public will realize, highly 
unlikely that the bells will ever ring to this extent again. 
 
This kind of action, as unprecedented as it is, for an opposition 
to walk out of the Legislative Assembly in protest of government 
legislation, this kind of opposition that carries on for 17 days can 
only be sustained if there is a will in the public to sustain the kind 
of protest initiated and mounted by the opposition in walking out. 
Without public support, without public approval for a walk-out 
while the bells are ringing, such an initiative would never even 
get airborne. And in fact that’s why we find that the bells 
ordinarily ring for maybe five minutes or 10 minutes 

on most occasions to call the members to a vote. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say that when there is public business that’s 
high on the public’s priority, or high on the public’s agenda — 
business such as the privatization of SaskPower — then the bells 
will ring for more than five or 10 minutes. The bells then will 
ring legitimately for 17 days. 
 
And it’s well then that there is a legislative mechanism to allow 
for such a procedure to happen. And I would argue that it’s 
precisely the mechanism that we have right now in the rules and 
procedures book of the Legislative Assembly that allows for the 
democratic process to flourish and regenerate itself and sustain 
itself as public opinion is brought to bear on government 
decision. 
 
And the point I want to make in this regard, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there is a built-in system of checks and balances when we talk 
about the existing provisions for the bells to ring in unlimited 
fashion. They simply won’t ring for 17 days, or even for seven 
hours, unless there’s a matter of equivalent consequence that 
sustains public approval for that duration of bell-ringing. If the 
issue is frivolous, if the issue is irrelevant to public consideration, 
the bells will not ring that long because no opposition can sustain 
that kind of frivolous action without incurring the wrath of the 
public. 
 
The circumstances that we had here in this province though, this 
spring, were such that the ringing of the bells in accordance with 
the existing rules of the Assembly was sustained by public 
opinion. The bell-ringing might seem extreme, but the public 
deemed that there were extreme consequences to the 
government’s action, extreme consequences for individual 
families in Saskatchewan if their public utility, SaskPower, was 
to be privatized without their approval — and I add that, Mr. 
Speaker, “without their approval.” 
 
Because clearly there was no consensus whatsoever; there was 
no attempt to secure any consultation with the public by the 
government prior to this privatization initiative. And well then 
did the bells ring. Because if the government had consulted the 
public prior to this decision to privatize SaskPower, if the 
government had gone . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. The hon. member is 
setting forth an argument that unfortunately he has made several 
times. He’s been speaking for some time, and he’s had that 
opportunity. And I have indicated to him before that it’s 
repetitious to repeat the same argument, and not acceptable, and 
I’d like the hon. member to move off that argument and move to 
a new original argument. It’s not possible to keep repeating the 
same argument. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I said, Mr. Speaker, earlier, it is with a certain 
degree of disappointment that I have to return to this subject this 
afternoon, and so I will, on the strength of your advice, simply 
move on to what is now some new material, rather than to spend 
any time recapitulating what has already been said. 
 
What we’re talking about today is a limitation on   



 
June 12, 1989 

1795 
 

bell-ringing. We’re talking about a limitation on public input into 
public policy. Now the government has decided that when it 
comes to the ringing of bells there will be a motion introduced, 
as we have before, that the bells will be allowed to ring for only 
one hour calling the members to vote on government legislation, 
and those bells will ring for only one hour — a limitation of 
bell-ringing which does not allow for public participation and 
public debate, public opinion, to be sounded and heard by 
members of this legislature. 
 
And I say we see the exact parallel in the government’s action 
when it comes to the Barber commission, limiting the 
commission to receiving written briefs. How can the public 
participate in an issue of public policy — all the public 
participate in far-reaching fashion — those people who don’t 
have perhaps finely polished literary skills; how can these people 
participate in the formation of public policy if they can’t appear 
before the Barber commission and speak their minds without 
having first submitted a written proposal or a written brief? 
 
And I think . . . and the public of Saskatchewan has judged this 
government to be up to the business of limiting public input on 
issues of public policy, whether it has to do with bell-ringing in 
this Legislative Assembly or whether it has to do with their own 
commission travelling the province and putatively, allegedly, 
securing public opinion at the very time when it limits the 
expression of that opinion to written briefs only and appears in 
only eight communities, not even geographically distributed. 
 
We know then that there are more adequate ways to ensure public 
opinion and public input into questions of public policy. When it 
comes to the issue of bell-ringing, one of the ways to do that is 
not to limit bell-ringing to one hour, to allow the bells to ring for 
as long as public opinion sustains that process. 
 
And we think that similar moves or initiatives could be made 
when it comes to the Barber commission, that there ought to be 
full time status accorded to members of other than government 
appointees to this commission, to other groups and organizations 
interested in public policy. And that would foster and facilitate 
the democratic process. And that just as oral presentation and 
representation was made across this province while the bells rang 
in April and May of this spring, so ought there to be oral 
representation and presentation when the Barber panel holds 
public hearings. 
 
In essence then, this opposition challenges the government to 
consult with the people for a change, challenges the government 
not to unilaterally impose its agenda on the public or to impose 
its understanding of what the public expression is and what the 
public wants, but we challenge this government to consult. 
 
(1445) 
 
And anyone who has teen-age children will know, or younger 
children for that matter, will know that when it comes to dealing 
with people, a consultative approach is far more productive and 
a forthright way of dealing with disagreement than an approach 
that does not consult, that strong-arms and is unilateral. 
 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we believe, on this side of the House, 
that this very motion before us to change the bell-ringing should 
be referred to a committee of the Legislative Assembly for 
consultation. Consultation ought to be at the top of the 
government’s agenda, whether it’s consultation with respect to 
privatizing SaskPower, or consultation with respect to this piece 
of legislation to amend the bell-ringing. 
 
Why can’t the government consult with the opposition on this 
matter? This has been the practice in this Legislative Assembly 
for years — years and years. In fact, the public should know that 
there has been no other way of securing amendment or change to 
legislative procedures and rules other than through a consultative 
process whereby the government and the opposition sit down 
face to face and start to communicate with each other and begin 
to compromise and communicate with each other. 
 
What we don’t need is a government — and let’s be honest on 
this side of the House — what we don’t need and what we don’t 
want is a government that browbeats the public into submission, 
and the opposition into humiliation. And that’s exactly what we 
see is behind this move with this motion to change the rule 33(2) 
and to limit the bell-ringing to not more than an hour. 
 
As I say, anyone that raises children nowadays knows that you 
can get further with communication and consultation; that that’s 
a far more constructive way to approach disagreement than to 
take unilateral strong-arm tactics. Those strong-arm tactics, the 
bulldozer mentality that we’ve seen from this government, may 
seem to get results in the short run, but in the long run it’s 
counter-productive, we believe on this side of the House. 
 
A government that determines its policy in secret as much as 
possible will not want to surround itself with public scrutiny or 
public discussion or public consultation beyond the walls of its 
own cabinet. And that’s what’s at stake in essence with this piece 
of legislation. Once the policy course has been set, this 
government puts its foot to the floor and wants to ram its will 
through, whether or not there’s public consent for that will or not. 
 
And the argument is made that because it’s the government it can 
do that. But I say, Mr. Speaker, that in this democratic system, in 
this parliamentary system, while the government can do that, can 
put its foot to the floor and ram legislation through like it’s 
driving a bulldozer, that’s not in the interests of the democratic 
system. 
 
It’s allowed by virtue of the democratic system. It’s allowed by 
virtue, the government says, of its democratically arrived at 
mandate. Political power for this government comes once every 
four or four and a half years, whenever it screws up its courage 
to call an election. If it had its way, it would be once every 50 
years or 500 years, because fundamentally the democratic system 
doesn’t mean much to them. 
 
But once they secure political power through the democratic 
process, then between elections there’s no opposition that is 
allowed, whether that’s opposition   



 
June 12, 1989 

1796 
 

from the official opposition or opposition from the public at 
large. And isn’t that what we saw this spring, and isn’t that what 
we see right now with the proposal to amend the rules of this 
Assembly. 
 
The electoral gun gives this government power, and that’s all that 
they’re interested in — not public opinion, but their own political 
power. And this particular motion is plain and simply a means of 
perpetuating this government’s political power arrived at through 
its electoral gun that it gets a hold of every time it goes to the 
public during the course of an election. 
 
But forbid going to the public outside of an election. Forbid 
public consultation. Forbid a procedure that allows for the bells 
to ring for 17 days or longer. Tighten the screws down on 
government. Put the lid on public opinion and the democratic 
expression, and limit bell-ringing to only one hour. 
 
And that’s why on this side of the House we say this government 
is wrong in introducing this motion by the member from 
Kindersley to limit the bell-ringing to an hour. It’s wrong because 
it curtails the democratic process just as it’s so accustomed to do, 
whether it has to do with cut-backs that have taken place in the 
spring of ’87 to our dental program and our prescription drug 
program that took place without any consultation. So now when 
it comes to the privatization of SaskPower, major initiatives, 
don’t allow the bells to ring; don’t allow public opinion to be 
sounded or expressed. 
 
This government really is afraid of the people. And it’s not 
without reason then that we have to ask: what really is at stake? 
If in a democratic system, people — the many, the people, the 
demos — are to have authority or power or input or voice, what 
really is at stake with this sort of motion is a curtailing of the 
democratic process. 
 
Now it’s fair in this day and age, because of the size or the scale 
of the kinds of representative democracies that we have, not only 
on the national level but on a provincial level — even on a 
municipal level — it’s difficult sometimes to allow the 
democratic process to flourish full face; in other words, with 
face-to-face democratic representation, with direct participation. 
 
One has to admit that it is difficult to give particular or individual 
voice, democratic voice. In spite of the democratic system we 
like to assume that we have, it is difficult to give voice to that, 
given the nature or the reality of political structures in modern 
mass societies. Simply because of the size of our population, it’s 
difficult to have direct representation. 
 
And yet, given that kind of curtailment of the democratic process, 
simply because of the size of the state — some million people 
here in Saskatchewan — it still points to the need for vehicles to 
give what voice we can to individual participation, to direct, 
face-to-face, democratic input, participatory democracy. Any 
measures that we can add to our parliamentary or democratic 
system that give vent to that kind of expression ought to be kept 
in place and maintained and sustained. 
 

And it’s for that reason that I would argue that the motion to 
change the rules of this Assembly ill serves the very needs of the 
modern democratic system that we have now, where 
participatory democracy is not easily achieved because of the 
nature of a mass society. And here, with the existing provision in 
the rule book, we have an opportunity to sustain and perpetuate 
the democratic process. Even if it’s used on rare occasions, so be 
it. 
 
Let the rules stay. Let the democratic process flourish to the 
extent that people want to give voice to their public opinion and 
their particular concerns. Let that democratic system flourish. 
And if this particular rule that we now have — 33(2), the existing 
rule that allows for full and free participation, public participation 
— if that can serve the democratic process in a mass society of a 
million people in Saskatchewan today, so be it. Let it stay. And 
if it ill serves the democratic process, then I say, take it away. 
 
Now the government will say that it should be taken away. I have 
here a letter from the Premier, dated May 3, 1989, and in this 
letter he talks about the freezing of the Legislative Assembly 
since April 21 when the New Democrats walked out to protest 
this sale of SaskPower. And in this letter it’s interesting to note, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Premier himself says to the PC Party 
membership: 
 

 The real issue we are facing is the democratic process held 
hostage. 
 

The Premier seems to believe that with the walk-out in the 
legislature that took place on April 21 that the real issue we are 
now facing is the democratic process held hostage, and goes on 
to talk about the NDP paralysing the democratic process. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan can judge whether what took 
place in that 17-day walk-out . . . I will trust the people of 
Saskatchewan to hold judgement over whether that walk-out, 
whether those 17 days were a paralysis of the democratic process 
or an energizing of the democratic process. 
 
The bell-ringing accomplished precisely an increase of 
democracy in this province during those days, facilitated and 
fostered an increase in democracy, not only in that opposition 
members went out for 17 days across the province and tried to 
convey their understanding of what was happening with the 
legislative process and to listen to public concern, but wonder of 
wonders, Mr. Speaker, the Premier himself calls on PC Party 
activists to go into their communities and begin to listen and 
communicate with their friends and neighbours regarding this 
issue. And I say then on both scores, the opposition going out to 
hear public opinion, and the government going out to hear public 
opinion, on both scores, Saskatchewan is richer for the bells 
having rung for 17 days and not for one hour. 
 
The Premier says in this letter: 
 

Thus it is critical that we stop the NDP attack on our 
democratic institutions and challenge their calculated 
dishonesty. All members of the PC Party must go into their 
communities and help their friends and neighbours 
understand what is   



 
June 12, 1989 

1797 
 

happening. 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is precisely what the rule we have before 
us now allows for, is for the opposition to go out, and if the 
government has the will and the resolve and the courage to go 
out, to go out itself into the public and get a sounding of public 
opinion and try to explain their cause. 
 
Now we know that there isn’t too much of that that happened. 
We know that the government was much more inclined, this 
government, to go out and propagandize the people of 
Saskatchewan with advertising for the sale of SaskPower. That 
is not full democratic expression, that’s bogus democratic 
expression, propagandizing as opposed to direct participatory 
democracy. Because it’s one thing for members of this legislature 
to go out into Saskatchewan and stand in front of their 
constituents and listen and talk and have a cut and thrust of debate 
on public policy, and it’s quite another thing for members of this 
Legislative Assembly to sit frozen in their seats in this place and 
to consign the democratic process to advertising firms and 
political hucksters — quite a difference. 
 
(1500) 
 
I’d say then, that contrary to the hijacking of democracy, the very 
role that we have in this Assembly, at this point in time, serves 
the democratic process fully and more capably than just about 
anything else we can imagine. We can’t imagine using it on every 
particular occasion when an issue comes up. But if and when 
there are issues of public consequence, then we can see that this 
rule that exists now to allow full and free ringing of the bells, we 
can see that this does have its place and should not be removed 
from the legislative rule book. 
 
Telemiracle uses the notion, Mr. Speaker, of ringing those bells; 
we all know that. Anyone who lives in Saskatchewan would be 
hard put not to recognize the origin of that phrase, “Ring those 
bells; ring those bells.” Those bells call attention to the fact that 
they’re trying to raise money for Telemiracle. It’s an appeal for 
Saskatchewan people to get involved and to participate in the 
fund-raising exercise, and so when the call goes across the 
province to “ring those bells” with Telemiracle, there’s a reason 
for it: it’s to get people involved. 
 
And when the bells ring here in the Legislative Assembly, it’s 
similarly a call for the public to get involved . . . Well not on 
every occasion. If they ring for five minutes, calling the members 
to a vote, then the public is likely not even to know that the bells 
are ringing. 
 
There’s little at stake then, if the bells ring for only five or 10 
minutes, or if the bells ring for an hour or so. Sometimes it’s just 
a pure factor of inconvenience or deployment that the bells need 
to ring for 45 minutes or an hour or an hour and a half, simply 
because individual members — it could be the Premier himself 
— are not in the Legislative Assembly and want or need to be 
present for a particular vote to take place. 
 
So that, in and of itself, the ringing of the bells in the Legislative 
Assembly is not the be-all and end-all of this place. It performs a 
purely functional sort of role in terms 

of calling the members to vote. But if there are occasions when 
the bells need to ring to call Saskatchewan people to get involved 
with a particular issue, then they need to ring for more than one 
hour, as this particular motion to amend the rules would 
introduce. 
 
Lately, this government seems to think that it can do anything it 
pleases, without public consent. It wants to play by its own rules 
and not by any of the rules of the Legislative Assembly. And if 
the rules of the Legislative Assembly don’t suit its purposes, or 
its own rules, then change the rules as it will — unilaterally, 
without consultation. 
 
The government likes to say that they do consult, that 
SaskEnergy has been travelling the province into 80 
communities, looking into the question, explaining the 
privatization of SaskPower. But I would say that this was not 
occasioned out of the good will of the government’s heart; rather, 
it was occasioned as a direct result of the bell-ringing episode 
itself. 
 
And I would go further than this and say, consider the contrast 
— consider the contrast in which the government has SaskPower 
executives going to 80 communities, and the bell-ringing episode 
which sees members of this Legislative Assembly go into 
hundreds, literally hundreds of Saskatchewan communities with 
petitions opposing the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, could not have accomplished the 
almost infectious, contagious spread of public opinion on the 
SaskPower issue if it had been allowed to go for only one hour. 
The public of Saskatchewan needed to have an opportunity to 
reflect on the issue that this privatization move was not in the 
public issue, as the petition states; that it’s the privatization or 
sell-off of a major public utility which serves all Saskatchewan 
people; and that the privatization of SaskPower will lead to 
higher utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will benefit only 
wealthy investors. And those are quotes from the petition itself. 
 
And it’s interesting to note, along the lines in the case I’m trying 
to make, that this is an exercise in participatory democracy; that 
the petitioners signed their names to the petition expressly so that 
it can be tabled in the Legislative Assembly and contribute 
directly in some measure to the parliamentary process, to the 
legislative process. 
 
And I make the case again that in its blind ideological bent to 
privatize, this government will stop at nothing. It will steamroll 
over public opinion and it will even violate its own securities 
legislation; that with the moves to privatize SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy can release market-oriented information before a 
share issue prospectus has been released. 
 
Now if a private company attempted to do this, the commission 
would almost certainly stop it, would sit it down and talk to it and 
say: this doesn’t fly. And yet, when SaskPower can go out and 
send 400,000 letters explaining financial benefits to share 
offerings, this at the impetus of the government itself, that really 
is okay even though it flies in the face of this government’s own 
securities legislation. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

1798 
 

But that’s really nothing new. We’ve seen the government fail to 
enforce its own investment contracts Act when annual reports for 
the Principal Group of companies were filed late in 1983, and it 
didn’t make any difference; or when quarterly financial 
statements in 1985 were not even filed altogether — not even 
filed altogether. So much regard this government has for public 
opinions. 
 
So if it wants a rule change on bell-ringing, it will ram it through. 
But it won’t play by its own rules; whether it has to do with the 
share offering on SaskEnergy or enforcing its own investment 
contracts legislation for the benefit of the public, it bulldozes its 
own way forward and it violates the public interest in doing so. 
 
What is particularly galling then, in all of this is, not only doesn’t 
the government keep the rules but it doesn’t keep faith with 
Saskatchewan people. And we could ask why was there such a 
strong public outpouring of opinion against the sell-off of 
SaskPower while the bells were ringing? Why was there such 
strong public support? 
 
And on some reflection, Mr. Speaker, I’ve come to the 
conclusion it has to do with the fundamental fact that the 
government had promised that it would not sell off SaskPower or 
SaskTel or SGI, and then has gone ahead and changed its mind 
unilaterally without consultation and decided to do it. In fact we 
know, as has been amply indicated these last weeks, that the 
Premier told the Leader-Post, the Regina Leader-Post, on 
January 25, ’88, quote: 
 

All Crown corporations with the exception of such utility 
Crowns as SaskPower and Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications could be for sale if the price is right. 
 

End quote. With the exception, the notable exception of 
SaskPower, the Premier saying that in January 25 of 1988, and 
then he goes ahead and introduces legislation to privatize it — 
well no wonder public opinion rears up in opposition. 
 
So we have a situation in which the rule change before us is to 
curtail the bell-ringing, and we wonder, we have to wonder 
whether this isn’t a move out of revenge that the government 
wants to curtail public expression, simply out of spite for what 
had taken place the previous 17 days. 
 
It’s a heavy-handed tactic, it’s a bulldozer tactic, and it isn’t 
likely to win much public approval. And that’s why we stand 
opposed to such a motion that would simply increase the 
government’s ability to bulldoze or, with heavy hand, hammer its 
way over the public will and not using tools of public 
consultation such as the existing provisions that we have in the 
rules of this Assembly, used rarely as they are, but on occasion 
very appropriate for the expression of public opinion. 
 
There really is no pressing need to curtail the ringing of bells at 
this point — there’s no pressing need. The 17 days have come 
and gone, and for better or for worse, they were 17 days. For the 
opposition, it looks like those 17 days were for the better. For the 
government, it looks as if those 17 days were for the worse. 
 

But that’s not to say, Mr. Speaker, that if we were to keep the 
existing rule on the books that allows for full and free democratic 
expression, that those circumstances might not be reversed at 
another time in another bell-ringing episode. When an opposition 
goes too far with the bell-ringing, then the opposition might incur 
the wrath of public opinion. It might work against an opposition 
and for a government. And in fact that was a potential implicit in 
this most recent bell-ringing episode. 
 
But regardless of the winners and the losers in terms of 
government or opposition, if we stand back and look at the thrust 
of this proposed rule change, we have to say, I think, that the 
public will be the worse for this rule change; that the people of 
Saskatchewan will be the poorer in losing the opportunity to 
comment on critical issues, as any particular opposition gives 
them opportunity by use of the bell-ringing provision. 
 
That can’t happen in one hour; it can happen in five or 10 hours, 
in seven days. It can happen, as we saw, in 17 days of 
bell-ringing. And that’s why there’s a strong logic or rationale, 
there’s a strong argument to keep this particular motion on the 
books the way it is, and not to change it. 
 
(1515) 
 
In this particular case of the 17-day bell-ringing, this legislative 
rule allowed the public to become more involved in democracy, 
not less involved. No one would argue that the public was 
involved less in the democratic legislative process as a result of 
this most recent bell-ringing episode. No one would argue that 
the public were involved less in the democratic process. And so 
if they weren’t involved less in it, they were involved more in it 
and are the richer for it, and this province is the better for it. And 
we need to preserve and protect this particular rule of the 
Legislative Assembly as it has been in place for many a year now. 
 
I’d like to share a quote from a well-known piece of political 
reflection by Henry David Thoreau, from his essay on civil 
disobedience. And he writes, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The authority of government, even such as I am willing to 
submit to, is still an impure one. To be strictly just it must 
have the sanction and consent of the governed; it can have 
no pure right over my person and property but what I 
concede to it. 
 
The progress from an absolute to a limited monarchy, from 
a limited monarchy to a democracy, is a progress toward a 
true respect for individualism. 
 
Even the Chinese philosopher was wise enough to regard 
the individual as the basis of the empire. Is a democracy, 
such as we know it, the last improvement possible in 
government? Is it not possible to take a step further towards 
recognizing and organizing the rights of man? 
 
There will never be a really free and enlightened state until 
the state comes to recognize the individual as a higher and 
independent power   



 
June 12, 1989 

1799 
 

from which all its own power and authority are derived, and 
which treats him accordingly. 
 

Those are some of the very concluding thoughts of Henry David 
Thoreau on civil disobedience and the role of the individual 
person in a democratic society. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s precisely those kinds of issues, consideration for the 
individual as a higher and independent power from which the 
state’s own political power and authority are derived, that are 
implicit in the consideration of this motion to change the rules. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would thank you for your 
attention to my remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the chance to 
enter this debate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Again. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I hear someone saying “again,” but this is my first 
opportunity to speak in this. You see, Mr. Speaker, on this side 
of the legislature, we’re reduced these days to fighting amongst 
ourselves. And what we’re fighting amongst ourselves for is who 
gets the opportunity to speak on this issue next. I won the fight 
finally, not much of a scrapper, but it is my turn to give my views 
on this bell-ringing motion, and indeed it’s a privilege that I 
intend to do the best . . . to the best of my ability. 
 
It’s interesting that this bell-ringing motion is so important to 
government members. To the exclusion of all else, they must do 
away with the opposition’s right to ring the bells on given issues 
— that right which in over seven years with New Democrats in 
opposition, in over seven years we’ve used the bell-ringing, to 
my knowledge, two times. 
 
One was when one of our members in the first term was facing a 
million or a $2 million lawsuit and his petty cash fund simply 
wasn’t quite big enough to cover that. Indeed, knowing the 
member, as I know most of the members on this side, we could 
add all of our petty cash funds and most of our assets to get close 
to that $2 million. So there was a relatively short bell-ringing 
days at that time for that reason. Subsequently, of course, we’ve 
had a 17-day bell-ringing session dealing with the SaskPower 
privatization. 
 
As my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland pointed out so 
capably, the 17-day bell-ringing session that I was a part of, and 
that indeed all Saskatchewan people were a part of recently, 
served democracy very well. We have collectively — not the 26 
lonely socialists on this side of the legislature — but the people 
of Saskatchewan have collectively told the government, in no 
uncertain terms, that the privatization of SaskPower is not 
acceptable. 
 
People have been telling me, and they continue to tell me: we 
have a government that has gone too far. They’re asking us — 
not just asking, demanding — that on this side of the legislature 
we do everything we possibly can to stop a government that has 
gone rampant, a government that has totally lost touch with the 
people. 
 

To bring that point home, Mr. Speaker, the government members 
claim that they are the government or the party that represents 
farm interests best — absolutely the party of the farm interest. 
 
Despite that claim, we see on the blues, the orders of the 
legislature, that there are 42 Bills in second reading. Five Bills 
have passed in this legislature. Those five include such — well I 
was going to be factitious, but I won’t be — they are 
non-controversial Bills. That’s why they were passed. They 
included: The Residential Services Act; The Line Fence Act; The 
Public Trustee Act; The Municipal Board Act, and The Queen’s 
Bench Act. 
 
In that time we also passed one private Bill, and that was simply 
a name change for the hospital at Biggar. 
 
There have been, I understand, two appropriation of funds came 
before this legislature. Both were passed, enabling the 
government to continue with its day-to-day funding of business. 
 
But of the 42 Bills that have been . . . that are currently in second 
reading, Mr. Speaker, there is a grand total of two that deal with 
agriculture — two that deal in any meaningful way with the rural 
people of Saskatchewan — that from a government that has for 
some years now claimed they represent rural Saskatchewan Two 
Bills, at a time when agriculture is in a crisis unlike anything we 
have seen since the 1930s. The difference of course is this year 
we seem to be getting the rains, for the most part, throughout the 
province, and certainly on this side of the legislature we welcome 
those rains. It is most pleasing to see the green grass again where 
last year in some community pastures I saw dust rising off the 
pasture. This year I see luscious green grass. 
 
I haven’t figured out how we can take credit for that on this side 
of the Legislative Assembly yet, and I suspect we can’t. That rain 
indeed has come from a much higher power than members on 
either side of this House, and we all recognize that. 
 
But can you imagine, out of 42 Bills, only two of them dealing 
with agriculture. The legislature started sitting March 8, 1989 — 
March 8. Here we are, June 12, I believe. March 8, the legislature 
sat. 
 
Were either of the two agricultural related Bills introduced in the 
first week? No. The second week? No. A little bit of a slow start, 
you might say. Were they introduced in the third or fourth weeks? 
No. Fifth, sixth, seventh? No. Eighth, ninth, tenth? No. It was at 
the end of 11 weeks — 11 weeks in this legislature — when Bill 
No. 41, An Act to amend The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Act was first introduced in this legislature. Eleven 
weeks! Many sessions, Mr. Speaker, are over in that time frame. 
 
So here we are, now June 12, dealing with a change of the rules 
— a change of the rules when we could be dealing with Bills; we 
could be dealing with estimates; we could be dealing with any 
number of other important items. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, this motion was presented — this   



 
June 12, 1989 

1800 
 

motion that the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended by adding the following after rule 33(1). And I don’t 
propose to read it, but to say that it is the proposed rule change 
that will restrict bell-ringing to one hour only for ever more. That 
motion we have been . . . or has been before the legislature now 
in excess of one month — more than one month. 
 
Isn’t it interesting that a government that is a rural-based 
government, the voice of the farmer, finds that for a month the 
most important and pressing need is to amend a rule regarding 
bell-ringing — a rule that, to my knowledge, has been around . . . 
oppositions have had the right to ring the bells since 1905 when 
Saskatchewan became a province. It now being 1989 . . . what 
are we talking — 84 years? For 84 years we’ve had the right to 
ring the bells. Now in the past month that seems to be the only 
issue of any importance — that of ringing the bells. 
 
What it really is, of course, is a grab of power from the 
opposition. It is an attempt to make opposition virtually 
meaningless. Because from our perspective, from our point of 
view, whether it’s the Conservatives, who are in power now, or 
the New Democrats in the future, or the Liberals or perhaps some 
other completely brand-new party not in existence today, or some 
of the fringe parties that are in existence today — perhaps they 
will muster up enough support to one day become the 
government. 
 
What we are arguing for is that when any government gets so out 
of touch with the people, so out of touch with reality, so far 
removed from daily life that they try and force changes, force 
their will on the people of Saskatchewan, then you need an 
opposition to have whatever powers it can. In this case, of course, 
we’re talking about the power to ring the bells. 
 
It’s not something we take lightly. As I have mentioned earlier, 
it has been used two times in the past little more than seven years 
by New Democrats. Once was a fairly short bell-ringing session 
lasting a couple of days. The government realized that, indeed, 
the opposition of the day was bang on, and they removed the need 
for that bell-ringing episode. 
 
The second one was when we determined that the people of 
Saskatchewan had had ample time to get involved with the sale 
of SaskPower. They’d had ample time to study the matter and 
sign some petitions, get involved with taking the petitions out to 
their neighbours, their friends, strangers — but people in their 
community. We determined that the organization or mobilization 
of Saskatchewan people was great enough, and we were still at 
that time convinced that the government hadn’t so totally lost 
touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
We genuinely thought that the government would give up on its 
privatization gone astray, would have decided that, yes, there are 
more important things. We should get on with estimates; we 
should get on so that we could pass the budget, so that the 
government could pay all of the bills in a very timely manner; we 
wanted to get on with the review of the various government 
departments; we wanted to get on with the review of the Crowns; 
we 

wanted to get on with the review of the auditor’s report. 
 
Indeed, since this bell-ringing matter came to our attention a little 
over a month ago, we have been interrupted for five or six full 
days of debate regarding the Provincial Auditor’s report. That 
necessitated because the member for Kindersley brought some 
scurrilous remarks against an officer of this legislature, and those 
remarks, of course, trying to portray that the Provincial Auditor, 
Willard Lutz, would somehow bargain away some authority or 
some power of the Provincial Auditor, all for the basis of a 
slightly improved pension. 
 
The result of after that week, of course, we realized that to be 
patently untrue. We realized that the Provincial Auditor was 
entitled to his pension. It was just a question of whether that 
money was going to come directly out of the Provincial Auditor’s 
funds, thus meaning he would have to perhaps lay off some staff, 
or whether there would be an appropriation more properly dealt 
with in the legislature. We have been saying that appropriation, 
Mr. Speaker, should be dealt with here, but we have to get off the 
bell-ringing; we have to get on with other business so that we can 
deal with those important matters. 
 
I say we have been trying to get off of this bell-ringing. My 
colleague from Moose Jaw South, who’s only too painfully 
aware that last week he tried to move an adjournment of this 
debate — the purpose of that adjournment was not so that my 
colleague from Moose Jaw South could take a break or could 
catch his wind or anything like that. Indeed he was in the opening 
remarks — he was in the opening remarks — just nicely getting 
warmed up; indeed I think he’d spoken at that stage for less than 
an hour, or somewhere in that neighbourhood, on this 
bell-ringing motion. He tried to move an adjournment though, 
Mr. Speaker, because we wanted the government to have every 
opportunity to move to other pressing business — every 
opportunity. And we have been trying that for some time now. 
 
I refer you to June 9 — and I’m going to quote from Hansard, 
page 1781, where our House Leader, Mr. Lingenfelter, and I 
quote now: 
 

Mr. Speaker, in the . . . spirit of co-operation which we 
obviously have here in the Assembly now, moving off of 
rules to debate an important issue, I want to move a motion, 
seconded by the member from Regina North East, that: 
 

And the motion is: 
 

I move that the next order of business be Bill 41, An Act to 
amend the Agricultural Credit Corporation Act of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And very interestingly, we see the yeas and the nays. There were 
all the yeas, all those wanting to move to Bill 41, An Act to 
amend The Agricultural Credit Corporation Act of 
Saskatchewan. All of the yeas were New Democrats, all on this 
side of the legislature. All of the nays happened to be 
Conservatives. All of the nays included the Premier and many, 
many others. There was 29 nays that day preventing us from 
dealing with what, on this side of the House, we think is a fairly 
important   



 
June 12, 1989 

1801 
 

matter. 
 
We happen to agree that when this Bill No. 41 was brought 
before the Legislative Assembly, granted it took 11 weeks of 
legislature time to get it here, but we think it’s very symbolic that 
that being the very first Bill dealing with agriculture, we should 
be dealing with it now. We shouldn’t be into some democratic 
rights or bell-ringing change. 
 
But you see, Mr. Speaker, if we give up, if we give up our 
democratic right to ring the bells, it is our . . . well we’re firm in 
the knowledge that SaskPower gets brought back to this 
Legislative Assembly and gets rammed through by the majority 
that the government has. That, despite, as my colleague for 
Saskatoon Sutherland pointed out not very many minutes ago, 
pointed out the Premier is on record in the Leader-Post, quoted, 
saying that all Crown corporations, with the exception of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation and SaskTel, could be sold if 
the price is right. 
 
But with the exceptions — we have here the Premier’s very word. 
We also have, at a time after that, we have the Deputy Premier 
stating in this legislature that . . . we asked whether SaskPower 
was being split into the SaskPower, the electrical side, and 
SaskEnergy, the natural gas side, we asked if it was being split to 
be privatized. We have the Deputy Premier’s word in this 
legislature that that was not the case. So we have the two top 
honchos in the government, the two top people promising us that 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower would not be privatized. 
 
Do you wonder why we have such a prolonged harangue over the 
bell-ringing? It is no wonder on this side. We know that if we 
give up the right to ring the bells, SaskPower will be privatized 
without fail. We know that we are then virtually powerless to 
prevent it — virtually powerless to prevent a government that has 
run amok, a government that on that issue has over 70 per cent 
of the people of Saskatchewan opposed to it. 
 
Now of those 70 per cent of Saskatchewan people that are 
opposed to the privatization of SaskPower, I don’t pretend that 
they are all New Democrats — I would love it if they were; it 
would be an amazing piece of politics. But the hard reality is that 
the New Democratic Party and the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) before us never, ever approached a 
70 per cent vote. 
 
Many of those people who are opposed to the privatization of 
SaskPower are opposed because of their good common sense. 
Many of them were around many, many years ago saw that a 
monopoly utility in private hands is nothing further than a licence 
to print money. They understand . . . I can’t for the life of me 
understand, as I’m standing here, how government members can 
be so callous about it. 
 
Many of those people who are opposed to the privatization of 
SaskPower are your own members, or were your own members. 
I suspect you’re going to have a great deal of difficulty renewing 
them when the time comes to renew those memberships. I think 
you have turned your back on a huge portion of the Saskatchewan 
people, and they’re not all going to be willing to forgive 

and forget. 
 
We welcome those people if they want to join us on this issue. If 
they want to join us on all issues, so much the better, but 
particularly on this issue we welcome those people joining our 
ranks. It’s been most heartening to see that taking place. 
 
That’s the support that my leader, the member for Riversdale, the 
Leader of the Opposition has garnered in his travels around the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. People are telling him 
and demanding of him that we not give up SaskPower, and for 
that reason we are not prepared to give up the bell-ringing matter. 
 
The minute we give up bell-ringing, we believe very firmly, we 
know that SaskEnergy, SaskPower, whatever you want to call it, 
is going to come back before the legislature and it will be gone. 
We’re not prepared to accept that. We’re not prepared to accept 
the losing of our right to ring the bells. 
 
So we’ve been on and off, but mostly on, for a month now, 
dealing with this proposed rule change, all for one Bill. And that 
rule change is being proposed simply so that the government can 
ram that SaskPower Bill through. 
 
My constituents, Mr. Speaker, did not elect me to deal just with 
SaskPower. They wanted us to deal with job creation. They 
wanted us to deal with fair taxation. They wanted us to deal with 
equal opportunities for everyone. I suspect your constituents also 
wanted similar things: jobs; fair taxation; opportunities for all; 
fairness; an open government; good services; good health care; 
good education at all levels; environmental protection is 
increasingly becoming a major concern; minimum wage 
increase, which is very much overdue, witness one measly, 
miserly 25 cent increase in the minimum wage . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve allowed a lot of latitude in 
this debate, but the member is bringing specifics into the debate 
that certainly don’t relate to resolution 33(1) or the motion. So 
I’d ask him to make his comments on the motion that’s before 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m trying to point out 
that we are dealing with this motion in the legislature to change 
the rules, at the exclusion of all other important items that any 
government should be dealing with. I mentioned minimum wage 
— perhaps that’s a sore spot. I mentioned it very briefly and in 
passing. I will not persist on talking about that issue. I will be 
referring to this proposed rule change, that being the changes to 
rule 33(1) that is going to virtually eliminate the right of the 
opposition to ring the bells in any meaningful manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ringing of the bells is not something that we take 
lightly on this side. I’ve pointed out that we’ve used it two times 
in over seven years. If we were to indiscriminately ring the bells, 
we would risk the wrath of not only the general public, but all of 
us on this side of the House have a fair political membership, if 
you like, we have members of the New Democratic Party, people 
who pay annual dues, and in return they expect to get their 
MLA’s ear. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

1802 
 

We try very hard to provide that. We try very hard to be 
accessible. But I can assure you that if we were to 
indiscriminately ring the bells on very many issues — and it 
would be a very, very short list that we could ring the bells on — 
if we overstep that bound, not only would we have the public 
annoyed with us but indeed we would have our very own 
members annoyed with us. 
 
So we would not enter into a bell-ringing harangue just for the 
sake of a good scrap. If I wanted that, I suspect I could go to 
almost any bar or, perhaps, dance hall in the province, and I 
suspect I could arrange a good scrap. I know that most of the time 
fights don’t break out, but once you mix a few drinks, there’s 
usually somebody around who’s willing to take you on. 
 
So it’s not just for the sake of a good scrap that we enter into a 
bell-ringing debate, we enter into it on issues of fundamental 
importance to the people. We certainly don’t enter into a 
bell-ringing with any sense of self-aggrandizement, or any of 
that, but we enter it when a government goes too far. 
 
When a government has totally lost touch with the people, then 
we feel we have to bring them back to reality. The reality in 
Saskatchewan is people want SaskPower; they want it retained 
as a Crown corporation. They were promised that by the Premier 
and the Deputy Premier, and we are simply trying to hold them 
to that promise. So that’s what this particular motion is all about, 
dealing with the bell-ringing. 
 
(1545) 
 
I mentioned that it is over a month since this motion was 
introduced. I’ll be even more specific — Thursday, May 11. This 
motion to change the rules was introduced Thursday, May 11. 
It’s now Monday, June 12, more than a month later. Here we are 
stuck on the bell-ringing motion. Here I am, certainly not our first 
speaker, as you can well appreciate. 
 
In that ensuing month we’ve had quite a number of speakers and 
people wanting to address this very, very important issue, and 
I’ve heard from speaker after speaker on our side that we want 
the government to move to other agenda items. We’ve passed . . . 
or we’ve made motions that we deal with important Bills and 
items. 
 
We have called for the estimates repeatedly, including asking 
questions in our valuable question period, question period, Mr. 
Speaker, being the time when the opposition can ask the burning 
questions of the day. It used to be a time when the opposition 
could expect answers; that seems to have largely gone by the way 
of the boards. 
 
But here we are more than a month later dealing with the 
proposed limit to the bell-ringing, the proposal to cut off the 
opposition from speaking in any meaningful way. My colleague 
from Regina Rosemont spoke at some length, and I’m sure you 
appreciate why it took him that degree of time to come from 
nearly a millennium ago up to the current time. He spoke of the 
Long Parliament and many of the traditions that have led to 
bell-ringing being 

allowed in houses of commons and legislatures throughout the 
Commonwealth. 
 
It took my colleague a fair amount of time. I would have thought 
that members opposite would have paid a little bit of attention to 
the history. Because whether we like it or not, the length of any 
government is only short term. Even if it’s a government that 
lasts the 20 years that the CCF Tommy Douglas government 
lasted, 20 years, Mr. Speaker, is short term — short term. 
 
I remind you it was 2,000 . . . if this was 2,000 years earlier, 
Christ could be seated in one of these chairs and taking part in 
this discussion — 2,000 years, and that’s not even a terribly long 
term. I understand that earth has been here for something like 14 
billion years. It’s a big number. It’s hard to imagine. But you can 
put from the time Christ was walking, physically walking on 
earth till today, and you could include that in the 14 billion just 
an astronomical number of times. 
 
So even if a government lasts 20 years — coming back to my 
point — it is still relatively short. If this government lasts for a 
total of eight or nine years, from 1982 to 1990 or 1991, those nine 
years are going to be an incredibly short period of time. It’s short 
even in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
So why would any government want to be so short-sighted as to 
ram through a change in the rules that handcuffs oppositions? 
Why would any government want to do that? particularly when 
you look at this government and the very, very real possibility 
that they will not be the government after the next election, but 
they will be in the opposition. 
 
It seems to me that at that time, many of the — I shouldn’t say 
many — the handful of present government members who are 
re-elected will want to have the ability to ring the bells. If the 
New Democrats who are the government at that time, if we 
overstep our bounds, if we have made a solemn pledge to the 
people of Saskatchewan and we flop and turn against it for 
absolutely no apparent reason, then it seems to me that those 
small number of members would be well served by the right to 
ring the bells to draw attention to what it is that the government 
of the day is doing wrong. 
 
The thought just occurred to me that perhaps they’re not worried 
about that because they know that throughout history that the 
CCF and NDP have never, never made such a fundamental turn, 
have never said they would do one thing and then turned around 
and done the exact opposite. So I guess the bell-ringing would be 
restricted that way. 
 
You can’t ring the bells if you don’t have an issue, and I guess 
the opposition understand that they’re not going to . . . or the 
present government, future opposition, understand that they will 
not have a reason to ring the bells. So it makes very little 
difference if they lose that particular right. 
 
But without the public support we couldn’t begin to be ringing 
the bells for 17 days. Indeed 17 hours is a very, very long time if 
you are uncertain or unsure of public   



 
June 12, 1989 

1803 
 

support. Bell-ringing incidences do stop in a shorter time frame 
than that unless the government has, as they did in this case with 
SaskPower, said one thing and then turned around and done 
precisely the opposite and with no good reason, with nothing to 
change their activities. 
 
In the federal House of Commons, New Democrats were opposed 
to the War Measures Act some years back and indeed voted 
against the implementation or the imposing of the War Measures 
Act on Canadians. At that time you will appreciate that the New 
Democrat MPs were very much out of step with public sentiment. 
People of Canada were very much of the mood that, well, you 
know, there’s a problem in Quebec; let’s get it cleared up; 
Canada has gone to the terrorists; let’s get this problem cleared 
up. 
 
What the federal MPs were doing was trying to point out that you 
don’t put the armed forces in charge of a country. The armed 
forces are there to serve the country, not in any way to quell civil 
disobedience or to quell those problems. That’s what we have the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police for. That’s what we have the 
various police departments . . . like the city of Regina has its own 
police department, the city of Saskatoon has its own, and there 
are a huge number of other police departments around the 
province. Those departments are to deal with those problems. 
 
So we had a situation where the New Democrat MPs of the day 
stood proudly in opposition of the then Liberal government’s 
imposition of the War Measures Act — stood proudly, because 
it was an issue that they believed very firmly in. But they didn’t 
ring the bells over it, because that they knew that public 
sentiment wasn’t with them. But they did everything they could 
within the House of Commons to prevent the War Measures Act 
from being imposed on the people of Canada. I’m quite proud of 
their actions. I’m not particularly saying that I agree or disagree 
with what they were doing and what they were saying, but it takes 
a very, very strong person to stand up day after day, making laws 
for our country, and to stand up and go against the public will, 
knowing firmly in their minds that they were right. 
 
But the issue of that day, Mr. Speaker, was government power 
and abuse of the power, much like what we see going on in China 
today. China is teetering precipitously on the border of . . . I was 
going to say, civil disobedience, but there’s been various reports 
coming, extending from the hundreds of Chinese people who 
have been murdered, to the thousands. I think from where I’m 
standing you can pick a number, any number, and you’d probably 
be more accurate than anything I could guess. 
 
But certainly Chinese people in the hundreds, and I suspect 
thousands, have been murdered by an armed forces that is put in 
charge of the country, so to speak. We are trying to prevent that, 
or prevent any movement in that direction here by opposing this 
rule change. 
 
If we maintain our democratic rights, the people will speak in an 
election. And I guess I can only speak for myself, Mr. Speaker, 
but I suspect it’s a sentiment shared quite widely by members on 
both sides of the legislature — I do not look forward to being 
defeated at the ballot box. I don’t think any of us look forward to 
that. We 

would rather bow out gracefully when the time comes. But it is 
much, much more preferable to be defeated at the ballot box than 
to be defeated at the end of a gun. 
 
We have democratic freedoms here in Canada, here in 
Saskatchewan, that we should be holding dearer to our hearts 
than we do. We tend to take them for granted. We say, oh well, 
Saskatchewan has almost always been that way. But 
Saskatchewan, despite the fact that Saskatchewan has a relatively 
long period of support for democracy, Saskatchewan’s only been 
around for . . . since 1905 — 84 years as a province. 
 
Eighty-four years pales — pales — in comparison to, for 
instance, the Ukrainian Catholic Church which just last year 
celebrated a millennium — a millennium being a thousand years. 
A thousand years. It’s a very powerful organization to this very 
day, and I suspect will continue for another millennium, 
providing we don’t blow up earth or pollute it so badly that it 
becomes uninhabitable. I expect that the Ukrainian Greek 
Orthodox . . . or Ukrainian Catholic Church, I should say, will be 
around another millennium, and will be very much involved with 
people and with their lives. 
 
So our 84 years as a province is just like a drop in a bucket — a 
drop of sand in a bucket would be a more apt description. 
Saskatchewan should be around . . . Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I hope 
Saskatchewan is around for much more than just another 
millennium or just a thousand years. I hope that Saskatchewan 
. . . I hope that 500 years from now, people can look back to 1905 
and say that yes, those men and women of vision and of courage 
did the right thing. 
 
I hope that they can also look back to 1989 and say, yes, by gosh, 
the legislature finally came to its senses. They didn’t fight 
democracy; they, rather, went with it. They voted for the people. 
They voted for the power to the people. They voted against this 
change to rule 33. 
 
That’s what my sincere hope is, Mr. Speaker, because if we 
change these rules and procedures as is being proposed here now, 
this unilateral ramming of the rule change down our throats, it is 
just bad news for democracy. It is horrible news for our province, 
and it’s not something that I want to be able to talk to my children 
and, hopefully, grandchildren if and when they ever come. I don’t 
want to have to tell them that we gave up some of the democracy. 
 
(1600) 
 
So that’s why we are so adamantly opposed — more than a 
month after this motion was introduced, we are as adamantly 
opposed to it today as we were when it first was introduced. 
 
But I just want to reiterate the one thing that I think is key to the 
last few minutes of my talk: that is, even though I don’t ever want 
to be defeated at the ballot box, it is very much preferable that I 
should be beat at the ballot box rather than beat by force, beat by 
a gun, beat by a knife, beat by whatever other forcible means 
there is. I can accept a defeat at the ballot box, and indeed some 
day I may have to. I can accept that a lot more gracefully than I   



 
June 12, 1989 

1804 
 

can accept a . . . well, my murder, to put it as bluntly and as coldly 
as I know how. 
 
So in the month that has gone by we’ve seen various things. I’ve 
talked about my colleague from Regina Rosemont discussing the 
Long Parliament in Great Britain. He talked at some length about 
the year 1215, and he brought us up to date. In fact, at that time, 
one of my colleagues who also teaches school, or taught school 
before he became an MLA, said, you know I teach that at school, 
or I used to teach that. He said: but I never was able to quite bring 
it up to date, quite make it so germane, so relevant to what is 
going on today as our colleague the member for Regina 
Rosemont did. Indeed it was a proud moment in our history as an 
opposition that we were able to do that. 
 
But the other day we see the member for Moose Jaw South, who 
was cut off, moved a motion to adjourn debate. The motion was 
defeated by the government. My colleague, the member for 
Moose Jaw South stood on his feet, a government member was 
recognized, my colleague from Moose Jaw South lost his place. 
 
In dealing with bell-ringing and this motion, we had in Ontario 
in recent days, we had a bell-ringing . . . what’s the word I’m 
looking for . . . a bell-ringing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Incident. 
 
Mr. Trew: — . . . incident, thank you, that lasted for seven sitting 
days. It wound up with a cabinet minister resigning. The 
opposition was correct, I would venture to say, in the reasons it 
went out. If it was not correct, there would be no reason for a 
cabinet minister to resign. 
 
There were two issues that were a part of that. In this case it was 
the Ontario Solicitor General, Joan Smith, who has resigned. She 
resigned because the opposition objected to her taking a personal 
interest, in the wee hours of the morning . . . I can’t scan it fast 
enough, but in the wee hours of the morning she went down to a 
police station to inquire after a family friend. And the opposition 
is saying that as the Solicitor General, and being in charge of the 
police, she should not have been doing that. And of course the 
other matter was that of a drowning that took place in the 
Premier’s swimming pool. So at the end of the day that cabinet 
minister resigned rather than face the music, rather than have a 
public inquiry. 
 
But seven sitting days the bells rang in Ontario. So, as the 
government would have us believe, we are one of the last 
bastions of bell-ringing. If that’s so, if that is accurate, that we 
are one of the last bastions of bell-ringing, then we should be 
proud of it. Because you look at Saskatchewan history, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have not rang the bells, throughout history, not 
for any length of time. Certainly the 17 days that we’ve witnessed 
recently is the longest bell-ringing, not only in Saskatchewan 
history but in Canadian history. 
 
But is that a reason for the government to shoot the messenger, 
in this case the opposition? I think not. I submit to you, sir, that 
that longest bell-ringing in Canadian parliamentary history 
should be reason for the government to sit up and take notice. 
Why is it that an 

opposition could ring the bells for 17 days and then move from a 
position where we were favoured by a majority of the 
Saskatchewan electorate into a position of near certainly forming 
the government. Our political strength, that is the number of 
people who feel closest aligned to the opposition, rose 
dramatically in those 17 days. The government should not be so 
much wanting to change the rule as they should be sitting up and 
taking notice. They should be just withdrawing their privatization 
plans. The people have spoken. The people have spoken and will 
continue to speak. There is, as I understand it, 92,000 . . . 
somewhere in that order, of names . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like leave to 
introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce through you, and 
to the Assembly, a group of 11 students and their teacher and a 
chaperon from Stony Rapids. They are accompanied by their 
chaperon Lynda MacDonald, and Don Harding is the teacher and 
also the principal up in Stony Rapids. 
 
Stony Rapids, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a small community just 
south of the Northwest Territories at the very east end of Lake 
Athabasca and right beside the famous Stony Rapids. This group 
of students had to fly from Stony Rapids to Saskatoon. They are 
now in Saskatchewan touring all the major cities and other 
points, and I would ask all members today to give the students 
and the teacher and the chaperon a warm welcome to Regina. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly continued 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
get into what the government’s proposing in the rule change, and 
I want to get into what the motives are for what is, I think, the 
most important issue in this debate. I think the motive is very 
worthy of some fairly close examination, and I say that because 
it says a great deal about the arrogance of the government 
members opposite, a great deal about the arrogance. The rule 
change is simply a means of assuring that SaskPower and any 
other unpopular privatization can go ahead. 
 
When you take from an opposition one of its tools, in this case 
the tool to be able to ring the bells and muster up whatever public 
support we can, when you take that away, our whole system 
loses, and the government loses too. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

1805 
 

The government loses, and here’s how you lose. No opposition 
would ring the bells for any length of time without public 
support. If an opposition can garner the public support in that 
bell-ringing incident, the government is better served by paying 
attention to that message than it is by shooting the messenger. A 
government that is at the mid-portion of its term, by paying 
attention to what the message is, they can adjust. 
 
They can say, yes indeed, as the government did in the 1982-86 
term when it introduced the 5 per cent E&H tax on used vehicles. 
You recall that the government lost the by-election in Regina 
North East massively, and it responded. The very next day the 
Premier had a news conference and he said, well, the people have 
spoken, and they have rightly spoken. We’ve made some 
mistakes. We think in the main we’re doing the right things, but 
clearly we’ve made some mistakes; we’ve alienated some 
people. We lost a seat we had previously held; we lost it 
massively. Obviously the people are concerned. 
 
The Premier heard the message. The very next day, gone was the 
E&H tax on used vehicles. 
 
There was another matter that he changed then, and I’m not 
trying to simply not give the government good press; I simply . . . 
it simply escapes me what that other change was at the moment. 
 
But there was two things changed, and the government said, 
we’re going to try and listen to the people. We’re going to try and 
respond in a more open fashion. And now we see, not the 1985 
by-election, now we see some four years later, the year being 
1989, a government mid-term, midway through its second 
mandate, a government given a message in the most clear and 
unequivocal terms of any message that any government in the 
history of Saskatchewan has ever received, and they choose to 
ignore it. And that’s a shame. 
 
This present government, led by the member for Estevan, is 
going to go down, not in a blaze of glory, but it is going to go 
down because it chose to ignore the message, and worse yet, 
chose to shoot the messenger. 
 
To change this bell-ringing motion, Mr. Speaker, is going to be 
telling the nearly 100,000 people who have signed the petition 
opposing the sale of SaskPower that your opinion does not 
matter. It’s going to be saying to the countless other people who 
have not had the opportunity to sign that petition: your opinion 
does not matter. 
 
And I guess if you take very, very consistent public opinion polls 
that show opposition to the privatization of SaskPower running 
in excess of 70 per cent, the government is saying to seven out of 
10 Saskatchewan people, we don’t care what you say; we know 
what’s best; we’re going to go ahead with it; we’re going to 
change this rule; we’re going to limit the opposition’s right to 
ring the bells; and we’re going to ram SaskPower privatization 
down your throats — like it or lump it. 
 
And the government is not going to be well served because those 
seven out of 10 Saskatchewan people, 

those women and men throughout Saskatchewan are going to 
know that they have run into a brick wall. They are going to know 
they have run into an arrogant government that is determined that 
it knows best, the people be hanged. And that’s what we’re 
witnessing today. 
 
In the opposition we are trying to help the process — not the 
process of hanging the government. The government, as I pointed 
out, can still respond to this. They can still grab a hold of the 
agenda. Very clearly they can, and they should. They were 
elected to govern, but they were elected with some very specific 
promises. 
 
(1615) 
 
I want to refer to some promises taken out of Pocket Politics, 
which I’m sure you are quite familiar with. On page 14 of this 
Pocket Politics it talks about the dismantling of Crown 
corporations. And I’m going to quote from it. It says: 
 

 Question: Is it true the Conservatives plan to dismantle the 
Crown corporations? 
 
Answer: Absolutely not. That’s a scare tactic the NDP is 
using. A PC government will revitalize and improve the 
Crown corporations of the province of Saskatchewan in 
such a manner as to provide the best possible service at the 
most reasonable cost to the public. 
 
There were some suggestions from the Premier that Tory 
sympathizers were somehow anxiously waiting in the wings 
to swoop down and peck away at the entrails of dismantled 
Crown corporations following a Conservative win. 
 
A few points are worthy of clarification in this regard. The 
first is that the Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative 
Party has not suggested dismantling Sask Power 
Corporation, nor for that matter have the PCs suggested the 
same for any other natural monopoly where the obvious 
advantages of scale and the confusion of added costs of 
competition dictate against duplication or government 
divestiture. 
 

Well what a mouthful, coming out of Pocket Politics, the version 
coming prior to 1982, talking clearly about Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And as I’ve pointed out, that is clearly 
why we are on this bell-ringing motion. We lose the bells, we 
lose SaskPower. 
 
And I don’t know how in the world any reasonable-minded 
individual could for two seconds believe that we are using scare 
tactics when we quote from Conservative literature, pre-1982, 
repeated again with variations prior to and during the 1986 
election campaign, and repeated by the Premier in the January 
1988 Leader-Post; repeated by the Deputy Premier here in this 
legislature in May 1988: SaskPower’s not for sale. How can we 
believe anything put forward by the government when they 
campaigned saying one thing and then turn around and introduce 
privatization . . . 
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

1806 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has information 
to give to the House about SaskPower, but I think he’s spent 
considerable time at it, and it’s not really directly related to the 
motion — maybe indirectly — however, you have certainly made 
that point. And I’d ask you now to move on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That is probably a very 
good ruling. As you can appreciate, I would like to have a little 
more latitude than what perhaps you in your capacity are willing 
to allow, but I recognize the ruling of the Chair and will 
endeavour to keep within those bounds. 
 
So here we are dealing with the proposed changes to rule 33 
dealing with the bell-ringing. Mr. Speaker, it is obvious, in light 
of the remarkable events that have taken place recently, that the 
government needs the rule change. Because without the rule 
change, without limiting our ability to ring the bells when a 
government has gone too far, without this proposed rule change 
proposed by the member for Kindersley, SaskPower is gone. As 
we know it today, SaskPower is gone, despite the promises. 
That’s why more than a month after this proposed rule change 
was introduced, that’s why we’re standing firmly opposed to the 
changes. We are not willing to see democracy that poorly served. 
 
We think that any opposition that rings the bells for no reason 
whatever is going to lose public support and as . . . I recognize 
you’re not wanting to be drawn into the debate, Mr. Speaker, but 
as all MLAs understand — government MLAs and opposition 
MLAs — we must curry public favour. And that’s very important 
that we not lose this bell-ringing motion — we lose the bells, we 
lose SaskPower. 
 
But if we do not have the support of the public in any 
bell-ringing, we couldn’t go out. We couldn’t sustain a 
bell-ringing for a couple of days, much less a couple of weeks, 
or 17 days, as was the case in the most recent bell-ringing 
incident. And any government that ignores the message of the 
people does so at its own risk. 
 
I want to refer to some of the things that have been said regarding 
transportation. The reason that I want to relay this, Mr. Speaker, 
is I want to tie in a bit of transportation to the importance of the 
bell-ringing where we have a promise from the government now 
that, well, let’s just give us this bell-ringing and we’re going to 
provide you with a good government. We’ll do the things that we 
promised you we would do. We’ll do the things that the people 
of the province want. 
 
But it directly relates to some promises that the Conservative 
Party has made during elections and subsequently. The reason 
that I say it directly relates is the promises that we are hearing 
regarding this bell-ringing motion, sir, are: give us the 
bell-ringing and we will see that this Legislative Assembly works 
and works to the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan; that give 
us the bell-ringing motion and we’ll make this place wonderful. 
We’ll make everything well again. 
 

But that’s not been the case study. You needn’t be a genius to be 
able to go through the various promises that have been made and 
broken repeatedly for over seven years now. We’ve dealt with 
the promise not to privatize SaskPower being broken. 
 
With regards to transportation, and I again quote from Pocket 
Politics: 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party believes that it is 
urgently necessary that a transportation policy 
encompassing all modes of travel in Saskatchewan be 
developed and co-ordinated. 
 

This is not very long, Mr. Speaker, so if you’ll bear with me. 
 

The major distances between various areas of the province 
and the relatively low density population of Saskatchewan 
make an efficient transportation system imperative (very 
laudable). A Progressive Conservative government will 
(two things): 
 

(1) promote a regional transportation policy which will be 
designed by the four provincial governments of western 
Canada for the benefit of western Canadians; 
 
(2) allow purple gas to be used in all farm trucks. 

 
And yet we see virtually nothing being done in the areas of 
transportation. We no longer have purple gas. We have everyone 
in the province paying the gas tax and then applying subsequently 
for a rebate for those gas bills that you have. We see nothing done 
by way of a regional co-ordination of transportation; certainly 
nothing between the four western provinces. 
 
So the two bench-marks of a Progressive Conservative election 
campaign regarding transportation were nothing but smoke and 
mirrors. Nothing happened. And it’s just so difficult to 
understand why we would accept this proposed rule change 
limiting the right, our right, to ring bells after we see example 
after example after example of Tory promises gone astray, 
forgotten. 
 
We see a government dealing with whatever it wants to on a 
given day. We see a government that now, for in excess of a 
month, has told us that this proposed motion to change the rules 
is the most important agenda item, the most important issue 
facing Saskatchewan people today. And I ask the government 
members opposite to move on to other agenda items. 
 
And I’ll ask this fairly, I think, fairly simple question: what have 
you got to lose by simply, the next time we meet, instead of 
dealing with this rule to change the bell-ringing motion, why not 
try, bring forward some estimates or bring forward a Bill? Bring 
forward Bill 41, which is an Act to amend The Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Act. 
 
I suspect there are things in that Act that I disapprove of. Maybe 
there isn’t. I don’t know. But I can give a fairly reasonable 
assurance that I won’t be in any way   



 
June 12, 1989 

1807 
 

obstructing that Bill. I may have some questions to ask about it. 
Indeed I have friends and relatives throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, have a great many people that would expect us to 
take a great deal of interest in that Bill. But why not just bring it 
forward? 
 
The government says: until we get this rule change through, we 
can’t trust the opposition. We are uncertain that they’re going . . . 
The government is saying: we are unsure that if we move to other 
legislative agenda items, we’re uncertain that the NDP won’t 
walk out again. Well, I mean they were uncertain of that for 84 
years. So we used it one time — one time in 84 years — and as 
soon as we use our democratic right to ring the bells, the 
government wants to eliminate that right. And I just can’t, for the 
life of me, understand the logic to that. 
 
If I have a friend who has stuck by me . . . indeed I have such a 
friend, who is my very best friend, sticks by me through thick 
and thin, believes in me, doesn’t . . . I’m sure that Gary doesn’t 
agree with everything I do, I’m sure of that, but we have a trust 
relationship. I know that he is a good person; he knows I’m a 
good person, and we will support one another to the best of our 
ability. But if the whole world suddenly were to turn against me, 
it wouldn’t quite be the whole world, my family, I suspect most 
of them would still be with me, and certainly Gary would be. 
 
But if on one given issue I did something that hurt Gary, I don’t 
think he would turn against me or suddenly not trust me. 
Certainly it may take a little while for us to build that trust up 
again, but our friendship is firm enough and solid enough that 
I’m sure that we could work through those difficult times, as I’m 
sure that the government and the opposition can work through 
the difficult times that we’re having right now. 
 
I am convinced in my own mind that if the government would 
simply bring forward any other agenda item, other than the 
bell-ringing, other than SaskPower, other than the potash 
privatization, that we could deal fairly straightforwardly with the 
legislation. Not that the opposition would lay down and play 
dead. We would have questions, but the progress in the 
legislature would be marked and you would see it. And every day 
we would advance and do the work that we were elected . . . or 
do some of the work that we were elected to do. 
 
(1630) 
 
The reason I changed from do the work to do some of the work 
is, as all members are very much aware of, we’re not paid simply 
to be in the legislature when the session is on. There is much, 
much more to being an MLA in Saskatchewan today than that. 
 
So I thank you for allowing me that tie-in with transportation, 
Mr. Speaker. I very much am opposed to this motion that is going 
to be limiting our right to ring the bells. And I’m opposed 
because of the promises that are being made now, you know, give 
us the bell-ringing. The government says, give us the bell-ringing 
and we will make Saskatchewan work, we will make the 
legislature work. All this brought to us by the people who 
privatized highways equipment, selling off $40 million worth of 

highways equipment for less than 6 million, and privatized the 
coal-mine at Coronach, and many other things. 
 
And they’re telling us now, trust us on this motion. These are the 
people who sold the Prince Albert Pulp Company to 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington — gave it away, no 
money down, despite promises of much good things coming. The 
good things didn’t come. 
 
These are the people that sold off, despite promising not to sell 
SaskTel, they’ve sold the cable division of SaskTel, they’ve sold 
the directories of SaskTel, they’ve sold the computer operations 
of SaskTel. What’s next? 
 
This is not something that is being sold, but operator services 
right here in Regina, within 14 months we are going to have 133 
fewer employees in SaskTel, because they’re shutting down 
Regina’s directory assistance and operator services division — 
133 jobs gone. Those examples at a time when the government 
is promising us they’re not going to privatize SaskTel. How can 
we believe them? I’ve listed three portions of SaskTel that have 
been privatized. The way the government goes about piecing off 
SaskTel, they may in fact . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is bringing forth 
issues that, if one was to even rule that they are relevant, they 
would be extremely on the edge of relevancy. I think that the hon. 
member should speak to the motion in a more direct fashion. A 
wide-ranging discussion of government policies and programs 
really, as I’m sure you realize, isn’t really on the motion. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So we’ve got a rule change, Mr. Speaker, that is 
designed to allow the government to ram down the throats of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and indeed of the opposition, literally 
any legislation they want — any legislation they want. 
 
I hear what your ruling is regarding the relevancy. I will once 
again endeavour to stay within the bounds of the rule 33 change. 
But I think that all areas are indeed relevant. I’m not saying this 
by way of particularly arguing your ruling, Mr. Speaker, but 
because of the far-reaching effects of this rule change, literally 
all legislation in Saskatchewan is going to be affected by this 
proposed rule change. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve listened to the member’s 
remarks and yes, what he’s saying is potentially correct. 
However, the discussion of each of these pieces of legislation is 
not relevant. That’s the point I’m trying to make. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes, I understood the . . . or let me check and make 
sure I understand, Mr. Speaker, because it is not my wish to 
challenge your rulings; it is rather my wish to participate as fully 
as I can in this debate. 
 
You are saying, sir, that I may use very short examples if they tie 
in to the bell-ringing change, but that I cannot go off in a tangent 
regarding, for instance, Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
or SaskTel, but only as they relate to this proposed rule change. 
Is that . . . 
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

1808 
 

The Speaker: — Well that’s close. That’s true. The hon. member 
is close, I believe. It’s a good question. 
 
I believe what I’m trying to put across to the hon. member . . . 
For example, I’m trying to find something in the blues that we 
can both refer to. If we just look at adjourned debates, for 
example, there are a good number of adjourned debates that one 
might say is in some way relevant, as an example. 
 
But the discussion of adjourned debates themselves certainly 
wouldn’t be relevant and here’s your problem. I believe that you 
raise an issue and then you want to discuss it, and if the 
discussion of that issue . . . it isn’t relevant, you know, in most 
cases. I’m not saying in every case. It depends how you put it. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The action taken, Mr. 
Speaker, by this government in this unilateral rule change is 
unprecedented in this legislature, and the government knows it. 
The Minister of Justice has publicly admitted that this is the first 
time he is aware of the rules committee being passed by. And 
despite the fact that this is the first time that any of us are aware 
of in Saskatchewan history that the rules committee has been 
passed by, the Justice minister makes no apologies for it — no 
apologies whatsoever. 
 
That’s why we are on our feet debating. This matter should have 
been referred to the rules committee. Indeed, in the very early 
stages it looked like we had agreement to do that. From our side 
we had some agreement to try and negotiate on the matter, set up 
a rules committee to deal with this and a number of other items 
dealing with how the legislature operates. 
 
My colleague, the member for Saskatoon Eastview, has outlined, 
I believe there was six proposed rule changes that he has been 
putting a huge amount of thought to, to try and make this 
legislature work more effectively for all — for the government 
and for the opposition. And despite those proposals that we have 
made, we saw that rules committee go by the boards. Instead we 
see us being reduced to debating here in the legislature. 
 
When my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland was 
finished, I gave every opportunity for government members to 
speak. And indeed if one of the government members who are so 
busy speaking right now would have been speaking then, perhaps 
I wouldn’t be on my feet at this particular moment. We would be 
listening to a government member. 
 
When we returned to the House, Mr. Speaker, after the 
bell-ringing, the Premier stated publicly that the government 
would talk to the New Democrats about a possible change in the 
bell-ringing rules. The Premier’s initial reaction was the correct 
one, in terms of parliamentary tradition in this legislature. So he 
was certainly within his bounds to be saying that — totally within 
his bounds. Nothing unreasonable about that. Whatever I may 
think of the change to the rule itself, the Premier had every right 
to say that, and obviously he did. And we take no quarrel with 
that. 
 
But later the same day, the government served notice that 

it was introducing the rule change without consulting the 
opposition — unilaterally introducing a rule change. That we 
take objection to. That is unprecedented in Saskatchewan 
parliamentary history and we take our precedent from other 
parliamentary jurisdictions. Saskatchewan having only been 
around as a province since 1905, the tradition, as I pointed out, 
only goes back 84 years. So we reach back into Canadian, both 
in the House of Commons and other provinces, as well as British 
parliamentary history for the precedent. 
 
But I don’t think there is a precedent for a government to 
unilaterally change the rules, as is the case here now where the 
government says, this is what we’re going to do — tough. Like 
it, lump it, whatever you want to do, but this is the way it’s going 
to be; this is the way it’s going to be. That’s what they’re saying 
to us, and that’s not acceptable. That’s why we’re fighting. 
 
Throughout Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly history, Mr. 
Speaker, there have been many consultations, not only many, but 
much consultation, substantive as well as quantitative 
consultation on rule changes, and it’s taken place with a 
mechanism that has all-party committees that are approved and 
given a mandate by all members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The rule changes have happened with consensus and without 
division. Indeed, it is common for a government MLA to move a 
rule change once the rules committee has agreed, and for a 
member of the government . . . of the opposition, rather, to 
second it. 
 
And if there . . . as in the case when there were three parties in 
the legislature, the third party would have someone speak in 
favour of that rule change, or speak to the rule change that . . . I 
recognize not always would everybody be jumping for joy when 
there’s a rule change, but always we’ve had agreements in the 
past from all parties that this is the most workable solution. It’s 
the most obvious way to keep the proceedings in the legislature 
happening, to keep things rolling along. 
 
So this government has now proposed a single rule change which 
came about because of its difficulties after the 17-day 
bell-ringing, after its difficulties regarding privatization. So 
we’re saying it’s somewhat cynical, certainly undemocratic; it’s 
without precedent that the rules would be unilaterally changed in 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So we’ve got a government that changes, flies in the face of 
tradition, both in Saskatchewan, throughout Canada, throughout 
the British Commonwealth — flies in the face of that tradition. 
And why? Why would a government be so underhanded? Simply 
because they got into such a jackpot with the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now they’re looking for anything to deflect 
interest away from SaskPower. 
 
I think they’ve chosen the wrong issue to deflect the attention to 
the rules change because the two are so intertwined — lose the 
rules, we lose SaskPower. We can’t accept that. If we were to lay 
down and accept this unilateral rule change imposed upon us, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be as much as us admitting that our 17-day   



 
June 12, 1989 

1809 
 

walk-out was for nothing other than political grandstanding, and 
I can assure you, sir, that was not what we were about to do. 
 
(1645) 
 
Some other things that the government has done regarding their 
undemocratic ways are trying to privatize many of the Crowns. 
Many of them have been privatized to varying extents, and we’re 
not prepared to see it go on indiscriminately. 
 
People are telling me that we should be opposing this rule 
change. People are telling me that we should be opposing the 
ongoing privatization plans of a government that has gone too 
far. And they’re demanding — not just telling me to stand up and 
speak out — they’re demanding that we do so. And that’s why, 
on this side of the legislature, we’re reduced to fighting to see 
who gets to speak next, to fight to see who gets to speak next — 
not a fight to see who gets to speak, but who gets to speak next. 
And I know that there’s a number of my colleagues that are 
working on their speeches at this very moment, and I can assure 
you that some of those speeches will be very, very good. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, that the government has introduced 
changes, re-working The Electoral Boundaries (Commission) 
Act. We see that Morse, there’s going to be 7,757 voters, 
compared to 11,734 in Humboldt. We think it’s very much unfair 
that there would be a 50 per cent discrepancy. And I take 50 per 
cent of 7,757 and you come up with 3,878. So you add 50 per 
cent to Morse and it still comes up with 11,635 voters, which is 
short of the proposal that Humboldt have 11,734 electors. 
 
This at a time when we’ve even gone so far as to change the 
discrepancy from one constituency to another. It used to be 10 
per cent; now they’re proposing 25 per cent. Even with that 
additional, this still doesn’t fall within the bounds because it’s 
not a 25 per cent discrepancy; it’s rather a 50 per cent discrepancy 
from a Tory seat with the lowest number to a New Democrat seat 
with the highest number. And we’re hard-pressed to agree to a 
change in the rules limiting our bell-ringing rights when we see 
other undemocratic actions taken and forced upon us by the 
government. 
 
I have used the example of Morse and Humboldt. I now want to 
point out that Morse is proposed to have 7,757 voters and 
Saskatoon Greystone is proposed to have 12,567 voters. The 
member for Weyburn made some comment about Roy’s radicals. 
I guess I’m pretty radical. I guess I’m pretty radical. I always 
thought it was a matter of talking common sense. But this 
discrepancy between a rural constituency of Morse and an urban 
seat of Saskatoon Greystone is unacceptable. And I wonder, do 
we get less valuable as we move to the city from the farm? Do 
we lose our sense of fairness or our understanding of rural 
concerns? 
 
My grandfather who farmed for a huge number of years, did he 
suddenly lose all his common sense, all his knowledge, just 
because he moved to the city? I think not. I don’t think my 
parents lost any of their values when they moved to the city; 
when the farm was sold and they moved to the city, I don’t think 
they lost it. I very much 

appreciate the values that I learned growing up in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see rule changes being forced upon us. We see a situation 
where we will no longer be able to ring the bells on important 
issues. And why that is important as it relates to the electoral 
boundaries is we see an electoral boundaries Act that has been 
changed, much to the detriment, I would argue, of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We see electoral boundary changes proposed by 
the government that are anti-democratic. That’s one example. We 
see the other example . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to stay on track on this very important motion, 
not to be detracted by the member from Weyburn or from Regina 
Wascana or from Rosthern for that matter, but to stick with this 
issue before us, which is the issue of bell-ringing. 
 
And it’s the issue of the democracy as we have come to 
understand it here in Saskatchewan. And I’m using now the 
example of the changes in The Electoral Boundaries Act which 
are detracting from the democracy in Saskatchewan, as is this 
proposal to change the bell-ringing rule, because no longer would 
we have the right under this rule change to ring the bells. Now 
with the right, Mr. Speaker, comes a certain amount of 
responsibility too. I’m sure you’re aware of that. There is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could you answer that one question . . . 
 
Mr. Trew: — I can’t recall the member for Weyburn having 
spoken on this issue. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Never from his feet. 
 
Mr. Trew: — . . . (inaudible) . . . from his seat. And I very much 
look forward to the time when I sit down, and hopefully the 
member for Weyburn will care to share some of his jewels of 
wisdom, pearls of wisdom with us. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So we have the proposal to restrict our right to ring 
the bells. Then we have the proposal to change the legislation 
regarding the electoral system; then we have the ward system 
having been changed. Despite the fact that the huge majority of 
people in the cities favour retention of the ward system, we went 
away from the ward system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you feel about the store hours? 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Regina Wascana asks how I feel 
about store hours. Mr. Speaker, I suspect you will rule me out of 
order if I were to tell him because it’s not really germane to this. 
But I will say something that is germane to this particular motion, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is, if the member for Regina Wascana 
would get his colleagues in the government to move from this 
issue we could be   



 
June 12, 1989 

1810 
 

dealing with urban issues, or we could be dealing with rural 
issues, or we could be dealing with estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Just every day the government gets to bring the 
agenda items forward. At the start of every day, Mr. Speaker, we 
hear item number one, and they’ll read what it is. And we hear 
government members say, stand, which means pass over it for 
the day — stand. Then they go to the next item, and it is read by 
the Clerk, and the government members say, stand. So we pass 
over that. Then you go to the next agenda item and the same story 
is repeated until you hit agenda item number 14, on the proposed 
motion of the member for Kindersley: 
 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended by adding the following . . . 
 

And then it’s the rule change that we’re debating. Item number 
14, every day, every day the government is sending clear 
messages that this is the most important agenda item. It is not. It 
is absolutely not the most important agenda item. 
 
We welcome the opportunity to deal with many, almost any of 
the other legislative agenda items. We would welcome the 
opportunity to deal with estimates. We also recognize that very 
shortly, I think, the government is going to have to move off of 
this and onto an interim supply Bill yet again, and simply because 
of an unwillingness on the part of the government to just try 
moving to something else. 
 
If we were to ring the bells again, and particularly if we were to 
ring the bells on an issue that was less important, we would lose 
the support that we have gained in recent weeks and months. We 
would lose that support. And I can assure the government 
members that we are not at all interested in giving up any of the 
support that we have gained in recent weeks and months just for 
the sake of frivolously ringing the bells on some less . . . some 
issue of lesser importance. 
 
So the government’s really got nothing to lose if they were to 
move, as we proposed Friday — indeed, we proposed it in a 
motion — if they were to move to Bill No. 41 — An Act to 
amend the Agricultural Credit Corporation, or any of the other 
37 Bills that there are on the order paper — 37 Bills on the order 
paper — 37 Bills to choose from, and yet we get no movement 
whatever on the part of the government. And that’s a shame. 
 
I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that as the government maintains, 
they are the party that represents rural Saskatchewan. I can’t 
believe that the number one issue on the minds of farmers and 
their families throughout Saskatchewan — the number one issue, 
bar none — is to change the rules in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well it is. You go into any coffee shop — 
that’s all they talk about. That’s what they want. 
 
Mr. Trew: — One of my colleagues says, if you go into any 
coffee shop, that’s all they talk about. Of course he says it in jest, 
and you of course would know it. 
 

What we do here is seemingly more and more and more 
irrelevant because we spent over a month dealing with the 
number one issue in the province, that of changing the 
bell-ringing motion. Isn’t that absurd? Alice-in-Wonderland was 
never, never as insane as this place has become. 
Alice-in-Wonderland is a fairly decent piece of literature. It’s 
kind of interesting to read. But what’s going on here is not very 
interesting to read unless you’re a direct participant. 
 
We would like to make the legislature relevant again to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We want this place to work. Because 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of the House in 
a few — I don’t know — months or years will be the government, 
and we want this place to work. We want to be able to turn 
Saskatchewan right side up again. We want to be able to put 
people of this province to work; we want to be able to virtually 
eliminate hospital waiting lists; we want to improve our 
highways; we want to improve our education system; we want to 
provide jobs for people; we want fair taxation for everyone, not 
just ad hoc programs, a touch here and a touch there and a touch 
somewhere else. We want to put Saskatchewan on its feet — the 
three engines of growth: the public sector, the private sector, and 
the co-operative sector working in harmony together to make this 
province as great as it truly can be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — So we need this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands adjourned 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

1811 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 1724 of the Hansard No. 53A Thursday, June 8, 1989, 
2 p.m., almost half way down the left-hand column the quote: 
 

Legislation will be introduced to allow a tax on 
environmentally unsafe projects. 

 
should read  
 

Legislation will be introduced to allow a tax on 
environmentally unsafe products. 

 
We apologize for the error. 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 
 
 


