





























































Hansard: July 18, 1989


July 18, 1989 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure, on behalf of the Regina North 
Rotary Club to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, a group of 13 
young visitors who are visiting Regina. These students come from various countries throughout 
the world: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Finland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Norway, Spain, 
Sweden, and Turkey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young people are in our city at the District 555 Rotary International Youth 
Forum. Rotary clubs, as you know, are very keen on sponsoring international good will and 
understanding, and it is through forums such as these that they hope that the young people will 
learn about other countries, about other people, other cultures, and other ways of life. 
 
These young people are looked upon as being ambassadors of their own countries and will grow 
up to be leaders of tomorrow. I would welcome you to our fair city and ask you to rise and be 
recognized. I hope you have a very good stay in Saskatchewan and go home with fond memories 
and new friendships, and maybe take home with you a little bit of good western hospitality. I 
would ask all member to recognize these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join the member from Maple Creek in 
extending greetings to the international students who are here under the auspices of the Rotary 
Club. I too have had some association with the Rotary Club, not as a member but as one who has 
recommended students for exchange programs, and I know the good work that they do in 
promoting understanding throughout the world among people of different nations. And I want to 
commend them for that work that they do, and join the member again in extending greetings on 
behalf of the opposition to the students who are here with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce through you, and to 
the House today, three guests that are in your gallery. They are my sister, Wanda Upshall, and my 
niece Kathy Upshall, and a friend, Rhonda Adie. Kathy and Rhonda are down looking for a place 
to stay was they will be attending university here in the fall. 
 
I would ask all members to give them a warm welcome. 



 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and through 
you to the members of this Assembly, two out-of-province guests seated in your gallery. One is 
Christina Massie, a consultant from Ottawa. She has been very active in promoting 
Saskatchewan agriculture products. Sitting beside her is Roy Wunderlich who has got the wile 
organic food from Kelowna, B.C. I would like to ask the members to please show them our 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Barber Commission on SaskEnergy Privatization 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Deputy Premier and the member 
responsible for the SaskPower Corporation, I'll direct my question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it 
concerns further proof, if any is necessary, that your so-called Barber Commission is little more 
than a diversion, little more than a whitewash. And I want to say that we now believe and know 
that you are paying no attention to the people of the province as a result of what has happened 
today. 
 
And considering that I have here now the SaskEnergy prospectus which was filed today, can you 
tell us why you are going ahead with the Barber Commission in light of the fact that you have 
every intention now, as a result of tabling and filing this prospectus, why are you continuing on 
down the path of trying to delay and to buffalo the people of the province, and give an indication 
that you're not going to privatize when every indication is the plan to ram ahead with the project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, as . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I think, as the back-up minister for SPC that it would be appropriate that I 
answer, and I know the paranoia of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, would cause them to 
read all sorts of things. But I think that there's been enough distortion and falsehoods about 
what's happening with SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, that I would have thought that it would have 
stopped with the announcement of the Barber Commission. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the Barber Commission did ask for the prospectus. It was at their request, 
Mr. Speaker, so that they would have before them, and I think properly so, the plans of 
SaskEnergy -- if and when the legislature passes the appropriate legislation, Mr. Speaker. It was 
at the request of the Barber Commission, and SaskEnergy has made it abundantly clear that there 



will be no privatization of SaskEnergy until such time as this legislature approves that, Mr. 
Speaker. One should read nothing more into it than that, although I expect that not to be the case 
with the official opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that you will choose to submit the 
prospectus when it's good politics for you. That's what you're telling the people of the province. I 
want to say to you and ask to you, why it wasn't appropriate to table and file the prospectus when 
the Securities Commission asked you to, more than a month ago. 
 
Why now, after the people have prepared their briefs for the Barber Commission, after that is all 
completed and the July 14 deadline has now passed, why do you choose now to file the 
prospectus if it's in the best interest to the people of Saskatchewan coming to the hearings? Why 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP did not want to see details of the legislation. The NDP 
did not even want to follow the constitutional process of free speech and free debate in this 
Assembly on SaskEnergy. For them to stand up today and say that there's some injustice or 
something wrong, is, as I have said, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy that is now becoming . . . made 
much more aware to the people of this province, and they have, of course, and I think, delivering 
that message to the opposition. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I'm advised, as I said at the outset, that it was the Barber 
Commission. And I know that the hon. members attack the Barber Commission, saying he isn't 
fit to run a university. But, Mr. Speaker, that's not how the public feel about it, and I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that SPC is merely responding, or SaskEnergy is responding to the legitimate request of 
the Barber Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to credibility, this is the man who made 
the $800 million mistake in his budget before the last election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want the people to remember that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister. You have apparently realized now that you're not going 
to gain public support for the privatization of SaskPower. With the tabling of the prospectus, you 
have admitted that. 
 
Will you also admit now that you're going ahead with your plans anyway, and will you cancel the 



Barber Commission? Will you cancel the Barber Commission and save $1,100 a day in per 
diems plus expenses. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, they can talk about not being accurate on a budget. Let's 
remember the documents that have been tabled in this place which shows that the NDP when 
they were out $3 billion on their financial estimates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, let's look at the questions that the hon. member has asked, 
because he prefaced his first question today by saying, it's good politics for you to do it now. And 
now he says it's bad politics, Mr. Speaker. So what I am suggesting to the hon. member, that we 
are responding to a request for SaskEnergy as responding to the request of the Barber 
Commission. 
 
Now the other thing that is happening, Mr. Speaker, as the NDP have suddenly begun to find out, 
is that the lies that they spread about SaskPower that he just referred . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I would respectfully ask the Minister of Finance to withdraw the 
unparliamentary remark he has just made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I withdraw that remark and substitute for the record "falsehoods," Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. The member for Moose Jaw North, the member for Regina 
Wascana. I would like to ask the hon. member to withdraw his remark in the customary manner. I 
know the hon. member is well aware of that, and I'm sure he will do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will withdraw both phrases and say "gross 
distortions of the truth." 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. The Minister of Finance is well aware of the rules of this House, 
and I'm going to ask him one more time and expect that he will co-operate fully, and simply ask 
him to rise and withdraw his remark without any equivocation. Would you do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I thought I had withdrawn the statements without 
equivocation and put the facts before this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Now I'm going to give the Minister of Finance one more 
opportunity. I'm going to give the Minister of Finance a final opportunity to withdraw his remark. 
And I'm sure the Minister of Finance, who's a senior member in this House and well respected, 
will do that. And I ask the Minister of Finance to do that, so we can continue with our question 
period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I again apologize, Mr. Speaker. I thought I had withdrawn the statement 
without equivocation. 



 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question, in the absence of 
the deputy Premier, is to the Minister of Finance. Even though this grandstanding before the 
cameras may help his leadership bid to replace the worn and tired-out Premier sitting beside him, 
it's not going to carry any weight with the people of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, a normal prospectus that would be filed before the Securities Exchange 
Commission, or would be filed before the people of the province, would include things like the 
proposed number of shares to be sold the price of those shares, along with the rationale for the 
share offering. Mr. Minister, it is our understanding that those precisely were the mandate given 
to the Barber Commission to deal with those kinds of question. 
 
How can you, sir, stand here today in this Assembly and defend your cynical and hypocritical 
manipulation of the political process in order to cover up and drive through your intention to sell 
off what belongs to the people of this province, which is the assets of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I appreciate very much, Mr. Speaker, that it's become clear in this session that 
there are two things that the NDP do not want to do. They don't want to have the public see the 
truth about SaskEnergy, and now they're opposing the filing of the prospectus at the request of 
the Barber. And secondly, today they have stood up and said, cancel the Barber Commission, Mr. 
Speaker, two very strong pieces of evidence that the NDP do not want the truth to go to the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, they do not want to have the truth on the potash corporation because 
they're afraid fundamentally to exercise the democratic process and have a vote to allow the 
privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- New question to the same minister. Mr. Speaker, that minister wouldn't know the 
truth if it came in his front door at his condominium and shook his hand. Don't he dare lecture us 
about the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Minster, we went to the people of Saskatchewan for 17 days to receive a 
mandate for our opposition to SaskPower. Mr. Minister, the Barber Commission has no mandate 
to advise whether or not to sell SaskPower, when to sell SaskPower, if to sell SaskPower, or if 
even to do is to sell SaskPower. 
 
Why are you standing here defending a decision to waste thousands of dollars of taxpayers' 
money for your own narrow political purposes? How can you dare stand here and try to defend 



that political decision, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The first truthful statement of the hon. member today is when he said the 
Barber Commission has no mandate to deal with the privatization of SaskPower. They have no 
mandate. I agree with that. They have absolutely no mandate to deal with the privatization of 
SaskPower. They're dealing with SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. It's SaskEnergy that they are dealing 
with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks why the Barber Commission has this 
information before it. They should have the information, Mr. Speaker. They will end with public 
hearing, make the assessment, and recommendations back. And they have all sorts of options, 
Mr. Speaker. They may say that that form of that prospectus is no good. They may suggest other 
changes. They may suggest not do it. They many suggest that it should have been done yesterday. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one think, Mr. Speaker, is that we will wait for the Barber Commission. We 
will wait for the Barber Commission, Mr. Speaker. I don't know what it's going to do, but I will 
tell you this, Mr. Speaker, for the interest of the hon. member -- I've got a pretty good idea what 
the Rafferty hearings are going to do, and they're going to throw that member all the way down to 
eastern Canada, Mr. Speaker, because he was so far wrong here . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- New question to the same minister. Mr. Speaker, we know what the people of 
Saskatchewan want us to do, Mr. Speaker, and that is to defend their interest. And we are doing 
that, Mr. Speaker, here today, as we have done in this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: given your cocksure arrogance, 
Mr. Minister, that what you are doing is so right and what we are doing is so wrong, why don't 
put your leadership bid on the line, take the question to the people, and force the old, tired fellow 
beside you to call and election so the people of Saskatchewan can decide who's right and who's 
wrong on this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- If the NDP are so confident, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are so confident . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. The member for Regina Elphinstone, would you co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- if the NDP are so concerned about the democratic process and are so 



convinced that they're right, why don't they allow a vote on the potash, Mr. Speaker? They're 
afraid to, Mr. Speaker, because they know that public rejects them, just like the public rejects the 
NDP positions of nationalizing, as articulated by the member from Rosemont, the whole potash 
industry; just like they reject your going on strike, Mr. Speaker; just like they reject the extreme 
positions of members opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as those become more and more evident in the performance of the NDP, 
becomes more and more evident to the people of this province, you know what's happening out 
there, Mr. Speaker -- they are increasingly rejecting your extremism, your radicalism, and the 
uncontrolled, undemocratic nature of the New Democrat Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: - Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was wondering why the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) has sent it's agricultural reporter to cover question period, but I guess 
it takes one with some expertise to recognize a fertilizer spreader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Capital Grants to Urban Municipalities 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Urban Affairs. And, Mr. 
Minister, how do you explain your government's unfair treatment of approximately one-third of 
the population, the residents of Regina and Saskatoon, who are being treated as second-class 
citizens by your new urban capital program? Why aren't all citizens of Saskatchewan treated 
fairly and on a level playing field? Why aren't all people who live in our cities, towns, and 
villages entitled to the same $25 per capita grant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that Romanow radicals got a hold of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I wish to bring to the . . . Order, order. I wish to bring to the attention of 
the Minister of Urban Affairs and the member for Regina Elphinstone and to that member and to 
the Minister of Finance, I'd like to bring to the attention of all of you individuals that the Minister 
of Urban Affairs has used the name of a member in the House and that's not permitted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- You're right, Mr. Speaker. It was actually the headline that I was referring to 
out of the Saskatoon paper. But the member from Riversdale and his radicals got control of 
questions period today over an issue that I believe needed some clarification, and I appreciate the 
question from the member for Regina Victoria. 
 
And you know, even the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 
admitted that the municipalities throughout the province have come to him saying that in their 
opinion Regina and Saskatoon seem to get a lot of extra, special things. 



 
And you know, I could point to in Regina, for instance, assistance that we've given to rail 
relocation so far, the new carbon filtration plant for $5 million, cost sharing construction of the 
Ring Road, new fieldhouse, Queensbury Downs, commitment to the art gallery, the new science 
centre, all paid for by provincial taxpayers to accrue to the city of Regina. Then on the other 
hand, in Saskatoon we've got Saskatchewan Place, special bridge assistance for the new 42nd 
Street bridge, upgrading of the Broadway bridge, Wanuskewin Heritage Park, all of this paid for 
out of the provincial taxpayers' funds. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, over the last six or seven years that has totalled about $40 million of extras to 
these major cities that supposedly don't count. I wish that our government could indeed settle on 
$25 per capita when the extras alone amount to some 30 or $35 per capita. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I wouldn't want you to get sensitive about the word radicals, 
because if being opposed to the sell off of SaskPower and if being opposed to discrimination in 
government programs makes you a radical, then I'm proud to be a radical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Minister, your answers just aren't good enough. The simple fact is, for 
the people of Saskatoon and Regina your program means increased taxes or reduced spending for 
roads and curves and gutters and sewers and waters and public works and civic facilities. That's 
what it means, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now have you considered, or have you consulted with the city councils and their chambers of 
commerce in Saskatoon and Regina to explain to them why you believe there is room for this 
type of discrimination? Have you done that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, unfortunately my critic sounds more like an NDP alderman from 
the city of Regina, a radical NDP alderman from the city of Regina, and proud to be one, rather 
than as the critic for the Minister of Urban Affairs for the provincial taxpayers' dollars. 
 
And certainly these interest groups that he refers to, does he think it's possible, for instance, for 
Rosthern to have a big function like Saskatchewan Place and get the economic benefits from it? I 
doubt it. That accrues to Saskatoon. Their chamber of commerce understands that. 
 
What the chambers of commerce throughout the province, you know, don't understand is their 
opinion regarding business when he starts getting into that -- the economic benefit from the 
Agribition that accrues to the city of Regina, all of these things paid for by the provincial 
taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, that accrues to their benefit, so that when the member opposite stands up 
and asks these kind of questions about fairness, when our government has delivered 40 . . . $80 



million extra to these cities, it really makes me wonder who is the ventriloquist, he or Mayor 
Archer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to keep a score-
card and talk about the 50 cents per capita that people in smaller centres are paying for public 
health . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I understand we're having an interesting question period with high 
emotions today, but we would like to hear the member from Regina Victoria, and I ask your co-
operation in allowing us to hear his remarks. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter remains that the mayor of Regina, and 
Saskatoon, and the president of SUMA believe there to be an inequity. They have asked for 
meetings with you; that's my understanding. And my question is: will you attempt to give them a 
better explanation of your actions than you have given this Assembly? Will you do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd appreciate meeting with the president of SUMA. I have 
already, and I'll meet with him again. I have no problem with that. I give you reference to a quote 
that he had made following our budget. 
 

SUMA had taken the position that capital funding needs were a top priority, and this 
budget demonstrates the provincial government recognizes these needs. 

 
So he's pleased with that. But what I'm pleased with today, Mr. Speaker, is today for the first time 
we see perhaps some little policy being formed by the NDP. They don't have a policy on very 
many issues, but it appears that they've got a little policy here that they are against 509 
communities in Saskatchewan while they favour two out of the whole membership of 511. And I 
will carry their policy to my SIMA regional conferences. 
 
And if they think that this is unfair and if the member from Regina Victoria thinks it's unfair, 
why doesn't he ask his colleague from Humboldt or from Quill Lakes or from The Battlefords or 
members from Moose Jaw or Prince Albert to see if they think that it's unfair when their 
respective cities get more dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Report on GigaText 
 

Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister in charge of SEDCO, 
and I'd like to point out to the minister that yesterday saw this government's passing of the one 



month lateness mark on the deadline that the Deputy Premier gave GigaText to prove its worth. 
 
Now I was wondering if you were prepared to tell the House today whether or not the 
government is going to continue to put money into this kind of a "Giganomic" mess, and how 
long are you going to be sitting on this so-called experts' report before you come clean and tell 
people in the province of Saskatchewan whether or not the technology will work or not, whether 
you're going to keep funding it, even in light of all the economic mess that has gathered around 
the GigaText affair, Madam Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: -- Mr. Speaker, with regards to the member's question, we have had two 
independent expert reports on GigaText, both of which found the technology somewhat 
encouraging. Since that time the Deputy Premier and myself have met with both of the experts to 
go further into their summary of the technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to the Gigamess, as articulated by the member, that is his assumption 
and his assumption only. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

78th Anniversary Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. Before orders of the day, I should like to bring the following message to 
the attention of the hon. members from the secretary general of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association. Normally, as you are aware, we aren't sitting at this time and we don't 
have this opportunity to have the message from the chairman. So allow me one or two minutes to 
please read it to you, after which I will table it. 
 

Dear Secretary: I am pleased to enclose the 1989 Message from the Chairman to all 
Members of the Association on the occasion of the 78th Anniversary of the founding of 
the CPA. 

 
By now you will probably have considered the ways that you have traditionally celebrated 
the Anniversary; but if not, please give some serious thought to holding a Branch meeting 
or dinner to mark the occasion. We would be pleased to know what has been done. 
 
We wish you every success in your celebrations. 

 
And here is the chairman's message himself: 
 

I am delighted once more to extend to you all, fellow Commonwealth Parliamentarians, 
very warm greetings and congratulations on the occasion of the 78th Anniversary of our 



Association. 
 

In my last year's message I expressed a wish to have our membership increased, our 
activities expanded and the boundaries of Parliamentary Democracy enlarged. We have 
achieved some of these and stand on the threshold of more dramatic breakthroughs 
between now and next year. I want to commend all of you for holding high the CPA 
banner in your Constituencies, Branches, Regions and indeed Commonwealth-wide. 

 
You may not have known that the CPA shares the same birthday as Nelson Mandela. The 
name of Nelson Mandela has become synonymous with freedom, universal human rights, 
and parliamentary democracy. And as we celebrate . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- 
 

. . . as we celebrate our 78th Birthday let us re-dedicate ourselves once again to the cause 
of our Association. Let us all work towards achieving within our lifetime a happier world 
for all mankind in which love, truth, social justice and fair-play are part of our common 
heritage. 

 
I wish every one of you a very happy 78th Anniversary celebrations. Hon. Lavu Mulimba, 
Chairman. 

 
I now take the opportunity to table these documents. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, I would 
seek leave of the Assembly to introduce a motion as agreed to by myself and the opposition 
House Leader, with respect to hours of sitting, in order to accommodate the royal visit. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, that when this Assembly adjourns on Friday, July 21, 1989, it do stand 
adjourned until Tuesday, July 25, 1989, and the hours of sitting on Tuesday shall be from 
2 o'clock p.m. until 4 o'clock p.m.; and from 8 o'clock p.m. until 10 o'clock p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 



 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Resolution No. 5 -- Protection of People Under Free Trade 

 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will be putting the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan and the federal government to 
maintain solemn commitments made to the people of Saskatchewan regarding the 
implementation of the free trade agreement, and therefore ensure that social programs 
will not be affected, that regional development grants will remain, that the Canadian 
Wheat Board will not be undermined, that marketing boards are protected, and that 
national agricultural programs such as the Western Grain Stabilization Fund, the Crow 
benefit, and compensation for the elimination of the two-price wheat system will not be 
cancelled. 

 
That is the resolution that I will be moving at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
It is timely that this resolution comes before the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
announcement from the United States Department Commerce respecting the final determination 
of the Commerce department with respect to the countervailing duty on imports of pork, of fresh, 
chilled, and frozen pork from Canada into the United States. 
 
Now that is in confirmation of an earlier decision of the United States trade tribunals which 
established a countervailing rate of 8 cents per kilogram, or 3.6 cents per pound, on Canadian 
live hogs and chilled and frozen pork going from Canada into the United States. And this is a 
drastic, a drastic bit of news for the pork industry in this province, indeed across Canada, and it 
places our whole industry, our hog industry under a very severe threat. 
 
I want to just review, Mr. Speaker, the circumstances which led us to being in the position which 
we're in with respect to these countervailing duties. And I want to say this for the special benefit 
of my friend, the member from Weyburn, who always has interesting questions with respect to 
the application and implementation of the free trade agreement. So I'm going to go into some 
detail with respect to the situation respecting hogs, for his benefit, Mr. Speaker, and for the 
benefit of all members of the House. 
 
It was this very trade law, this very trade law that permits the application of countervailing duties 
that led us into negotiations in the first place, which led to the signing of the free trade 
agreement. Members of the House will recall that there were a number of trade actions being 
taken by the United States in the early 1980s. 
 
I remind members of the countervailing duty on shakes, on cedar shakes and shingles, on 
softwood lumber, on certain kinds of steel products, and on other products, which eventually 



caught the attention of the Prime Minister of the country and led him to conclude that something 
had to be done in order to soften the effects of the countervailing duty law that is part of the 
United States trade law. It was indeed becoming a very critical situation. 
 
And in order to try and deal with that, he came up with the idea of accepting a long-standing 
invitation from the Americans to enter into negotiations for freer trade between the two countries. 
That led to the negotiations for the free trade agreement, of which I have a copy in my hand, and 
which is well known to all members of this House. 
 
Now the idea in going into those negotiations was that Canada would be able to negotiate an 
exemption from those trade laws so far as Canada is concerned. In other words, those trade laws 
would not apply to Canada; we would negotiate a trade agreement which would regulate the 
conduct of both countries, Canada and the United States, in such a way that a countervailing duty 
law would no longer be required. That was the idea. 
 
Well that idea, Mr. Speaker, just turned out to be a fruitless idea. It turned out to be something 
which the federal government was not able to accomplish in negotiations. So the Prime Minister, 
during those negotiations, abandoned that fundamental position of his, abandoned the position 
that Canada needed an exemption from those laws and moved to a different position, which was 
that the free trade agreement would define with some precision what subsidies in Canada would 
be allowed and what subsidies would not be allowed. And similarly in the United States, what 
subsidies would attract countervail and what wouldn't, and that then became the focus of 
negotiations between the two countries. 
 
And we bargained with that as our bottom line bargaining position for some months, and we 
weren't able to achieve that. And accordingly, in the final hours of the negotiations, Canada 
abandoned even that minimal position, and then we were left in the position where we were in 
effect endorsing the existing trade laws of the United States. We were saying that those laws will 
continue to apply. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well is that what you want? What do you want? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And the member asks if that's what I want. That is certainly not what I want. 
What Canada wanted was an exemption from the United States trade laws as they related to 
countervailing duties. Failing that, it seemed to be a reasonable position that we would try and 
define in these negotiations what subsidies would attract countervail and what wouldn't. And the 
reason for that, the reason why it should have been done in this agreement is that while we were 
negotiating this agreement, we had a number of very large, very important bargaining chips that 
we could play off against the United States position in an effort to achieve that. Now we played 
all those chips, Mr. Speaker. You've heard me on this subject before. 
 
We played the important chip of access to Canadian energy, we played the important chip of 
America access to our service industry, and we played a lot of other bargaining chips too, as I've 
detailed in this House before. 
 



And what did we get in return? I have suggested, I have analysed and tried to prove that in reality 
we got nothing in return. We got nothing except the right to take off our own tariffs, which we 
could have taken off without having to enter into this agreement in order to do it. Now that's 
some kind of deal. We played all of our bargaining chips, and in return we failed to get the one 
that was most important to us, and that was the way in which countervailing duties would apply 
to Canadian exports. 
 
So that's how we find ourself in the position that we're in today. That's how we find the hog 
producers of this country, including the hog producers of this province, being faced with 
countervailing duty action on the part of the United States. 
 
Now this is the second step in a three step process in the United States. But I want to draw to the 
attention of members that the third step have nothing to do with the fact that a subsidy has been 
found to exist, and it have nothing to do with the level of that subsidy, which has been found to 
be 3.6 cents per pound. It has only to do, this third step has only to do with whether or not these 
Canadian imports are causing any harm or damage to producers in the American market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have never been a situation where the third step has found that there was no 
such damage. There has never been such a situation. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Not true. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- If the member says it's not true, the member will have an opportunity to stand in 
his place and cite . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. The hon. member will have his opportunity to speak in the debate. 
The member for Saskatoon Fairview now has the floor. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should say that there will be one action which can be 
taken, and that is that resource can be had to the dispute settlement mechanism under the free 
trade agreement. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Now we're getting to it. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now we're getting to it, the member says. Now we're getting to it, and indeed we 
are, because the member will find, as I have predicted in this House before -- I predict again -- 
that that dispute settlement mechanism is going to turn out to be an empty purse. That dispute 
mechanism procedure is going to turn out to be virtually useless, Mr. Speaker. It will confer no 
new rights on our country or our producers at all. 
 
All that's happened under the free trade agreement, so far as that dispute settlement mechanism is 
concerned, is that the role of the American courts in the application of U.S. trade laws has been 
taken away from the courts and has been lodged in this disputes settlement tribunal. 



 
And that's bad! And the reason why it's bad, Mr. Speaker, is because the America courts, in all of 
our trade law history, have never found that the tribunals, that the tribunals that I've been talking 
about, have misapplied the American Law, or misunderstood the American law, or not applied 
the America law properly, or found that the tribunals have been biased. That has never happened, 
and it will not happen now. 
 
And clearly, if you read the free trade agreement -- and I recommend that to my hon. friend, 
clearly, if you read the free trade agreement, you will find that the jurisdiction of this dispute 
settlement tribunal is exactly as narrow, or exactly as wide as the courts of the United States used 
to have under the America trade laws. No wider. 
 
They have no right at all to determine whether a duty ought to be imposed in circumstances. They 
have no right whatever to determine whether or not there is a subsidy being paid to Canadian hog 
producers, no right whatever to try and recalculate what those duties ought to be, and no right at 
all to determine whether or not any damage is being done as a result of all this. 
 
Now the implication of that, Mr. Speaker, the conclusion one must draw, is that the kind of 
review that can take place under the dispute settlement mechanism has nothing to do with the 
merits of the case. It has only to do with process; it has only to do with the question of whether 
everything that has been done by the American trade tribunals has been done in accordance with 
their law. 
 
And as I say, the American courts have never found otherwise in the history of the application of 
these trade laws, and that is a second fact that I would ask my hon. friend to research and speak 
to during this debate. 
 
Now what happens down the road here? We have only to look to 1985, Mr. Speaker, where a 
countervailing duty of about this much was placed upon live pork, live hogs being shipped into 
the United States. We found that Canadian exports dropped by 1 million head, by 1 million head 
on one year -- from 1.25 million to 250,000 hogs -- a drastic, dramatic drop in the export of live 
hogs from Canada to the United States. 
 
And now with this duty we find the countervail being extended from live hogs to carcasses, to 
fresh carcasses, chilled, and frozen pork, in which there is a very large trade between Canada and 
the United States, valued in 1988 at approximately $341 million U.S., according to U.S. figures. 
And that will drop, and drop dramatically. 
 
Now that is, to say the least, a major aggravation for the agricultural industry in this province. To 
think, and to summarize what I've said so far, to think that we went into these negotiations for the 
precise purpose of ensuring that this sort of thing couldn't happen, and it has happened, and it's 
happened because our negotiators in this free trade agreement weren't able to negotiate into this 
agreement one single line that means anything so far as protection for our hog producers are 
concerned -- not one single line. 
 



Now I also want to draw the attention of the House to the situation respecting our social 
programs. Mr. Speaker, you'll recall during the federal election campaign that there was a great 
deal of debate about the impact of the free trade agreement upon Canada's social programs, and it 
became a hotly contested issue with charges and countercharges on each side as to who was 
telling the truth and who was not telling the truth. 
 
One of the things that was brought to the attention of the public at that time was statements that 
had been made by the head of the Canadian Manufacturers' Association, whose name is Thibault, 
a Laurent Thibault. 
 
And Mr. Broadbent, during the election campaign, quoted Mr. Thibault as having said in 1980 
that social programs in Canada were too expensive and ought to be cut back. And Mr. Broadbent 
brought that up during the campaign, and Mr. Thibault said that that wasn't fair -- such an old 
quote shouldn't be resurrected and thrown out in the campaign. 
 
But what do we find in February 1989? Well in February 1989, notwithstanding all of the 
assurances we'd had during the election campaign about how social programs would not be in 
any jeopardy under this agreement, we find that same Mr. Thibault, on behalf of that same 
Canadian Manufacturers' Association, writing a brief, presenting a brief to the Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Wilson, in which he said the following, and I quote: 
 

Because 60 per cent of program spending is tied up in statutory programs, with most of 
this on social programs, this is the spending area that must be reduced. (Mr. Thibault 
said). 

 
Now that was in February 1989. The ink is hardly dry on the signatures to the free trade 
agreement and right away we find pressures on the Canadian government to reduce its 
expenditures on social programming. 
 
And why does it have to do that? Well it has to do that because Canadian taxes are already high, 
already very high compared to other countries, including compared to the United States, and it is 
with the United States that we are supposed to be on a level playing -field following the signing 
of the free trade agreement. Our manufacturers are competing with each other on a level playing-
field, free from any tariff, and that's something that apparently my friends opposite welcomed and 
apparently something which the Canadian Manufacturers' Association welcomed. 
 
But then they come to the government and they say, yes, it's a level playing-field but our taxes are 
too high; they don't have to pay this kind of taxes in Alabama or Mississippi or Nebraska, and 
that's not fair. How can we compete against some manufacturer from Alabama when our 
Canadian taxes are so high? And therefore we want you to reduce the level of Canadian taxes, 
says the Canadian Manufacturers' Association. Reduce those taxes. 
 
And how do you do it? You do it by reducing spending on social programs. Precisely, Mr. 
Speaker, precisely the fear, precisely the concern that was raised by the New Democratic Party 
during the 1988 election campaign. Precisely the concern that was raised, and precisely the 



concern that was denied by the Prime Minister and other people speaking on behalf of the federal 
government. And precisely the concern that was denied specifically by this same Mr. Thibault. 
And yet, as I say, the ink is hardly dry on the free trade agreement when the man on behalf of the 
Canadian Manufacturers' Association is into the office of the federal Minister of Finance 
demanding that spending on social programs be reduced. 
 
Well what we're asking for in this resolution, and which I think has the support of all members of 
this House, is that spending on social programs must not be cut -- must not be cut -- in these 
circumstances, and that it is incumbent upon federal government to deliver on its commitment 
that the free trade agreement will not result in any reduction in spending on social programs. 
 
Now I want to turn to the regional development program, and I mentioned regional development 
programs because there are very, very concerning developments with respect to regional 
development funding in this country. And I believe that the majority of those concerns arise 
directly from the federal government's attempt to implement the free trade agreement. Now 
again, this is an area where we Canadians have had repeated assurances from the federal 
government that the free trade agreement will have no effect -- we have been told repeatedly -- 
that regional development programs will not be affected by this agreement. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, events are showing that this is wrong. And actually, Canada ought to have 
know that is was wrong before the last election. I have a clipping, a Canadian Press clipping, 
dated September 1, 1988, in which a very senior official of the federal government is quoted on 
this point. And I will quote from the clipping: 
 

"Regional development aid for western Canada is already being restricted by the free 
trade deal," a top federal official revealed Wednesday, just hours before the Commons 
gave the agreement final approval. "Major regional development projects for western 
Canada are being screened by Ottawa before being approved to ensure they don't conflict 
with the trade deal," said Bruce Rawson, the senior official with the Western 
Diversification Fund. 

 
The comments by a cautious Rawson, during a question and answer session following his 
speech, contradict repeated promises by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney that the deal will 
have no impact on Canada's regional development programs. 

 
Now there it was, Mr. Speaker. It was clear to many of us that the regional development 
programs would be under great pressure following this free trade agreement, and Mr. Rawson, 
who is a senior official of many, many years experience with the federal government, confirmed 
that last September. He is the former deputy minister of Health and Welfare, for example, Mr. 
Speaker, and a very senior person and moreover, Mr. Speaker, a product of this province -- a 
graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the federal government maintained their denials though, Mr. Speaker, but now we find, in 
the aftermath of the free trade agreement, that the chickens are coming home to roost, that the 
situation is becoming quite obvious. We are finding that despite these assurances there are 



substantial cuts to regional development programs such as the federal-provincial economic and 
regional development agreements, the so-called ERDAs (Economic and Regional Development 
Agreement). 
 
Now we've raised that question in the House, and it seem to me that the members opposite did 
not know what the situation was respecting ERDAs. But last week, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government confirmed that the first of seven such cost-shared regional development agreements 
in Saskatchewan would not be renewed. The federal Tourism minister, Mr. Hockin, announced 
that Ottawa had decided to abandon the tourism ERDA agreement across Canada. These 
agreements had expired on March 31, 1989. Now it's expected that ongoing negotiations will 
result in the cancellation of more, if not all of these agreements. 
 
Now it's appropriate to start with tourism, Mr. Speaker, because in no circumstances could the 
tourism agreement run afoul of the countervailing duty laws, but the other ERDA agreements, or 
at least most of the other ERDA agreements, are industry specific, industry specific, and many of 
those grants in many parts of Canada could attract the attention of the U.S. trade authorities and 
could result in countervailing duty actions. 
 
That at least is the fear and that's the fear that was expressed before this agreement was 
negotiated, and although it was hotly denied, we're not seeing that these developments are 
actually taking place. 
 
During the early negotiations for this free trade agreement, there was just simply no recognition 
by the United States of the Canadian approach to regional inequalities. They did not regard it as 
fair or as a legitimate exercise of the federal spending power that the federal government ought to 
be directing funds towards underdeveloped parts of Canada, and I include Newfoundland, the 
Atlantic provinces, and parts of Western Canada. 
 
And that is a very, very serious concern to us that the Americans were not excepting of this, Mr. 
Speaker, because we in Canada have understood very clearly that regional development programs 
are necessary. IN order to give Canadians equality of opportunity and a relatively equal quality of 
life, it's necessary that the federal and provincial governments take action together in an effort to 
improve the economies of some of the hinterlands of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
And there has been a growing concern that those actions would be viewed by American 
authorities as being a subsidy which may attract a countervail. And that was the concern that was 
expressed again and again during the negotiation of the free trade agreement. Now that, as I have 
mentioned, has been consistently denied by federal authorities. 
 
But what we're seeing, if we examine the last federal budget and the actions of the federal 
government with respect to the negotiation of the ERA agreements, is that the federal 
government is in effect surrendering, Mr. Speaker, surrendering regional development 
programming -- surrendering it without a fight. 



 
Now how is the fight to come? The fight, Mr. Speaker, was to come under the free trade 
agreement in the form of further negotiations. Now as I said earlier, we weren't able to 
accomplish our primary objective of getting an exemption. We weren't able to accomplish our 
secondary objective of defining what subsidies would be allowed. 
 
So we settled in this agreement on a further agreement to continue to negotiate the question of 
subsidies, and we spelled that out in article 1907 of the free trade agreement which provides for 
the establishment of a working group that will: 
 

a) seek to develop more effective rules and disciplines concerning the use of 
government subsidies; (and) 

 
b) seek to develop a substitute system of rules for dealing with unfair pricing and 

government subsidization: 
 
And this group, Mr. Speaker, made up of representatives of both countries, had five years in 
which to produce an agreement on these matters. And if they couldn't do it after five years, they 
were entitled to another extension of two years, making a total of seven years. In the meantime, 
both countries could continue to apply their existing trade laws. 
 
Now these negotiations are a developing story all by themselves, Mr. Speaker. These 
negotiations haven't got off the ground, in a formal sense. But the Americans have been 
preparing for these negotiations ever since these provisions were agreed to. The Americans have 
been dedicating people, resources, time, and effort to develop the American position in these 
crucial negotiations. 
 
On Canada's side, nothing at all has happened. On Canada's side, our senior negotiating people 
from the free trade bargaining team have all disappeared back into the private sector, or off into 
other government jobs. And there's just nobody around any more who can pick up this portfolio, 
pick up this file, and start to prepare for negotiations with the Americans. 
 
So we haven't even begun the process of preparing for these subsidy negotiations. But in the 
meantime, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime we're just like a bunch of good little boy scouts and girl 
scouts. We are withdrawing these subsidies. We are pulling back on these grant programs. We 
are eliminating these joint agreements. In other words, we're giving up, Mr. Speaker. We're 
surrendering before the fight takes place at all. Now that's certainly not a responsible position for 
the federal government to be taking. 
 
These negotiations have attracted the concern of many people in this country, Mr. Speaker. It is 
not simply a questions that we raise in this House in any political way, but rather a question 
which has been of great concern to people across this country. 
 
In The Globe and Mail for December 12, 1988, the president of the Canadian Sugar Institute, 
who was a member of an advisory committee for the federal government on free trade, is quoted 



as saying: 
 

We could lose everything we have gained unless we get down to some hard bargaining. 
 
And when he said that, he was talking about these very subsidy negotiations that I've been talking 
about. 
 
A Mr. Shammas, of the Plastics Industry of Canada, had this to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We are concerned because the U.S. is gearing up its trade negotiating team while in 
Ottawa they are gearing down. And further, (he said) the U.S. Department of Commerce 
sees this as the big part of the negotiations while we have lost some of our top 
negotiators. 

 
Now that's serious business. There are other such quotes, Mr. Speaker, and I won't take the time 
of the House to read those into the record. But the fact of the matter is that the Canadian side in 
these negotiations simply doesn't exist. They're not doing the work, the people aren't in place, and 
we're not preparing. And that, as I say, is not a responsible approach to these very, very important 
questions that remain unresolved under the trade agreement. 
 
We've also been told by the minister, the federal minister involved, that the provinces will not be 
represented on these negotiations. And I've urged this government before, and I urge it again, not 
to stand still for that kind of a statement. We in the province of Saskatchewan have too much at 
stake in these subsidy negotiations to be frozen out of that process. We have a right in this 
federation of Canada, in this federal state of ours, we have a right to participate in negotiations 
such as these. And I urge the government opposite to stand up on its hind legs and press that 
point home with their federal counterparts and get involved in these negotiations because they are 
important. 
 
At the same time there are other negotiations taking place with respect to agriculture. And I want 
to draw this to the attention of the member from Weyburn, because while he's pressing the point 
on the working group on subsidies, I also want him to press the point on the working groups on 
various kinds of regulatory matters that related to agriculture, and those are collected in article 
708 of the free trade agreement. We've got working groups that are going to be set up with 
respect to animal health, plant health, seeds and fertilizers, meat and poultry inspection, dairy, 
fruit, vegetable, and egg inspection, and so on. And these are crucial things so far as our 
Saskatchewan producers are concerned. And again this government has been told that they do not 
have a role in those negotiations. Again this government has been told that they are not going to 
be represented on these working groups. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who said? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And the member asked, who said? And I would answer to him that the federal 
government has so said. The federal government has so said. 
 



An Hon. Member: -- We've got a guy working on it full time. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now the member says they've got a guy working on it full time, and we'd like to 
hear from the guy, because as far as we can tell at the moment, Saskatchewan is playing no part 
at all in the work of these working groups. And these working groups are going to be dealing 
with matters that are of crucial importance to the agricultural industry in this province for years 
and years and years to come. 
 
Now parts of the resolution, significant parts of the resolution deal with agriculture. And I've 
touched on one part of it with respect to the hog countervail, but I also want to touch on other 
matters that are crucially important. 
 
The first that I'll mention is the role of the Canadian Wheat Board. That is a question that is of 
continuing concern to the producers in western Canada, and especially the producers in this 
country. And the producers are not reassured by what they have been seeing happen in terms of 
actions by the federal government, and they have not been reassured by what they've been 
hearing from this government. 
 
The first really significant warning bell that rang on this question was when the public . . . when 
the farmers of this province learned of the provisions of article 705 which gave, in certain 
circumstances, market access, market access to U.S. grain, or U.S. wheat, oats and barley, to 
Canada, directly to the Canadian market, without those grains passing through the Canadian 
Wheat Board. Now we have debated that question in this House before, and we all realize how 
serious that question is. 
 
We know that the application of article 705 so far as it relates to wheat have resulted in, has led 
to the abandonment of the two-price wheat system in this country, in which domestic grain 
produced domestically attracted a higher price than domestic grain which was produced for the 
international market. And that benefit, in the last full year of its operation, was $280 million -- 
$280 million. 
 
And the member asked, to who? And I would answer that by saying, to Canadian producers. And 
the figures that I have, and the figures that I have show that 15 per cent, that 15 per cent of that 
money went to Ontario farmers -- 15, one-five per cent, one-five per cent -- and 85 per cent of it 
went to western Canada. Now I know it was a growing figure, I know it was a growing number, 
but in the last full year of its operation my information is that 85 per cent of that benefit landed in 
and stayed in western Canada. 
 
Now you can argue that it may have been different as time went on in the future and that Ontario 
producers were getting into that market -- and I acknowledge that they were getting into that 
market -- but the bulk of that benefit still landed in western Canada. 
 
But besides, what does it matter? I means, I for one would prefer all of the benefit to land in 
western Canada, but the fact of the matter is that all of the benefit of the $280 million stayed in 
Canada -- all of it, east and west -- east and west. And that money is now gone. So far as the 



producers are concerned, that money is now gone. 
 
Now the consumers are the people who paid it, aren't they? They're the people who had to pay 
more, you'd think, for their bread and other flour products. And one would have expected that 
this $280 million, which is not longer going to the producers, would somehow land in the 
pockets of the consumers. 
 
Now I just ask members opposite whether they've seen any drop in the price of bread in the store. 
We know from senior executives in the Weston company, for example, who expected that that 
reduction would not be reflected in any reduction in the price of flour -- would not be reflected in 
any reduction in the price of flour. And I think that could be the case. 
 
But the point I want to address is not that one, but the $280 million, Mr. Speaker. That was paid 
to the agricultural industry as an adjustment, as an adjustment, and the Prime Minister declared 
that we would do that and no problem with this access, this market access of American grain, 
because we'll make it up; we'll pay the $280 million. And we on this side of the House and farm 
groups said, yes, that's once, but what about the future? Oh, don't worry about the future. That'll 
be part of the adjustment process. 
 
Well now we see that adjustment process worked. We see that that $280 million was paid once 
and not again. And the de Gandpf report, dealing with adjustments that follow from the free trade 
agreement, made no recommendation whatever that losses to Canadian agriculture under this 
market access provision would be made up by the treasury or by anybody else. So that $280 
million benefit is just simply gone, Mr. Speaker, it's gone, it doesn't exist any more. 
 
And this leads, Mr. Speaker, to a second point, and that is the situation respecting oats, the 
delisting of oats. Now members opposite minimize the impact of that because they say there 
weren't that many oats grown anyway, and so it doesn't hurt. You tell that to the producers in this 
province. You go anywhere you like and you ask people whether or not they agree with delisting 
of oats from the Canadian Wheat Board and they will answer, no. They will answer no in every 
single community in the whole of western Canada, and that's the reality -- that's the reality. That 
action was taken without any agricultural support at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of us are concerned, generally, with the situation of marketing boards, not just the Canadian 
Wheat Board but marketing boards generally. And I'll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. We're 
concerned because the Americans are opposed to them. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Americans have placed the elimination of marketing boards very high on their agenda of 
trade issues with Canada -- very high. And it has been our experience watching this process in 
the last four or five years that whatever is high on the American agenda tends to come out as an 
outcome, as a result. The Americans, generally, have gotten pretty much what they wanted out of 
this whole process. 
 



You look through the free trade agreement and it's just stunning to compare that to the agenda of 
the Americans going into these negotiations with Canada. It is not a gross exaggeration to say 
that the Americans got what they wanted. They got what they wanted, and on top of that there 
were able to salvage their own trade laws and continue in a position to impose countervailing 
duties whenever they found that there wasn't anything resembling a subsidy. 
 
So when we see something like marketing boards high on the list of the United States as a trade 
irritant or an outstanding trade issue, then I think that we all have cause for concern -- for very, 
very deep concern. And it doesn't do us any good at all to simply say, oh that's not a problem. My 
friends, that is a problem. That's a problem because the Americans are simply not going to let go 
of it. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it is not reassuring to think that it is the federal government that 
is going to be protecting our interest in this connection. It is not reassuring because their track 
record with respect to these matters have not been good, and there is absolutely no cause for 
optimism at all. There is cause indeed for great concern. 
 
So I would urge the House, Mr. Speaker, in concluding my remarks, to give very serious 
consideration to this motion and to approve it. And I'm going to move the resolution formally 
now, Mr. Speaker, and then say a few concluding remarks with respect to it. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan and the federal government to 
maintain solemn commitments made to the people of Saskatchewan regarding the 
implementation of the free trade agreement, and therefore ensure that social programs 
will not be affected, that regional development grants will remain, that the Canadian 
Wheat Board will not be undermined, that marketing boards are protected, and that 
national agricultural programs such as the Western Grain Stabilization Fund, the Crow 
benefit, and compensation for the elimination of the two-price wheat system will not be 
cancelled. 

 
Now that's the resolution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it was drawn in terms that the government 
members could support it, the government members could support it. These matters, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are matters that are of concern to us all, and I know they are matter on which there is 
not any difference between our two parties so far as these questions are concerned. 
 
When we talk about ensuring that social programs will not be affected, surely members on the 
government side would agree that the free trade agreement should not have that result. And when 
we way that regional development grants will remain, surely we all want regional development 
grants to remain. This province will only be the beneficiary. This province will only be the 
beneficiary from that sort of . . . the continuation of that long-standing, well-established program. 
 
Thirdly, that the Canadian Wheat Board will not be undermined. Surely we agree on that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Surely we agree fully on that, that marketing boards are protected. Surely every 



member of this House agrees with that. And that national agricultural programs will not be 
cancelled, and I have mentioned three in particular, and that is the Western Grain Stabilization 
Fund, which all members of this House must support; the Crow benefit, which every one of us in 
this province support; and that the compensation for the elimination of the two-price wheat 
system will not be cancelled. 
 
So as I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this resolution was drafted in terms that all members of this 
House can support, and I would urge that you do so. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it give me pleasure to 
stand in this Assembly today and speak on this motion concerning the free trade agreement and 
some of the implications that we will see from the free trade agreement. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, that this Premier of Saskatchewan went around during the free trade 
debate saying time and time again that this agreement will give us access to the U.S. market. 
 
Well I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the result today from the Commerce department of the 
United States shows us that there is no access in this particular area to the U.S. market. And I 
think on that grounds that Premier should be made to resign because he simply misled the public 
of Saskatchewan when he went around and time and time again repeated himself saying that free 
trade would give us -- and there's quote after quote -- would give us Saskatchewan, access to the 
American market. And we see that is not so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order. All members will get an opportunity to voice their opinions 
on this debate, so I would ask you to allow the member from Humboldt to make his comments. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I understand that it's a very touchy area when their leader has misled the 
public by saying that there is access to the U.S. market when in actual fact we see a procedure on 
a countervail on pork going through the U.S., just has come through the U.S. Commerce 
department and upheld that 3.6 cents a pound would be coming out of the farmers' pockets, pork 
producers' pockets, the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
That adds up. In 1988, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about $410 million Canadian was the value of hogs 
shipped to the U.S. You multiply that time 3.6 cents and that comes out to $15 million out of the 
pockets of pork producers of this province. And that Premier, the Minister of Agriculture for this 
province, told Saskatchewan pork producers that they would gain, they would benefit from this 
free trade agreement. And now we see that he was not telling the truth. In fact, either he was not 
telling the truth or he didn't know what the process and the procedure was going to be -- either 
one, it doesn't matter. 
 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the case is strong enough now that that Premier, that 



Minister of Agriculture, should resign his seat because that is not acceptable in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The omnibus trade Bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member can call me a pip-squeak 
if he wants. I can tell that it hurts when they start shouting insults across. The truth hurts all the 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I'm sure it's hurting this time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the omnibus trade Bill that wen through before the free trade agreement was 
signed told us that things like this were going to happen, because that omnibus trade Bill 
identified not only live hogs, but it expanded the mandate to frozen and chilled and some 
processed product. 
 
That omnibus trade Bill, we knew, and we on this side of the House told them that that was going 
to be part of this process. And we see today the procedure going forward, the second-last step in 
this whole procedure to have a duty, a countervailing duty imposed, as being upheld by the U.S. 
commerce department. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this will go on, this will continue, because under the deal there was a 
code that was supposed to be put forward, code of acceptable subsidies over five to seven years. 
And can you imagine how fast the U.S. government is going to jump to their feet to try to get this 
code established when they can go on and impose countervailing duties on products such as pork, 
as well as other products coming out of Canada? I'm sure that they will be dragging their feet as 
long as possible. 
 
And the Canadian government, or this government, does not even pick up on that because we 
know that there is not even a negotiator assigned on behalf of Canada to negotiate what is an 
acceptable subsidy. 
 
Why isn't this Premier, this Minister of Agriculture, pushing counterpart in Ottawa to get that 
process moving? I mean, it's unfortunate that we're in the process, but we have to know and we 
cannot continue to see countervailing duties such as this put on by the U.S., flying in the face of 
the intent of the free trade agreement that was lauded so loudly by the government opposite -- 
flying in the face. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, this Minister of Agriculture has to be representing the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. If he was doing that, he would be pushing Ottawa to go forward with 
these negotiations, and he is not doing that. And no wonder he's not doing that, because he is so 
busy with his privatization, so busy with other things that he's forgotten totally about agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the free trade agreement has affected Saskatchewan farmers in a way far 
more quickly than I would ever have imagined. And if you want to just take a look at some of the 
events that have happened in the past couple of month, you will note that the free trade 
agreement is behind many of the activities of the federal government, whether introduced in its 
budget, or whether part of the policy for transportation, whether part of the policy for the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 



 
I will start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by talking about an item which was . . . an item that every 
farmer took for granted -- that was a cash advance on the grain that they could ship. And, Mr. 
Minister, for the life of me, I sat down and I questioned myself as to why the Canadian 
government would remove the cash advance system that was in place. It was a constant that 
farmers could rely on from year to year, and in many years when the shipment of grain is slow for 
many, many reasons, that cash advance allowed that farmer to carry himself through, have his 
debts paid, and as the grain was sold, then repay that advance. But now this government in 
Canada, the Mulroney government, is removing that interest-free cash advance. And I ask myself 
why. 
 
The other thins I asked why, is why didn't the Premier of this province, the Premier for the 
province of Saskatchewan, in which the majority of the grain is produced, the majority of the 
grain farmers come from, why would he not stand up for grain farmers and say, no, Mr. 
Mulroney, the cash advance should stay interest-free -- not one word. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, this Premier, would not stand up to Ottawa because he's either 
afraid or he doesn't have the intestinal fortitude to go forward to Ottawa and say, represent the 
farmers of Saskatchewan in such a manner that would help them. And he's not done that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the interest-free cash advance is going to be gone. That will constitute about on a 
$30,000 maximum, the cash advance program, depending on how fast the grain moves, that 
could be $1,000 at least, maybe more, depending; on some years it could be 2 or $3,000, some 
years it could be less. 
 
But let's take $1,000 as an average, $1,000 dollars of new money that farmers of this province are 
going to have to come up with next year at a time when you read that net farm income is going to 
be going down in this province by 46 per cent. Where is the Premier of Saskatchewan, the 
Minister of Agriculture, the so-called friend of the farmers, when it comes to standing up to the 
federal government? 
 
And behind this whole thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that the free trade agreement, 
through the Americans, is putting pressure on the Canadian government, is muzzling the premier 
of Saskatchewan by saying that you have to cut this subsidy out to Saskatchewan farmers. That's 
the reason that interest-free cash advance is gone -- no other reason. And that is why we need a 
new Minister of Agriculture; that's why we need a new government in this province, a 
government that will stand up for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And if you want to continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ask yourself why, ask yourself 
why the fuel rebate was reduced. You think that could have anything to do with free trade 
agreement when the Americans are putting pressure on the subsidies that Canadian farmers are 



receiving. 
 
We see that the fuel rebate has been slashed, and that fuel rebate constitutes to the average farmer 
in Saskatchewan farming about a thousand acres of land, about 600 new dollars, 600 new dollars 
that he'll have to come up with next year to pay for fuel because the rebate is reduced. Do you 
think that has anything to do with the free trade agreement that this Premier, the premier of this 
province, the Minster of Agriculture, was applauding so loudly, running around telling how great 
it was going to be when we had free trade. 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the free trade agreement that this Minister of Agriculture, 
the Premier of this province was flouting in this province, touting in this province, is directly 
responsible for the reduction of the fuel rebate from Ottawa. 
 
Because they are trying now . . and the ironic part of this whole thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that even before the negotiations, even before the negotiations on the code . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member say, never thought of a federal deficit. 
 
Well I guess the member is more interested in the federal deficit than he is in taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, the farmers of Saskatchewan. And for a newly elected member in a rural riding, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is utter blasphemy, because he should be standing up for those 
members in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and obviously he's more concerned with what's happening 
in Ottawa then he is what's happening with farmers in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. That is not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying, this free trade agreement, even before the harmonization 
process, this code of subsidies is being negotiated, even before it is put forward we see the 
Saskatchewan government and the federal government, even before any negotiations are starting, 
starting to draw back, starting to knuckle under to the Americans. You'd think they'd be standing 
strong and increasing their programs, if you like, so that they would have a better bargaining 
position when it comes to reducing them through the negotiations. But not this government, not 
the federal government, and not a word from the Premier of this province because they are not 
concerned. Apparently they're not concerned with the process, with the Saskatchewan farmer 
who has to pay $600 a year, average, for the average farmer, for fuel. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another item that we're confronted with, and this is another item that 
the free trade agreement has directly affected, and that is the increase of the freight rates. increase 
to freight rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, constitutes another $1,000 of new cash that the 
Saskatchewan farmer, the average Saskatchewan farmer, is going to have to come up with next 
year in order to move his grain to market, because that is another reduction in the subsidy. 
 
And we can see this level going up higher and higher and higher. But in order to speed that up, 
what are they doing now? The federal government in Ottawa and this government in 
Saskatchewan is saying, well we got to change the method of payment. You know, there's 
pressure there on us; they say to change the method of payment. We got to pay the payment 
directly to the producer. 



 
Well isn't that lovely? What do you think our friends down south of the border in the United 
States will think when we have a direct transportation subsidy to the producer? They will single 
that out as probably number one or two, and they'll say it has to go. 
 
And as my friend from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, well that'll help the federal deficit. Yes, it'll help 
the federal deficit. But I ask, how will it help the farmers of Saskatchewan? And that is the point, 
that the members opposite so hypocritically sit there and say that they're representing rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And on all the issues that increase costs to farmers because of pressure from the free trade 
agreement, all the pressures of the free trade agreement and increases to Saskatchewan farmers, 
keep them silent, because it's the spineless leader they have. That is why -- can't stand up to 
Ottawa because the pressure comes from the U.S. to the federal government, to the provincial 
governments, and they knuckle under while Saskatchewan farmers have to come up with new 
cash every year. 
 
And that, Mr. Minister, as my colleague said, that's no wonder that this government opposite and 
its members are trying to dump this leader. I would applaud them if they did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Because it may be possible that even the members of his own party are saying, 
this leader has not stood up to Ottawa. This leader has told us falsehoods about the free trade 
agreement. This leader, or this Premier of Saskatchewan is not the person that we want to 
represent. Even the people in their own party must be saying that, if there is pressure from them 
to review his leadership. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, so the freight rates, the method of payment directly related to the free trade 
agreement, directly relate to it. And in order that Ottawa can get rid of this transportation subsidy, 
they go about it very sneakily, and their excuse is that they want to pay the payment to producers 
in order that it make more equity in the system. 
 
Well I'll tell you, more equity in the system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, means more dollars out of the 
pockets of Saskatchewan farmers because you don't trade off a large subsidy to put more so-
called equity in the system when it's costing the farmers money. What we do is build on those 
other areas in agriculture that are possibly . . . have some results against them because of the 
transportation policy, and I would love to argue or debate that point. But that's not the issue right 
here. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, well I have cited three, three things in the last couple of months, direct 
result from the free trade agreement causing Saskatchewan farmers to pay more money. 
 
Another one, let's ask ourselves why the initial grain prices were reduced. We in the past have 
seen that the pressure being put on Ottawa, if there is a deficit in any of the pools because of 



money lost because the sales were too high; if we see a deficit in the pools, the Americans say, 
that is a subsidy to Canadian farmers; you cannot do that, that is an unfair trading practice. 
 
So what does the government do? It drops down the initial price of grain to rock bottom. I mean, 
did the wheat board give the government a range on which the price of grain can be placed? The 
government placed that right near the bottom of the range to ensure that there was no deficit in 
the pooling system. How does that help Canadian farmers, Saskatchewan farmers in particular? 
 
They receive a low initial price, and hopefully they'll receive a significant final payment. But 
what happens in the meantime when we have a $6.5 billion debt load on Saskatchewan farmers 
hanging over the hear? Why wouldn't this Premier, this Minister of Agriculture, stand up to 
Ottawa and say, no, don't place that price for grain in the lower part of the range? Put it in the 
upper part of the range, because farmers need it. Grain stocks are low. Stand up to the Americans 
on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers to ensure that they get the maximum amount of dollars up 
front for the grain they sell. 
 
But we do not hear a whisper -- a whisper -- from the leader of this government, the Premier or 
the Minister of Agriculture, who can . . . it is impossible for me to say that he is doing his job. 
He's so wrapped up in privatization, so wrapped up in securing his own position in the party, that 
he has totally forgot about agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can go on. My colleague talked about the two-price wheat system, and I 
want to talk about that for a minute. The two-price wheat system in Canada was a system 
whereby Canadian farmers received about $280 million a year -- $280 million a year from 
domestic sales of wheat. And the member opposite, they justify the removal of the two-price 
wheat system by saying, oh, it was benefitting Ontario; Ontario's getting all the benefit. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is an outright . . . that is simply not the truth. That is simply not the truth. 
Two hundred and forty million dollars of that two-price wheat came to western Canada -- $240 
million -- and the rest went to Ontario. And they say, oh yes, but Ontario was increasing its share 
in great leaps and bounds. Well Ontario was increasing its share, but is that . . . what rationale is 
that -- to knock out $240 million to western Canada just because Ontario was getting 40 or 50 
million? What kind of logic is that? 
 
All it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an excuse, because the free trade agreement put pressure on the 
Canadian government, put pressure on the provincial government in Saskatchewan. And neither 
one of them, the Premier of this province nor the Prime Minister in Ottawa, had the gumption to 
stand up and say, no, we are going to keep this system. 
 
In fact, what they should have done was increase the two-price wheat system to include all of 
Canada. Put the two-price wheat system in one pool and have all farmers draw from it equally. 
That would have been even a better system. 
 
But no, they're satisfied to sit there and defend the actions of the federal government, defend the 
actions of the federal government when $240 million has been snapped out of the pockets of 



Saskatchewan farmers who are losing 46 per cent of their net income this year, or having it 
reduced by 46 per cent. What type of government, what type of a so-called friend of the farmer is 
that? That is pure, utter hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we see it time and time again. 
 
And I go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of the most important institutions that we have in Canada, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the Canadian Wheat Board, as far as farmers are concerned. In fact, in a 
poll, in a Decima poll that we saw come out a couple of months ago, 95 per cent of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan said they wanted the Canadian Wheat Board as their marketing mechanism -- 95 
per cent of the farmers. This free trade agreement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is putting direct pressure 
on the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We see the removal of oats from the board. Well the excuse was, it was only a half of the one per 
cent, just a small commodity. We hear rumblings in the future about export barley coming off. 
Well I'm not sure what their excuse for that would be, but I'm sure the defenders of the farmers 
over here will find out a good excuse why they can remove export barley from the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 
Instead of placing all the products under the Act, as wheat is, they're satisfied with seeing them 
fly away, seeing them excluded. The Americans say, well you subsidized your oat production 
more than we did, so therefore we don't need a licensing requirement -- free trade agreement. So 
what's that do? Brings down the standard. 
 
We see the Americans saying, marketing boards -- and especially pointing at the Canadian Wheat 
Board -- is an unfair trading practice. A mechanism in Canada whereby farmers have equal 
access to shipping their grain, no matter where you live in western Canada, through the Canadian 
Wheat Board -- a fair program, a program that markets grain right around the world. 
 
And more and more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, around this world we are seeing governments who 
want to trade from government to government, because they know they get stung when they start 
trading from the . . . in the private sector. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Americans have identified the Canadian Wheat Board as an unfair 
trading practice. And where is the premier of this province where the majority of permit book 
holders for that wheat board reside? Is he standing up to them and saying, no, you're not going to 
touch the wheat board? No. The Minister of Agriculture, the Premier of this province, is 
justifying the action. He's saying, oh it's a small portion, oats; well I support the wheat board but 
oats is okay to go. Next he'll be saying, I support the wheat board but it's okay for export barley 
to go. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the demise of the Canadian Wheat Board, the instrument that 95 
per cent of the Saskatchewan farmers want to be their export or their marketing tool. And this 
Premier flies in the face of 95 per cent of the Saskatchewan farmers, and I ask, why? 
 
And I think the answer is because he simply cannot represent this province on behalf of farmers. 
When it comes to standing up to Ottawa, when it comes to standing up to the Americans, he is 



simply bowled over and a small voice in the wilderness. That is why we have to have this 
Minister of Agriculture, this Premier, and this government out of this province so we can have 
someone govern this province who will stand up for Saskatchewan farmers, make representation. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board is a very important tool. We have seen in 
the past, we have see in the near past, several items come before the federal House directly 
affecting Saskatchewan farmers, and I have listed them: the interest-free cash advance; the loss of 
the fuel rebate; the grain freight rate and where it's paid to, the method of payment; the decrease 
in the initial price. 
 
(1545) 
 
And if you add up all these things . . . And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other factors that 
contribute to these things. But what I am saying is that this Premier, this Minister of Agriculture, 
should not be in his place in this legislature because he is not standing up for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you add up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cost simply on the loss of the fuel rebate, the interest now 
being paid on cash advances, and the increase to the freight rate, you come up with nearly $3,000 
of new cash that a farmer would have to bring out of his pocket, new money, when the reports 
are saying that net incomes in Saskatchewan are going to drop by 46 per cent, when a Premier, 
the person who brags about being the defender of Saskatchewan farmers, is silent on the issue. 
 
That is not acceptable, and I don't know what we can do on this side of the House to convince 
him. What the farmers of Saskatchewan, the 95 per cent who stand up for the Canadian Wheat 
Board, what they do to convince this Premier that he has to stand up to Ottawa. 
 
But I'm sure that Brian Mulroney has got a hold of his hand very tightly, and like my colleague 
says, a small dog on a short leash. And every time be barks he just gives that leash a jerk so the 
dog is pretty quiet. And that is the problem that the farmers of Saskatchewan have -- no 
representation to stand up for their interest, so $3,000 new money. 
 
If you want to add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the loss because of the drop in the initial drop in the 
price of grain, you're adding to the average farmer in Saskatchewan about another $12,000 -- and 
some of you people over there should realized that -- the added cost of $15,000 a year, the 
potential loss of $15,000 a year to Saskatchewan farmers as a result of pressures through the free 
trade agreement. And this Minister of Agriculture, this Premier of this province is silent because 
he is spineless, he has not courage, you cannot stand up to Ottawa, he can not stand up to the 
Americans, and he is not defending interests of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, and I think that is right, and that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Minister 
of Agriculture, that Premier, the Premier of this province, is so low in the polls in this province. 
And that is why is own party is questioning, that is why his own party is questioning his 



leadership capabilities. That is why, and there's not doubt about that -- even the members of his 
own party. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan and the federal government to 
maintain solemn commitments made to the people of Saskatchewan regarding the 
implementation of the free trade agreement and therefore ensure that social programs will 
not be affected, that regional development grants will remain, that the Canadian Wheat 
Board will not be undermined, that marketing boards are protected and that national 
agriculture programs such as the Western Grain Stabilization Fund, the Crow benefit, and 
compensation for the elimination of the two-price wheat system will not be cancelled. 

 
That is why we have to bring this motion forward because the Minister of Agriculture, the 
Premier of this province, will not do it. All as can hope is that the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
and I think the hoping is pretty well over, because the numbers of farmer that I've talked to -- and 
I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without a word of a lie, these were farmers that I knew voted 
Tory last year, last election, in my constituency -- when I talk to them, we talk about all the 
issues, talk about the weather and everything else that farmers talk about, and when it comes 
down to the end they tell me that this government's been here too long. And I'm not making that 
up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think the members opposite know that. They've been here too 
long. And . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Out of touch. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Out of touch with the people, not standing up against the federal government, not 
defending Saskatchewan farmers, the increases in the price, when they themselves know that 
there's a $6.5 billion debt problem. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to show you how far out of touch and how arrogant and how 
thoughtless these people are, we had to force them by showing numbers in this legislature of the 
over 10,000 notices of intention to foreclose or seize assets, before they would bring forward 
their agricultural legislation. They sat back and held back their legislation, using the argument, 
using the argument that we were holding up the legislature. But that is utter nonsense, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because they had ample time. 
 
So we forced them into bringing the agriculture Bills forward. That is why the people of 
Saskatchewan re saying this guy's got no leadership. He's got no intestinal fortitude when it 
comes to standing up to Ottawa on the free trade agreement. He's go no leadership when it comes 
to representing Bills before this House that will help Saskatchewan farmers. He simply is out of 
touch. He simply is preoccupied with his own leadership; he's preoccupied with his privatization 
binge that he simply cannot lead this province any longer. And I think if he has the will to call an 
election, the farmers of Saskatchewan will respond by tossing out that person who's so out of 
touch. 
 



Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a privilege for me to begin the discussion on this 
issue today on free trade. I want to make a couple observations, and I want to go into some detail 
on this. 
 
I had occasion to travel to United States prior to this agreement being reached, and the member 
for Regina Rosemont went along with me, and we dealt with two issues as it related to free trade, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that dealt with issues in relation to agriculture and fisheries. We went down 
there to take a look and to hear from people in the United States about how the role the American 
government . . . the role the American government played in the trade negotiations. They were 
just being begun at that time. We had a lot of insights into the various kinds of attitudes that the 
American people had in relation to trade and trade relations with other countries. 
 
We met with the ambassadors for Canada in the United States. We met with various trade 
agencies. We met with negotiators of the people who negotiated various aspects of disagreements 
between United States and Canada. One of the individuals who I recall having met with was Mr. 
Horlick, who was the principal legal counsel for the department of consumer affairs in the United 
States. That gentleman was well versed in the attitude of free trade as it related to the pulp and 
paper industry, the softwood lumber dispute that was on at the time. His opinion of it had not 
changed from the first time he suggested to the United States Department of Commerce that they 
should not pursue the tariff. And when they did that later on, he was against it and therefore he 
could not be supporting that kind of an attitude. 
 
We learned a lot about the role of the United States government in dealing with this. We met 
with the people who supplied the support systems for the American Congress, the House of 
Representatives and the senators. We dealt with a lot of issues dealing with trade in agriculture 
and fisheries. 
 
Before that I decided I was going to take a look at how to evaluate and determine whether in fact 
Canada would have an opportunity to improve its position or be a negative in relation to the free 
trade and the debate on trade. So I took it upon myself to do some investigation into various 
aspects of it. And one of the books that I read had to do with international economics, and it was 
a book that reviewed all of the research and the history that had gone on through the period of 
time of development of the trade and trade relations with United States, early into, and going 
beyond, the 1900s. 
 
And some of the things that they mentioned about the studies that had been done, they ran 
through the majority of them and did an analysis of whether they were in fact accurate, whether 
they were in fact legitimate in determining whether in fact trade with United States and a freer 
trade with United States would benefit Canada and its relationship in a trading manner. 
 
One of the things that struck me it the objectivity of the individual who did it, and he didn't make 



any partisan remarks one way or another. He was not pro-Canadian; he was not pro-American; he 
was not pro-trade; he was not pro-anti-free trade. 
 
And one of the things that he continually mentioned was that you have two views. One view is 
that you take a statistical analysis and deal with it in a statistical way and you can derive a 
conclusion from that statistical analysis to give you the dynamic of what it will be. 
 
And then you have the second observation that you have to make, and that's an empirical view, 
which is a view that gives you the response from a gut feeling as to what will happen when in 
fact a decision is made on an issue. And that empirical value he did not necessarily emphasize, 
but he put it into perspective and he says, if these kinds of things happen, then this could have a 
possibility of happening. 
 
He went on in detail and dealt with every facet of the trade and trade with United States, all the 
products that were there all the way from the textile industry to agriculture and manufacturing 
agricultural products, poultry products, eggs, dairy products, and all of those. In each of them he 
did a separate analysis. 
 
And in recalling the details of that, there were two areas that he said there could possibly be a 
negative impact on free trade. One was the textile industry in Canada could have a negative 
impact if they did no improve their manufacturing and their quality of manufacturing, plus if they 
didn't improve their commitment to modernize their plants. That was the one area. 
 
The other area, Mr. Speaker, was in the diary products. There was a possibility of some injury to 
Canada because of the size and the magnitude of the American volume. Now he didn't say it 
necessarily would happen, but he did indicate that there was a problem. 
 
One of the things that the free trade discussion did with the diary products is it gave it a longer 
period of time to adjust, because the American system and the system that they have developed 
over the last 75 to 100 years has just as many warts on it as ours does. And therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, it has to take a longer time to evolve in having a less position of hurt for those people 
who are involved in that industry. 
 
What the positives in this were, Mr. Speaker, is the example that he used over and over again of 
the manufacturing industry in Ontario in the cars. And, Mr. Speaker, what he pointed out over 
and over again was that the free trade in automobiles with United States had put the free trade 
into perspective. What the plants did in Ontario is they modernized. They became efficient 
because they produced massively products that they could sell into United States that they could 
deliver. Ontario, for example, out of $170 billion trade relationship has a $90 billion volume of 
business with the United States, and that is basically the car manufacturing sector. 
 
And so one of the things that he pointed out over and over again was the value that that was to 
the economy in southern Ontario. It had a tremendous impact to the benefits of the manufacturing 
of automobiles. It had spin-off effects into the whole region that gave it a dynamic that was 
unusual. And it wouldn't have been there without a free trade agreement with the United States, 



because the United States couldn't go back on the arrangement that they had made. 
 
And it leads me to a point that I think we must consider in dealing with the issue of free trade in 
the total concept of where we're going and what we're doing as a trading nation, as a trading 
province in the country of Canada. We cannot, Mr. Deputy Speaker, allow ourselves the freedom 
to build walls around ourselves, to protect ourselves from outside forces, because we have 
become know in the whole world as traders. We are highly equipped in our expertise, in our 
knowledge of the international markets. We are well equipped in our dynamic to understand what 
those markets can do to us. We understand that they can hit us and they can lever us into a very 
positive position. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why we are considered some of the best traders in the world. We have 
people who have come from this province who are heads of various agencies of the government, 
and they understand it. And where did they come from? They came from the basic trading 
province of Canada, which is Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
One in four jobs for Saskatchewan people is related to trade with the United States. That's why 
it's important that we deal very precisely and very factually with what we do with free trade. We 
cannot allow, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the emotional rhetoric of all the things that have gone on in 
previous years to be the only window that we look out when we look out into the future to see 
what Saskatchewan can have and what it can benefit from. We have to take the dynamic of the 
future and not only of the past to give us a vision of what we have to be. 
 
What does it do to agriculture as a trading function in Saskatchewan that we need? I'll give you 
an example -- Flexi-Coil. Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon is expanding their market. Where are they 
going to expand their market to? They're going to expand their market into United States, and 
they are not only going to do that for the people of Saskatchewan, which will be able to reduce 
the cost and the price of the products to the people of Saskatchewan, but John Deere farm 
equipment will sell that cultivator and their products all over United States, to deliver into United 
States; that opportunity giving us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an opportunity to sell steel, to have jobs, 
to provide services. And the second thing that it did, Mr. Speaker, in that one very single item, 
free trade allows the service industry to go down there and service products. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why those are very, very important features. If we didn't have . . . The 
United States had a law that said if you didn't have the service industry to service that 
manufactured product, then you couldn't sell it there. And we were excluded from those services 
by the law. And free trade now gives us an opportunity not only to sell down there, but to go 
down there and fix it for them. And that service-side industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is just as 
important to the people of Saskatchewan as it is in the manufacturing of that product itself. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is why we are directly impacted positively by that very same function. 
 
Now go to item number two, in a raw product manufactured here in Saskatchewan that is number 
three in California, and that's again manufactured out of Saskatoon. Intercontinental Packers 



(Ltd.) sells hams in the United States and to California markets. They're the third largest supplier 
of hams into the California market. 
 
Today what you're seeing in the automotive industry, which is rather different, and that is they 
are going to go to California to find out what the California people want for marketing and how 
they're going to make the cars in eastern United States. That's the dynamic of what the retail . . . 
the manufacturers are providing in the industry. They're going to California to find out how they 
want them to have the cars. We are going to go to California to see what they want in meat and 
products that we manufacture; in the bacon and in the hams that come out of Intercontinental 
Packers in Saskatchewan. Why? Because we can go to one place in United States and sell more 
product to one place in United States than we can do to all of Canada. 
 
And it is closer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for us to supply into the California market giving us an 
economic freight advantage than for us to ship it into Toronto. And that, Mr. Speaker, is very, 
very important for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when the United States rationalized their killing plants, where did they go? They moved the 
killing plants to that region of United States that would best serve those high volume 
populations. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we have to do. We have to put those kind of 
killing plants and processing plants in the province of Saskatchewan that are going to deliver the 
product into the United States at a competitive advantage, at an advantage based on the fact that 
we have a better product to offer. 
 
And why are the people in United States talking about buying Canadian bacon and Canadian 
hams? And I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want that product. They want it, and even if 
they would have to pay more for it, they would still buy it because it's better. Plain and simple, 
we have a good product to sell, we have a good product to provide to them, and they're prepared 
to buy it. 
 
And I know for a fact when they get those Flexi-Coil cultivators down in the United States 
they're going to say they're pretty darn good too, because they're manufactured here for the kinds 
of conditions that are required in a tough environment, and they're made to be the kind of 
implement that the people down there will want, and I know that. 
 
Morris Rod-Weeder is another company that sells down in the United States. Take Versatile, for 
example, in Winnipeg. What impact does that have? Is it negative? No, Mr. Speaker, it's not; it's 
positive. 
 
Now we have to deal with a couple of other items here yet, too; one is the cars. And I really, 
really think that the people opposite need to consider some very important features. When we 
were down in Washington talking to the trade people down there, they were very, very sceptical 
about whether the car agreement on the trade with United States would actually be able to stand 
up without a free trade agreement. And that, Mr. Speaker, is very, very important in dealing with 
this whole issue. 
 



You cannot only deal with the items that you're trading, but you have to take those items, and 
then how do they impact on the society around them with the other things that you're going to 
trade? And cars was one of them. Cars was in jeopardy of being gone if we didn't get a free trade 
agreement, and I heard that over and over and over again. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
reason why I believe Ontario, for example, voted in favour of, in the federal election. And I think 
that the people of western Canada voted for it for those same reasons. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan were led down the garden path by the members opposite because 
they said, oh, they're going to take health care away on you, they're going to take . . . and just like 
in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they said they're going to take your five 
hospitals away. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what those members opposite did in the free trade 
discussions; and that, Mr. Speaker, is why many, many people said they were a little hesitant 
about what they were doing with free trade. 
 
But that, Mr. Speaker, is also the point I want to make is why we won the Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg by-election, because those people in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg are free traders with 
United States today. They have been for years. They go down into there an they find out what's 
going on. And that's why they voted for the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to sit on this 
side of the House, because they knew and they knew very, very well that the people who were 
going to give them the benefit were those people who were in favour of the free trade agreement. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that came to mind in the discussion on free trade in relation to 
this thing as it related to the federal election was the steel plant here at Ipsco. Were they in favour 
of it? At the beginning they were not. At the beginning they said, there are a few things that we 
see as a problem with it. But as the trade discussion went on, they became more and more 
informed about what that impact was going to be and how that would positively impact on their 
industry. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is where they are today in relation to this. Why would they be against it 
when they can manufacture products that would put steel into products that would be sold in the 
United States. That, Mr. Speaker, is why they are speaking out in favour of it. 
 
I just wanted to point out, on a western Canadian ministers' conference, some of the things that 
were discussed. And the premiers of the four western provinces got together and they said that 
we need to have a summary of what we want to have in relation to a free trade agreement. And 
the premiers met in Calgary, and in a joint position paper the provinces took issue with the 
national tariff structure, which we suggest encourages the concentration of manufacturing in 
central Canada and the development of agriculture products and other raw materials in western 
Canada, and excludes them from using raw materials in western Canada: 
 

In addition, since the national tariff protects many of the inefficient manufacturing 
industries in central Canada which markets goods at higher prices than would be the case 
if the goods were imported duty free . . . 

 
Now that's been a problem all through the history of western Canada. Eastern Canada would 



manufacture the province, and here again cars is a primary example. We would have to pay the 
tariff on those cars; the car market in the United States would not have to pay that tariff. So we 
were in fact subsidizing the car manufacturing industry in Ontario. And then the tariff structure 
would cause an increase in the price of the product, therefore causing a negative to the economy 
in western Canada. That, Mr. Speaker, is why the four western provinces decided that they 
shouldn't be going that way. 
 
There's some other items I want to quote from this document. 
 

Presently, while ways and means of improving terms of trade to expand and diversify 
Saskatchewan and western economies are being discussed, the West is toiling under 
federal transportation policies that aggravate its trade position. 

 
Now that's been a part of what we have said in western Canada and the province of 
Saskatchewan for decades. I hear my father talking about that 40 years ago, and that hasn't 
changed. 
 

Many freight rate anomalies inhibit processing of resources in the West and yet open 
Saskatchewan up to easy market penetration. 

 
From where? From central Canada, from the manufacturing subsidies that are placed on, that we 
have to pay in order to deliver them into western Canada. 
 

Hence, as Saskatchewan's trade objectives we are now beginning to discuss with the 
federal government, Saskatchewan must point out that the federal transportation policies 
are not complementary to the objectives of Saskatchewan having growth. 

 
Now that's been real. That's been there for decades, like I said before. The whole concern, 
because Saskatchewan is an exporting province, has to relate to how we export our product. We 
have to have an opportunity for trade that gives us a background for putting our product, which 
has quality, which has a relatively low subsidy value in relation to its manufacturing, processing, 
and that sort of thing -- we have to deliver that product to the consumer. And that opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, is very important for us to have the recognition by the United States that we are 
equal in opportunities to provide the quality of product that we need to have. 
 
Now let's take wheat as an example, or durum or oats or barley or any of those products that we 
grow in western Canada. Those products, Mr. Speaker, have been recognized throughout the 
world as being of the highest quality. And that's because we have put research into the quality, 
but it also has to do with the environment they grow in. The tough, extreme climatic conditions 
that exist in Saskatchewan and western Canada are the reason why those products are of the 
quality they are. 
 
Now how do I sell them into United States? It's almost impossible for me to do. And if we hadn't 
had the change in the climate down in the United States, that their coarse grains were . . . they 
were having a problem growing them, Mr. Speaker, we would not have the oats market today 



that we do. The horses in Kentucky probably eat more than the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we have to have an opportunity to market that down 
there. But we haven't done that for so long, we had to find a new way to do it. 
 
(1615) 
 
And why couldn't we take that opportunity? We have that opportunity in the horse market, in the 
thoroughbred market in Kentucky and in Tennessee; we also have that market, Mr. Speaker, in 
the health food side. We haven't taken that opportunity to do it. 
 
And more and more, as I've heard people talking about the value of oats, in the quality of the 
food that they eat is the thing that we have to promote. And who do we have an opportunity to do 
that? We have an opportunity to do that because of the high quality milling capacity of the grain 
that we grow. And that is the reason why health food stores want to use our oats. They want to 
mill it. They want to use it for bread. They want to do all of those kinds of things. And if we 
wouldn't have a free trade agreement with the United States, they could just block us off right 
now and they could say, no more of that, and then where would we be? And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
one item. 
 
Let's take the role of canola, for example, in the United States. We have marketed canola into the 
Japanese market for a long time already and they were the sole . . . basically the sole users of the 
product, in a volume sense. What we've had over the last year or so is the U.S. home-maker has 
decided to adjust the kind of edible oils that she uses in her cooking. And they're coming to the 
place now, under the recommendation of the United States health and food, that the canola oil is 
an important part of that food supply source in the United States. And where are they going for 
that, Mr. Speaker? They're going to Saskatchewan and Alberta and Manitoba. And why would 
they come here? It's because we have the product, Mr. Speaker. We've developed a quality 
product that is highly valued all through the world, and that's why they want to come to us. What 
would free trade or closing of the doors and building this box around us, what would that have 
done if we would have continued to do that? Mr. Speaker, that opportunity . . . we would have 
narrowed and narrowed the opportunity for us to do those kinds of things with the American 
consumer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture placed in perspective in dealing with the functions because it is a 
primary food supplier to 260 million people, has a value for people of Saskatchewan, without a 
doubt. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why it is important for us to have a trade relationship with the 
United States that will give us an opportunity to market into that huge demand, that consumer 
demand. 
 
Now what that does for us, Mr. Speaker, by having a trade relationship with the United States, it 
makes other countries and other people begin to rationalize why they have high tariffs in the first 
place. Now let's take two examples of the worst that are in existence today in relation to trade -- 
Japan and the EEC (European Economic Community). Both of those countries, both of those . . . 
the community of countries under the EEC and Japan are the worst, MR. Speaker, as it relates to 



tariffs. 
 
I'll give you an example. Rice can be grown in Japan, sold to the United States at less than the 
American farmers can grow it for. How do they do that? They have one single agency to buy all 
of the rice, all of the food in Japan. That one single agency buys it at a high price, won't provide 
it to the people of Japan, sells it into United States with an export subsidy, and therefore reduces 
the price to below what the farmers in the United States can sell it for. 
 
And that's what they are doing with all of their food. They do that with the livestock industry. 
They do that with the cattle. You talk about selling our beef into Japan -- you can't do that 
because the tariffs are so high they just block it all off. We can't do that. But if we trade with the 
United States, they're going to have to soon say look, we've got to start to adjust our systems here 
because our people are going to start to grumble because they want to have the quality of meat 
products that can be delivered by the people of Saskatchewan, by the people of Canada, and by 
the United States, therefore, too. 
 
But since the United States is a net importer, they won't be supplying that food there. But where 
will it come from? It can come from the people of Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, gives us 
an excellent opportunity to market into that kind of an economy and therefore enhance the 
opportunities that we have to provide quality processed product into those kinds of countries. 
 
And the same thing can be done with the French market, the German market, and all of those in 
various other areas. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why I believe that the free trade agreement with the United States is a very, 
very important milestone in the history of Saskatchewan. It is going to give us an opportunity to 
develop the kinds of things that we want to in this province, and the kinds of things that we need 
to do. 
 
I just want to have one more item and then I'm going to have some concluding remarks. But one 
of the things that I find very difficult to understand, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the opposition and 
the opposition to the free trade agreement, and that is on two rivers that flow from Saskatchewan 
into United States. We have, through the history of southern Saskatchewan, had a very extreme 
problem, and it's no different this year than last year, in relation to the water volume that goes 
into the United States. 
 
The Frenchman River delivers way more than its 50 per cent share to United States, because we 
have no way of regulating and controlling the amount of water that goes into United States. We 
can't control what is delivered. We could have an opportunity to save 50 per cent of that water 
and we let it go. 
 
The second one is the Souris River. The Souris River, 90 per cent of the water runs into United 
States; 10 per cent stays here. We have rights to 50 per cent of that. Why can't we keep it? Why 
can't we take the things that we can do with the water in the southern part of this province and do 
with it what we have a right to do. 



 
Mr. Speaker, people believe in the southern half of the province, in water. I just spent a couple of 
days riding a horse through the Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, and it was dry, really, really dry. not 
only that, Mr. Speaker, I visited with those cowboys and ranchers through that area and they 
wondered why, why would people be against that sort of thing -- developing a water resource to 
keep it in Saskatchewan, to develop more capacity for producing and then giving more for 
production and all of those kinds of things. Why not guild the dam? And why would these people 
be against it? It just boggles my mind, Mr. Speaker, why. 
 
They don't want to have any trade with the United states. They want to block it all off, and they 
say, we want to let all the water go, on the other hand. What does that tell me? Where is their 
consistency in delivery of an opportunity for people in southern Saskatchewan? Where is their 
realism? 
 
And when we talk about the value that it would be, Mr. Speaker, Ducks unlimited have built 
reservoirs on my land, and they have done a good job with it. When I was a kid growing up, the 
geese would fly over in V's. Today they're nesting in those dams. When I was a kid growing up, 
we'd see ducks once in a while, but now they're nesting over in those places. 
 
And what does that do for the people of Saskatchewan on their relations with the free trade . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I'll tell you what it does, the member from Regina Victoria. The 
attitude that we can develop by having those Americans come in and invest in Saskatchewan and 
in an opportunity through Ducks Unlimited through the value that they add to the trade and the 
trade relationship with the United States is enhanced by that opportunity that we have to deliver 
the kinds of products that they want to have. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, what have we got in my constituency? Today we have in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, are outfitters who are dealing with an opportunity that they never, ever had before. 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, some of those people have told me this. Their gross earnings 
off of outfitting for goose hunts are higher than they are for their farms. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
fairly significant out in my part of the country. 
 
And we can have that. We have an opportunity for tourism. Why do we want to block 
Saskatchewan off? Members opposite do. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there . . . behind it 
all there is a reason. Behind it all there is a reason, because when you allow people of 
Saskatchewan to get out into the world, as they can see the people around them, they will know 
that they can compete openly, up front, with anybody in the world. And they have, and they can, 
and they will. 
 
And that's why I like free trade. It's an opportunity for us to develop the kinds of things that the 
people of Saskatchewan believe in. It's the kind of place we can have for an opportunity for the 
people of Saskatchewan to grow. Not only, Mr. Speaker, do I disagree with anything anti-free-
trade, I treat it with a good deal of disgust. 
 
And I would like to also add, Mr. Speaker, for years and years -- because I'm in the livestock 



industry, I was aware of this for a long time -- 25 per cent of our cattle would go to Alberta; 25 
per cent would go to the United States; 25 per cent would go to Ontario; and we would keep back 
25 per cent to feed right here. We have the highest volume of grain production. We have the 
highest volume of land base in Canada -- 40 per cent-plus of all the arable land in Canada. Why 
would we want to sell the raw product to those people who would process them, put the feed 
grains into them. Why would we want to do that? 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why we have to get back to the basics of having the product grown here. 
We have to have the product processed here and we have to have the product marketed from here 
because that, Mr. Speaker, gives us an opportunity to compete in a way that is going to enhance 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the only way we can to that, Mr. Speaker, is by opening the doors for trade and throw them 
wide open because, Mr. Speaker, I can compete on that basis anywhere in the world. And I want 
to say that I am entirely in favour of free trade. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to enter into this debate relative to free 
trade as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And I want to confine my remarks to three general areas, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, I want to go through, point by point, the issues that were raised by the hon. member 
for Saskatoon Fairview, who is the free trade critic, those points for the U.S. Department of 
Commerce ruling. Secondly, the NDP contention that there's been reduced social spending 
because of the free trade agreement. Thirdly, his remarks about regional spending and the free 
trade environment. And fourthly, the Canadian Wheat Board oats and the two-price wheat. 
 
The second area, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk about is examining these arguments, then close by 
looking at why the Progressive Conservatives and farmers across this province want a free trade 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Firstly, the hon. member talked about the U.S. Department of Commerce ruling that came down 
today. This is the final determination of subsidy. This was preceded by a ruling, a preliminary 
determination of subsidy, on May 2, 1989. And this is relative to our hog and pork exports to the 
United States, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In May of this year the U.S. Department of Commerce, under a preliminary determination of 
subsidy, saw a three and a half cent per pound countervail duty put in place, Mr. Speaker. This 
final determination of subsidy now sees that rise by 0.1 cent to 3.6 cents per pound, Mr. Speaker, 
on fresh chilled and frozen pork from Canada. 
 
Now we are of the view, Mr. Speaker, that this next step which is the final determination of 



injury by the U.S. International Trade Commission may well see this overturned. It may well see 
that overturned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To put this in perspective for producers and others who may not be familiar with this, it's a multi-
stage process. The Department of Commerce can investigate if asked to by producers, whether 
there's a subsidy, an unfair subsidy, by in this case, Canadian pork producers. They went through 
and decided that there was a 3.5 cent a pound unfair subsidy. On further looking at it, they've 
determined now that it's 3.6 cents. 
 
But the next crunch, if you like, the next stage in this is, okay, there is a subsidy according to the 
U.S., but is that hurting our pork producers, is that adversely affecting our market, and if so, 
adversely affecting our pork producers? 
 
(1630) 
 
So there is that step in the process that has to be gone through yet, Mr. Speaker, and our view is 
that that may well be overturned. And I think that view would be shared by the Canadian Pork 
Council as well as the Canadian Meat Council. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before we had a free trade agreement, if and when the International Trade 
Commission would have ruled yes, there is injury; yes, there is unfair subsidy' and yes, we will 
maintain this countervailing duty, we as Saskatchewan farmers or pork producers, really all we 
could do was wring out hands and say, oh those darned Americans, they're being unfair to us 
again. 
 
We didn't have that assured access, we didn't have that assured access to that U.S. market that we 
want. And why do we want that U.S. market, Mr. Speaker? Well the reason is that our pork 
exports to the United States, fresh and frozen, have gone from the NDP days of $3.4 million or 
$6.2 million in 1982 to now, if we look at '84, '85, '86, '87, for example -- $14.6 million, $20.9 
million, $26.0 million and $34.4 million, or about six, seven, and eight times what was being 
exported in the days of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why is that so? Well we've seen hog production in this program, because of the innovative 
programs of this Premier and Minister of Agriculture, and because of the vision and foresight of 
these members from rural Saskatchewan, we've see our hog production go from something 
around 700,000, Mr. Speaker, to over $1 million, and it's finding its way into that U.S. market 
because that is a market, Mr. Speaker, of 250 million people. 
 
So in the old days, Mr. Speaker, under the time when we didn't have this free trade agreement 
and this action was brought against our producers, all we could really do was wring our hands. 
But the NDP are good at wringing their hands, Mr. Speaker, and so the pork producers, the pork 
producers were very supportive of a free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker. The pork producers 
wanted to see this free trade agreement inked. 
 
And the reason they wanted to see this free trade agreement inked is because hand-wringing 



wasn't good enough. No pork producer can plan ahead. We couldn't see the jobs that could come 
with this, in a solid sense, if every year or two we were going to be subjected to these frivolous 
actions, sometimes frivolous actions, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, from the U.S. And so one of the 
things that we got through this free trade agreement, one of the things we got is a new tool to 
make sure that there isn't frivolous actions and that it's fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the pork producers asked for that; they wanted that; they saw the need for it, and we got that. 
And it's interesting that the critic really didn't talk about this tool. He talked about three stages. 
He really didn't talk about that final stage because they don't want to hear this. They don't want to 
hear that the Mulroney government, with the help of the pork producers, got an additional tool 
and no other country in the world has it, Mr. Speaker. Japan doesn't have that tool, the European 
Economic Community doesn't have that tool, but Canadian pork producers have that tool, and it's 
a credit to the Mulroney government and the pork producers that we have that tool. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- If it comes to the point where the International Trade Commission rules 
that there is hurt, I would predict . . . I would be urging, as will my colleague, I'm sure, the 
minister in charge of free trade, that the federal government pursue, on behalf of pork producers, 
going to that tribunal that was set up as a result of the free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker. WE 
have that new tool, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the hon. member over there says that under the International Trade Commission that they've 
never really changed a ruling, they've never ever really changed a ruling. Well I want to tell him: 
where was he in 1984 -- or was it early '85, Mr. Speaker -- when our pork producers were hit the 
first time with countervail? Where was he then? 
 
And you know what the situation was then, back then, Mr. Speaker, when we didn't have the free 
trade agreement? Well not only did they slap a countervail on frozen and fresh pork, they slapped 
a countervail on the live hogs, Mr. Speaker. Live hogs as well as the fresh pork, as well as the 
pork fresh and frozen. It went to the International Trade Commission. And we didn't win it all 
there, Mr. Speaker. We didn't win it all, but they took the countervail off the live hog trade. We 
didn't win it all, but certainly that denies the opposition member's observation that the 
International Trade Commission doesn't change ruling, or that they're just some kind of toady for 
the system, if you like. 
 
Now I thought that logic in their ruling, quite frankly, was lacking. It wasn't a unanimous ruling; I 
thought the logic was lacking. But even the International Trade Commission, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it can be said, isn't a toady of the system, if you like. But never mind that. Even if that rules 
against us at that stage, we do have this additional new tool of the international tribunal, Mr. 
Speaker, and that's something that we didn't have before; it's something that we have now. 
 
Having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, there's no question that this determination, this final 
determination, at 3.6 cents a pound is unfortunate; it's regrettable; we all wish it wasn't 
happening. We wish we didn't have to run it up the flag pole, if you like, and use these tools, but 



they are there. And they weren't there in the past, and hopefully they'll be there in the useful sort 
of way that we think they can be there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other argument that the hon. member from Fairview made is that here we went through this 
negotiation process and at the end of the day we didn't get the U.S. to give up their trade remedy 
laws. They came out of this with their trade remedy laws intact, and oh how sad and awful that is. 
 
Well what a narrow-minded argument when you think about it, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, first of all it took several years to get to the stage we got with an agreement. If we'd 
wanted to cover off everything, they'd still be there. So it made sense, if you like, in a strategic 
way to let's get something delivered and get something to start with, and they've made provision 
over the next five or six or seven years to work on some other areas. 
 
That's point number on. But frankly, Mr. Speaker, that isn't the most important reason. I'll tell 
you what, Mr. Speaker, as sure as I'm standing here, if we had have gotten the U.S. to give up 
their trade remedy laws, they would have had us give up our trade remedy laws. And I'll tell you, 
I will never sell out Canadian producers to that kind of scenario ever. You might, but we won't 
on this side of the House. 
 
And I'll tell you why, and I'll telly you why, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you why. Because we have not 
been nor will we be bullied or pushed around by the U.S. And it was because we had Canadian 
trade remedy laws that when the Irish beef was coming into here at, I think, something like 75 
cents a pound subsidy, it was those trade remedy laws that turned those boats around. And that's 
the kind of protection we have and we're not going to give it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I'll tell you what, that's the kind of trade remedy laws that we have here that provided our 
corn producers in Ontario, and I won't be backing corn producer in Ontario, but I'll tell you it was 
the same laws that protected those corn producers from unfair dumping, if you like, into Canada 
of U.S. corn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So he says maybe we should've given up all of our trade remedy laws; I say our negotiators were 
smart and they did not give up our trade remedy laws but instead we got a new tool that no other 
country in the world that trades with the United States has, and we got that under a PC 
government in Saskatchewan and under a PC government in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and my hat 
off to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Now the hon. member quoted at some length from the president of the 
Canadian Manufacturers' Association, something he said and I think it was 1980. Now I support 
whole-heartedly a lot of the initiatives of the Canadian Manufacturers' Association. One of the 
things that they are very proactive, Mr. Speaker, in is recognizing that in the world of the future 
education, job retraining, grasping the essence of the technological era is what's going to 
determine whether we are a success or a failure in the world economy ahead. 
 



But, Mr. Speaker, I find it unusual, I find it strange, I find it sad that an opposition member in the 
Saskatchewan legislature to make his case on free trade has to rely on quotations from the head 
of the Canadian Manufacturers' Association. He has to rely on his quotations from some guy who 
runs a plastic company in central Canada, and other NDP members who will drag forward every 
union head, people that run textile industries and the like that we don't have in here. 
 
I say let's stand up for Saskatchewan producers. Why didn't he quote what the stock growers 
think about free trade or pork producers or canola growers or barley growers or flax growers or 
the Saskatchewan cattle feeders association. I'll tell you why he didn't quote from them, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, he has no sense of where they're coming from; and secondly, they are, too, a 
group in favour of this free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we stand side by side with the 
Saskatchewan stock growers and the Canadian Cattlemen's Association, and the western 
Canadian wheat growers and the barley growers and the canola growers and the flax growers and 
the canola growers and the pork producers, and the list goes on and on and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker, because they too know we have a future in maintaining larger trade ties with the United 
States in that area. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here it is, once again we see resurrected in his second line of reasoning that if 
we sign this free trade agreement we'll see decreased social spending, we'll see our hospitals 
closing, we'll see our health care system torn down, and you know all the lines, Mr. Speaker. We 
heard them from the NDP during the election; we heard them during the election in Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg, and we heard in the election, the federal election in the fall of last year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, that is the most despicable form of scaremongering and 
fearmongering known to mankind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- What kind of a person is it, Mr. Speaker, what kind of a person is it that 
goes out on the campaign trail, walks into senior citizens' homes, walk into the homes of the 
elderly, Mr. Speaker, and tells them, and tells them as if it is fact, that if you elect the Tories and 
bring this free trade agreement in, your hospital will be gone? What kind of person would do 
that, I ask, Mr. Speaker, what kind of person? Is that right and fair? Is that the kind of society we 
want, Mr. Speaker, where you go around scaring old people; where you go around lying, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
That's not the kind of society that we stand for in this province. That's the tactics of radicals, Mr. 
Speaker, that's the tactics of scaremongers, fearmongers and all the like, Mr. Speaker. But then 
again, we shouldn't be surprised when we look at that issue, Mr. Speaker. Radicals will do those . 
. . 



 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I've just been listening to the hon. member's remarks, and I would 
just like to draw his attention to the fact that it seems that he may have been, he may have been 
indicating that perhaps some member had been lying. I think that we have to be careful about 
that. Order, order. And I think we have to be careful about that. Parliamentary language is very 
important to maintain the decorum of the House, and I realize that sometimes in the heat of 
debate, we may . . . our emotions may become extended, but I would like to draw that to his 
attention. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: -- What is the point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I have also been watching the minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I want to say I was watching on T.V. in the lounge, the member, and I want 
to say that if the minister wants to continue making a fool of himself, we have no problem with . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Now I would just also like to mention to the hon. member from 
Regina Elphinstone, who is also a member who has spent a great deal of time in the House, that 
he knew that was not a point of order. It was a frivolous statement and I would ask him to refrain 
from that in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the argument made by the hon. member 
just to review where I was at. The NDP said during the by-election and during the federal 
election that if you have this free trade agreement your hospitals will be gone, your health care 
system will be in pieces, etc., etc. And I ask, Mr. Speaker, and I ask again: is that the kind of 
society, is that a legitimate way to conduct ourselves as legislators and/or as people in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, going around scaring people with that kind of tactic? -- the tactics of 
radicals, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what did we see really? You know, the part that the hon. member from Fairview didn't raise 
here is a couple of headlines that I have, one from the Leader-Post, November 4, 1998, another 
one from the Leader-Post November 7, '88. Headline: "Hall denies medicare at risk". That was 
former Justice Emmett Hall, Mr. Speaker, well recognized as the father of medicare. He looked 
at the agreement and said that it wasn't at risk. "Medicare safe, CMA head says" was the headline 
in the other paper, Mr. Speaker, that I referred to, and that's in sharp contrast to the kinds of 
things that we see coming from the NDP, the radical crew other there. 
 
(1645) 
 
It was interesting in the paper here, I thin it's The Swift Current Sun, in January of this year, Mr. 
Speaker. It's well know that if it wasn't for some NFU (National Farmers Union) farm policy, the 
NDP wouldn't have a farm policy. And the headline there -- it must have been as a result of an 
NFU meeting -- was: "Lack of farm radicals mystifies NFU leader." You see, they're of the view, 



that NDP, Mr. Speaker, unless you're radical, unless you're radical, you really don't count. But of 
course we've seen what that can do, how hurtful that can be to people. 
 
Here's another one, Mr. Speaker, Leader-Post, Wednesday, September 28, 1988: "Revolution 
said only hope for democracy in Chile," Mr. Speaker. Now this is a result of a story around the 
trip by the member from Regina Rosemont to Chile, okay? Chile, Mr. Speaker. And then they 
wonder why the public think they're a little bit radical in their approach, Mr. Speaker, and why 
the public doesn't have a lot time for them with this fearmongering and scaremongering. 
 
But I return for a second, Mr. Speaker, to the by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, because I 
saw firsthand there, Mr. Speaker, the hurtfulness and the fright that can be imposed on senior 
citizens when people people send a letter out to them . . . well, Mr. Speaker, what would you 
think of this; what would you think, Mr. Speaker, if somebody sent you a letter and one of the 
lines in that letter was: "And the latest PC proposal to close down all five hospitals in this 
constituency is unacceptable"? 
 
Now what would you think, Mr. Speaker, if you were a senior citizen, Mr. Speaker, in a senior 
citizens' home, and somebody dropped this letter off and it was signed by the Leader of the 
Opposition and said, if you elect the PCs -- or essentially what it says is if you elect Progressive 
Conservatives, all five hospitals in this riding will be shut down? 
 
Well, I ask you, I ask the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, is there one hospital shut down 
in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg? The . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I can certainly appreciate the fact that the member wants to 
relive the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election, one of the three that took place, and the only one 
that they won. But his remarks basically have nothing to do with the topic of free trade and you 
should call him to order on that. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. The member has raised the point of order regarding relevancy, and 
the issue is well taken, of course, as it always is when members speak, and the hon. member of 
course is asked to relate that to the debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to move off the point of the hon. member 
suggesting that somehow after a free trade agreement our hospitals would close down. Well, the 
reality is they have not, and in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg they're opening hospitals, Mr. Speaker, 
not closing them down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well let's look at his final argument, Mr. Speaker. The NDP have 
suggested that somehow out of this free trade agreement the Canadian Wheat Board will be gone 
and that the thin edge of the wedge was the announcement some several months ago now that 



oats are no longer under the jurisdiction of the wheat board, Mr. Speaker. The reality is the free 
trade agreement and removing oats from under the Canadian Wheat Board had nothing to do 
with one another, Mr. Speaker. They had nothing to do with one another. 
 
And I just want to make this one point, Mr. Speaker. I want to make this one point. The hon. 
member from Fairview said it doesn't matter where he goes in this province, the thing that is on 
everybody's lips, every farmer that he talks to, the issue that's on their lips is, oh, how awful it is 
that oats has been taken out of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Well now I ask all of these rural members here: when you go to the UGG (United Grain 
Growers) elevator or the Pool elevator or the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Would the hon. member please allow the Minister of Education to 
continue with his remarks. Perhaps you'll get an opportunity later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I continue. I just asked, when we go into our constituencies across 
this province, is the thing that you get hit with when you talk to your farmers, is the thing they 
come up to you and say, Mr. MLA, I want to talk to you about article 705 of the free trade 
agreement about oats and the wheat board? Well I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, that might be an 
important issue, but it is not the most important issue in rural Saskatchewan today. The farmers 
out there are a very, very intelligent group, very intelligent. They know oats is a niche market. 
They know that this doesn't represent the thin edge of the wedge. 
 
And I'll tell you what they're talking about out there is the impact of what the crop's going to look 
like; are we going to get rain; whether this United States-EEC trade war and subsidy war is going 
to end; and what the price is going to be if they could put some of that stuff in their bin. That's 
what they're concerned about. 
 
And I'll tell you another thing they're concerned about. They're concerned about their soil. And 
they saw those winds this spring wreak havoc with their farm land, Mr. Speaker, because these 
farmers are people of the land. And I'll tell you what, they have a strong feeling for the land and 
the protection of the environment of this province, Mr. Speaker. That's what they're concerned 
about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- They're concerned about the green revolution, and the gene revolution, 
and trade wars in Europe, and the EEC, Mr. Speaker, and the United States, and export 
enhancement programs, Mr. Speaker, and they're concerned about when that drought payment is 
coming from the federal government. And, Mr. Speaker, they're concerned about these up-
coming GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) trade talks, Mr. Speaker. That's what 
they're concerned about. 
 
Now the other point the hon. member made is this two-price wheat system, Mr. Speaker, that 
somehow this was a sell-out, somehow this was another black mark relative to the free trade 



agreement. Well I'll tell you what. The NDP and the member for Fairview can stand in their place 
and talk about the two-price wheat system all they want, Mr. Speaker, but I'll just lay these facts 
before this legislature. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what I want for western Canadian farmers and Saskatchewan farmers is a 
fair deal when it comes to the pricing of our wheat. And I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, I didn't 
think, under that two-price wheat system, when Ontario farmers got a subsidy of 40 or $50 a 
tonne through that two-price wheat system -- not really a subsidy, but that was the other part f the 
money, if you like -- and Saskatchewan farmers were only getting 10 to $20, I didn't consider that 
a fair deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now he can back up Ontario wheat farmers. He can back up Bob White and the Canadian Auto 
Workers Union. I'll back up Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, and I don't consider that a fair 
deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm telling you that western Canada is tired of having a raw 
deal for our raw resources. And that's the kind of raw deal that he wants to continue to perpetrate 
on Saskatchewan farmers. And that leads me directly into why I support and why out part and 
why our Premier and why our farm and rural members support this free trade agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. Before the hon. member gets into that, I'd like to take the opportunity to 
introduce some special guests we have in the galleries with us this afternoon. 
 
We have with us this afternoon the chief electoral officers of all jurisdictions in Canada, who are 
having a conference here in Regina, both provincial and federal. Also they have some staff 
members with them and other guests. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to particularly introduce the following people: from 
Saskatchewan, the chief electoral officer, Keith Lampard; from Alberta, Pat Ledgerwood; from 
B.C., Bob Patterson; from Manitoba, Rick Ballasko; Ontario, Warren Bailie; New Brunswick, 
Scovil Hoyt; Prince Edward Island, Merrill Wigginton; Newfoundland, Dermot Whelan; Yukon, 
Pat Michaels; for Canada, Jean-Marc Hamel; and for Quebec, Pierre Ct. 
 
Please welcome these distinguished guests to our Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 5 (continued) 



 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, another special welcome to these our 
visitors in the gallery here this afternoon. 
 
I wanted to close, Mr. Speaker, by talking about why we support free trade, why we're in the 
same camp as the pork producers and the stock growers and the wheat growers and the canola 
growers and all of those other farm groups across this province, Mr. Speaker. I suppose one 
could make the observation that maybe it was summed up -- why we're in favour of this -- was 
summed up as well by Benjamin Franklin some several years ago, as well as anyone. He said 
this: "No country was ever ruined by trade." And he might well have gone on to say, but a great 
many have known prosperity because of trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how true that is in our province. I mean, where would Lanigan be without the 3, 500 people 
who work in potash mines? And were do we sell that? We export it all over the world, Mr. 
Speaker. Where would our pork producers be if we couldn't send 30 or 40 or $50 million of 
product down to California and other points in the U.S.? Where would the people who work in 
that forest products industry be, Mr. Speaker, if we couldn't sell? Where would the workers at 
Weyerhaeuser be today if we couldn't access that U.S. market? Where would the cattle producers 
be? The uranium producers? Here we are the largest or second largest producer of uranium in the 
world, oil, Mr. Speaker -- the list goes on and on and on. 
 
In my town of Weyburn, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, people work at the Canada Wire & Cable 
plant there, producing cable for the North American market. There's 142 families and livelihoods 
there that depend largely on free trade, Mr. Speaker. So I say, where would be if we couldn't 
export to other markets, including the United States, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The big reason . . . so then the question, Mr. Speaker, becomes this -- the question then becomes 
this, Mr. Speaker. One could say, well, yes you don't need to put all your eggs in the U.S. basket. 
Why don't you look at developing markets in other areas of the world, Mr. Speaker? Well the 
reality is, Mr. Speaker, we are not putting all our eggs in the U.S. basket. We recognize that as an 
important market. We want to go after it in a bigger way, but we also want to go after these 
markets in the Pacific Rim and elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the reality is, that U.S. market is a rich and lucrative market of 250 million people. There are 
more people in California, Mr. Speaker, than there are in all of Canada. And as my colleague 
from Morse, said, they like that Canadian bacon in California. What are we, number three down 
there? Of about 28 or 29 kinds of bacon, in California they like that Canadian bacon. We're 
number three, Mr. Speaker -- number three. 
 
And I'll tell you, the other reason that we support free trade, Mr. Speaker, the other reason we 
support free trade is we are tired of getting a raw deal for our raw resources. You know, you have 
to go back. The NDP could take a lesson from something that happened in . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I think perhaps the hon. members should give the member for 
Weyburn a chance to give us his comments without being interfered with. 



 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say, and just before I take my 
place I just want to say to the NDP opposite they could take a lesson from, I think it was in 1795 
when the French government of the day realized that armies probably made better time in their 
treks if they didn't have to lug around live chickens and pigs and whatever to feed them. So they, 
rather ingeniously, said they would provide 12,000 French francs to the first outfit that could 
come up with a way of canning all of this. So instead of trucking around with chickens and pigs 
and all the rest of it -- live ones -- they put it in cans, Mr. Speaker. And I'll tell you what, that's an 
example that goes back to 1795, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's relevant because today they're celebrating their bicentenary, but it speaks directly to what we 
want to do in western Canada. We want to take what we produce and make something more out 
of it. We want to take those live hogs and make them into pork chops, Mr. Speaker. We want to 
take that beef, Mr. Speaker, and make it into filet mignon, Mr. Speaker. We want to take those 
trees up north, Mr. Speaker, and make them into fine paper. We want to take that barley and 
make it into malt, Mr. Speaker, because that's where the jobs are. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, 
that's where the jobs are for our children, and they're good paying jobs. 
 
And I'm going to end on this point, Mr. Speaker. I'm going to end on this point. This deal my not 
be perfect, Mr. Speaker. It may not be perfect, but I'll tell you what, it represents one golden 
opportunity. And I ask all members of this legislature, I ask the members opposite: will this deal 
somehow mean that the member for Weyburn, or the member for Shellbrook-Torch River, or the 
member for Morse, or the member for Redberry, that somehow will be wealthy and just know 
some great largess because this deal goes through? I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. I doubt it. Because 
you measure this in decades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I'm going to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would seek leave of the Assembly to move to government 
business at this time and then go into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. Being 5 o'clock, the committee is adjourned until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


