


















































April 5, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 5, 1989 
 

545 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
The Acting Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7), I have reviewed 
the following petition and find it to be in order: 
 

Of the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Alberta, of the city 
of Edmonton, in the province of Alberta, praying for an Act 
to amend its Act of incorporation. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to 
introduce to you, and to the other members of the Assembly here, 
three gentlemen from my constituency. They’re in town to meet 
with some people regarding some concerns up there and some 
things that they’d like to see done. 
 
There’s Mr. Martin Laforge, a councillor from the R.M. of 
Arborfield, Mr. Harold McShannock, a councillor in the R.M. of 
Moose Range, and another gentleman with them, Mr. Art Hesje, 
from Zenon Park. I’d like to ask all members to welcome them 
here this afternoon, and I look forward to meeting with them 
again later to perhaps review the proceedings here now. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of Public Utility 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier. Last week’s budget, Mr. 
Premier, announced, or perhaps I should say, announced again 
your government’s plan to privatize SaskPower’s natural gas 
utility. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question is this: in view of the fact that you 
personally, solemnly promised the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan that basic, vital public utilities such as SaskPower 
would not be privatized, how do you explain the budget’s 
privatization plans with respect to SaskPower? How do you 
explain what can only be described as a betrayal and a major 
breach of promise by yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this 
discussion before with respect to SaskPower and the mining of 
coal. I believe SaskPower was the only utility in Canada that 
actually mined coal. Now we turned the coal mining over to the 
private sector, and it provides for an efficient production of coal, 
contracted to the SaskPower. 
 
It’s a long-run contract for SaskPower, and they’re better off, so 
the rates to the public are better. And as a result, we’re not in the 
coal mining business; the private sector  

is. It saved us the costs from SaskPower, and we don’t want to 
be in the coal mining business. And SaskPower is still Sask 
Power . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes is entertaining the 
students again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will say with respect to 
SaskPower, it is the only utility in Canada that operates the gas 
distribution system. All other utilities in the power companies 
have been contracted out to the private sector, as is the case with 
coal. SaskPower is going to stay SaskPower. It is a utility. 
 
We have hundreds of thousands of people investing in the power 
corporations through Power bonds — very popular, very helpful 
to the company, providing the rates at a lower rate to the people 
of Saskatchewan. So the combination of the private sector mining 
the coal and the public being able to invest in bonds keeps the 
utility in very good financial shape and provides long-run rates 
to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier, and I’m directing the Premier’s attention to the 
announced intentions by his government to sell off SaskPower’s 
natural gas division. We can talk about Manalta Coal on another 
occasion. 
 
Over the last 10 years, from 1978 to 1988, SaskPower’s natural 
gas division made approximately $188 million profit, while the 
electrical side lost about $90 million. On balance the two of them 
together still put SaskPower in a pretty good way. Now you are 
privatizing. You are breaking your promise and you’re 
privatizing the natural gas portion — the profitable portion — 
and presumably are leaving the costly portion — the one that’s 
losing money, the electrical side — to the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan. How in the world can you justify 
that? That may be a great deal for the private investors and your 
big business corporation friends, but how in the world is that a 
good deal for the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I understand why the 
Leader of the Opposition has to be against public participation in 
energy or in insurance or in any of the things that we have offered 
to the public, Mr. Speaker, because it’s difficult politically. They 
are philosophically hidebound by the party’s position that says 
the public should not be able to invest in the Crown corporations 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only say to the hon. member, the public wants 
to invest in government. I look at government, Mr. Speaker, as a 
large co-operative where everybody can invest in it and be part 
of it. And they should be, Mr. Speaker. Allow them, as the 1982 
document from the opposition pointed out when they  
  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

546 
 

were government. We should allow them to invest. It strengthens 
the company. If you can have it on the Toronto exchange it makes 
for a strong aftermarket, Mr. Speaker. They talked about all those 
things. It’s more jobs, more efficiency, more effectiveness, and 
the diversification of the province, and it was agreed to by them. 
 
Now they didn’t get a chance to do it because we formed 
government in ’82, we’ve been offering it since ’82, we’re again 
since ’86, and we’re going to continue to allow the public to 
invest. They enjoy that, Mr. Speaker, and we know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. The Premier said in respect of his last answer that 
privatization means new jobs and people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. How in the world he can say that in the face of 
the fact that in February this year we lost more people from the 
province of Saskatchewan than we gained in 1982 is beyond me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s how successful your privatization 
program is. 
 
But my question is this, and it speaks, sir, to the promises that 
you make and break. On November 14, 1987 — I have the article 
here in front of me — Dale Eisler of the Regina Leader-Post 
wrote in part: 
 

When asked what corporation could be sold, the Premier 
said, “The only ones not being considered” (get this, Mr. 
Premier), “The only ones not being considered are 
SaskPower . . .” (and you go on to talk about SaskTel). 
 

Those are your words in direct quotations. 
 
And now today in the budget you have betrayed that solemn 
promise by indicating that you’re going to be privatizing 
SaskPower. I want to ask this question to you: what prompted 
you to break that promise, to mislead this public of 
Saskatchewan? What prompted you to do it? Is it an offer from a 
large multinational corporation, is it Oliver Letwin from the 
United Kingdom and Maggie Thatcher that convinced you to do 
it? What in the world caused you to break your promise not to 
privatize SaskPower as you told the press and the public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can perhaps best summarize 
the arguments for public participation by saying world-wide, all 
over the world, when you allow the public to invest in Crown 
corporations, it creates jobs, Mr. Speaker, it provides for more 
diversification, and we find it in New Zealand, we find it in 
Australia, in France, in Great Britain, in Canada, frankly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Soviet Union. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, even in the Soviet Union, Mr. 

Speaker, everywhere in the world people are allowing the public 
to invest. Why, Mr. Speaker, would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. We’re trying to hear the 
Premier but having difficulty, and I ask members on both sides 
of the House to give the Premier the opportunity to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me say very clearly, the 
hon. members of the opposition have not denied, Mr. Speaker, 
that they planned to have public participation — even those 
words — in the Government of Saskatchewan. Now I just have 
to say I agree with them. Their passage of that Crown 
Management Board minute, Mr. Speaker, says public 
participation means jobs, it means diversification, it means the 
public being involved in creating wealth in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I agree with them. The people of Saskatchewan 
agree with them, Mr. Speaker. This whole House should endorse 
the fact that the public could invest in Crown corporations to 
create jobs that diversify and to build. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they did it; they’ve never refuted it. They said it 
was a good idea then; now they’re on the other side of the House 
and they say, well why are you doing it? I’m doing it for the same 
reason that they passed it, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a good idea 
world-wide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. For the moment, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to debate 
or ask a question about things being world-wide and therefore 
must be good for Saskatchewan, because I doubt that the Premier 
will say that the world-wide phenomenon of the workers in Korea 
getting $4 a day is something that the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan should be getting. That’s not the issue. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe that I, and the House, 
are now having difficulty hearing the Leader of the Opposition, 
and I would like to give him the opportunity, as well, to put his 
question without interruption. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, the issue is not, on this occasion, the world economy and 
how much Saskatchewan should blend into it. The issue is the 
commitment of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan that 
SaskPower would not be privatized — that’s the Premier — 
that’s not some back-bencher from Rosthern or some 
back-bencher from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that’s the Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan. You have said that publicly 
elsewhere. 
 
I want you to explain to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, if you knew what the world situation was in 1987, 
why you broke your promise just a few days ago on the budget? 
How do you explain the fact that you disrupted this breach of 
promise, you broke your commitment? What’s your answer to 
that? You knew that situation in 1987, too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

547 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me describe to the hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker, the advantages of allowing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Quite frankly, I don’t like to rise 
to interrupt question period; however, hon. members leave me no 
choice. So I would once more like to ask for your co-operation. 
If we’re going to have the Premier constantly interrupted and the 
Leader of the Opposition constantly interrupted, we can’t have a 
good question period, so I’m simply asking for your 
co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just say 
to the hon. member, that allowing people to invest in a utility like 
SaskPower, to be able to have Power bonds, allowing the private 
sector to invest in coal mining or in natural gas, Mr. Speaker, 
strengthens the utility and makes it a better company, provides 
for more diversification. And if I might, Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
point out to the hon. member his own reasons, by his own 
cabinet. And it says: 
 

It’s desirable for as wide distribution of shares as possible 
so that the individuals in the province of Saskatchewan can 
share in the growth of the province of Saskatchewan. That 
the initial offering should be through the credit unions and 
the banks for widespread distribution. (Logical, Mr. 
Speaker.) To avoid political difficulties associated with 
everybody, we should have voting rights for the individuals 
in the province that are investing. Shares should be listed on 
the Canadian stock exchanges to provide for required 
liquidity, (Mr. Speaker.) 
 

This is the NDP cabinet talking about public participation in the 
province of Saskatchewan, which includes his uranium mines, 
Mr. Speaker, which includes Ipsco, Prairie Malt, Intercon, the 
Cornwall Centre, and PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to remind hon. members that I 
believe perhaps we’re getting a bit into debate more than question 
and answer, so I’d like to bring that to the attention of hon. 
members. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another question for the Premier, who refuses to give an answer 
to me and to the legislature and, forgetting about even the 
legislature, the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll try another tack. On May 9, 1988, not a year ago, in this 
legislature, sir, my colleague, the deputy leader of our party, 
asked the Deputy Premier of your government, the member from 
Souris-Cannington, specifically whether splitting SaskPower 
was the forerunner to privatization of SaskPower. And the 
answer of the Deputy Premier is, and I quote, Mr. Premier, quote, 
Mr. Speaker, “To that rather lengthy, straightforward question, 
the answer is no.” End quote. “The answer is no.” End quote. 
May, 1988. 
 
Now those arguments, which by the way are 

misrepresented, were known to you as early as 1982; they must 
have been known on May 9, 1988. And if they’re the arguments 
to justify privatizing SaskPower and breaking your word, my 
question to you is: why did the Deputy Premier deliberately 
mislead this legislature and the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to draw to the attention of the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition that the term “deliberately mislead” is 
not acceptable. He may have said that without realizing it; 
however, it cannot be condoned — it can’t be condoned. The 
Leader of the Opposition has made a personal charge of a 
member deliberately misleading, and that is not acceptable in the 
House. And I would like to ask the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 
to withdraw that charge. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw, because I respect 
your rulings, the question of deliberately misleading. But if I 
may, with your permission, rephrase the question then in what I 
think is a proper way to ask the question: in the light of that 
record, I ask the Premier . . . this is your desk-mate, your Deputy 
Premier, the minister in charge of SaskPower, clear, unequivocal 
terms — with all of the arguments which are, by the way, not 
true, but even with all the arguments that you’ve advanced — he 
said this to this House and to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. How in the world can we believe anything that 
you or your Deputy Premier says on the issue of privatization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me try a different tact with 
the Leader of the Opposition. With respect to public participation 
and privatization, Mr. Speaker, I have not changed my mind. I 
have not changed my mind with respect to public participation 
and privatization. Why have you changed your mind? That’s the 
point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have been offering bonds and shares to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, since 1982. And we privatized part 
of the power corporation and the coal mining, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s the same principle with respect to gas. I say to the hon. 
member, I have not changed my mind and I’ve not changed the 
kinds of things that we have said on public participation or 
privatization. 
 
Why did he change his mind when he went across the floor, Mr. 
Speaker? This was a solution for him when he was on this side 
of the House, sitting in that chair, and he’s now changed his mind 
when he walks over there, Mr. Speaker. I suggest, I suggest we 
haven’t changed our mind. The public of Saskatchewan knows 
exactly what we’re doing. They’re not sure what the Leader of 
the Opposition is doing because he’s flip-flopped on it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan know   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

548 
 

exactly where this party stands in defence of Crown corporations, 
and the co-operative sector, and the private sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And they know, sir, exactly where you stand 
— right behind the large, private multinational corporations. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this. You’re obviously hidebound and 
determined to break your word, to mislead this legislature and 
the public. You’re going to privatize a public utility when you 
said you wouldn’t, when your Deputy Premier said you wouldn’t. 
I want to know when is the legislation to do this dirty deed going 
to be tabled? Why isn’t this Bill before this House now? Why are 
you withholding the Bill? I say this Bill should be tabled as soon 
as possible. I call on the Premier to do it today or tomorrow 
because the people of the province of Saskatchewan want to see 
exactly what you’re up to, and get their opinion stated to put a 
stop to this selling off of the heritage of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member must 
realize that when 43,000 people, Saskatchewan people, invest in 
SaskEnergy or SaskPower bonds, Mr. Speaker, that they are not 
multinationals. That isn’t 43,000 multinationals; that’s local 
people, Mr. Speaker, that would invest in power bonds. Same 
with telephone bonds, Mr. Speaker, over . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I know that 
hon. members realize that hollering when another hon. member 
is on his feet is not acceptable, and I just once more, for the fourth 
or fifth time today, draw it to your attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me put it 
another way. Over 90 per cent of the public employees in 
SaskCOMP bought shares in WESTBRIDGE Corporation. Now 
all those employees, Mr. Speaker, are not multinationals. They 
are local people, local people working for the government, that 
want to invest in this government and invest in the corporation 
so that they can diversify and build jobs and make it grow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now if the hon. member has flip-flopped and says now he doesn’t 
want them to do that because he puts them all the category of 
multinationals, he’s talking about tens of thousands of 
Saskatchewan people who’ve invested in bonds, invested in the 
companies like WESTBRIDGE — over 90 per cent of the 
employees. Why is he against that? Why is he against employees 
investing in SaskEnergy? Why would he be against the 
employees investing in Saskoil, Mr. Speaker? Saskoil’s gone 
from a $300 million company to over a billion dollar company, 
Mr. Speaker, and the employees invest in it. 
 
Well, I say . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environmental Concerns With NewGrade Upgrader 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a 
question from the hon. member as it relates to the testing and the 
monitoring around the upgrader and the Co-op refinery. I can’t 
table reports during question period, so I sent across a copy of 
this report to the hon. member. 
 
I would like, to answer to the question, advise that there is only 
one hour on February 12 of this year that the refinery or the 
upgrader broke the legal limits of carbon dioxide emissions. It 
only happened for one hour and that was the day that the plume 
of hydrogen sulphide drifted across the city. So I think the report 
should be noticed by this House and by the people of Regina. The 
Co-op refinery and the upgrader, except for that one hour, have 
been well within the guide-lines established by the federal 
government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have a question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, try as hard as you might to hide the negligence by 
you and by your department in this whole matter, you still have 
not answered the questions adequately. I ask you then if you 
knew that on February 12 . . . or February 12, there was a leak, 
Mr. Minister, which could have caused some serious damage to 
the health of people in the area, or in fact could have caused some 
danger to life, why did you not act then? 
 
This is now the third time in which there has been an incident at 
the Co-op upgrader in which you have done nothing, Mr. 
Minister, so the fact that there have been these things taking 
place, and you have done nothing but do media relations, you are 
therefore responsible for the situation in there. Why didn’t you 
act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this topic 
a number of times in this House and, as the member knows, in 
February when that leak occurred, we were not notified 
immediately. But as soon as we were, my people were on site and 
took action. And I believe that the corrections that have been 
made in the upgrader to eliminate that problem in the future have 
been taken as a direct result of the interference of our department, 
and I’m very pleased with the work that my staff have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask the 
Premier about some aspects of his recent trip to the orient, the 
so-called “orient express,” where we got back very conflicting 
statements as to what he said and then what he didn’t say, and 
then reinterpretations of what he said to various governments in 
the region. 
 
And in early February, Premier, in a telephone press conference 
from New Delhi, you told reporters it didn’t matter to you if 
foreign governments owned 50 per cent   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

549 
 

or more of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan). And my 
question is: is that what you people are talking about when you 
talk about public participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said on many occasions 
that we are going to offer the opportunity for people to invest in 
the potash corporation in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and offshore. 
You will find out when you look at the legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
that any one individual will be limited to a very small percentage, 
and indeed the majority of it will be Canadian, and the first 
opportunity’s for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we see that in legislation that is at the national level, as well 
as at the local level. So in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, when we table the legislation, you will see exactly what 
are the limits for people to invest locally, nationally, and 
internationally. 
 
I will say as well, Mr. Speaker, we are not anti-offshore, 
anti-American or anti-Japanese or anti-Chinese, having people 
come in here and invest and build as they have with the Marubeni 
corporation or Hitachi corporation in Saskatoon. We’re glad to 
see people come in and make their roots and live in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And if they can come in here and 
live and work with us and invest and diversify, we think that’s all 
the better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Premier, I have to throw back your own 
words to you, your own quote. You said: 
 

If that debt means 15 or 20 or 25 per cent to India and 15 or 
25 per cent to China and somebody else in Europe and 
Canadians in a joint venture offering . . . then I would look 
at removing all the debt. 
 

Now they’re your words, Mr. Minister, and those words say 
you’d be willing to sell all of PCS, and you don’t care if anyone 
in Saskatchewan is involved. 
 
Now you have apparently changed your tune. And I suppose 
you’ve called back to those officials in China and Japan and 
Korea and the other countries to say that you didn’t really mean 
it the way it came out when you talked to them. I don’t see how 
they can take you seriously on these questions, Mr. Premier. 
 
Will you tell us here now, in very concrete terms, what was your 
specific offer to these countries? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, very specifically, I said that 
we were going to be offering shares in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And when we did that and tabled the legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, then we would provide them with a prospectus, and 
if they wanted to look at investing in it, they’d have an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Construction of Rendering Plant 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I announced this morning in Saskatoon that West 
Coast Reduction Ltd., a corporation based in Vancouver, has 
made a commitment to construct a $22 million, full-service 
rendering plant in Saskatoon, which should be built and 
operational by May 1, 1991. Seventy-five jobs will be created in 
its construction phase, plus a further minimum of 50 jobs in plant 
operations and a provincial pick-up system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think it’s just about time this 
morning that hon. members simply quit interrupting the members 
on their feet. I don’t think it’s really becoming, or a good 
example, that members should be constantly for ever interrupting 
speakers, hollering back and forth across the floor. I just want to, 
you know, bring this to your attention in strong terms so that we 
can get on with the daily session. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this project will contribute to the diversification of 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural processing sector and increase our 
export of value-added agricultural products, as well as addressing 
an ongoing environmental concern. Upon commencement of 
commercial plant operations, the Government of Saskatchewan, 
through SEDCO, will provide financial assistance to the 
company of up to $3.3 million towards the cost of the project. 
 
Today we have only two Saskatchewan processing plants with 
any rendering capability, each able to handle only their own 
by-products. More than two million pounds of inedible offal from 
Saskatchewan are being shipped to Alberta each week for 
processing. We have more offal treated as a waste product 
currently being dumped in land fill sites or being buried on farms 
throughout the province. 
 
This new project will give Saskatchewan a state of the art 
rendering plant which will process these inedible by-products, 
such as fat, bones, offal and feathers, producing saleable 
commodities which include tallow, bone-meal, blood-meal, and 
feather-meal. 
 
West Coast Reductions pick-up system and advanced 
environmental safeguards at the plant will address all 
environmental concerns. Our government is pleased to support a 
project of this magnitude, Mr. Speaker, that addresses 
environmental issues head-on, that stimulates and diversifies our 
economy, that increases our value-added exports, and that 
generates new employment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take an opportunity 
to respond to the ministerial statement. And   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

550 
 

by way of starting the statement, I would hope that the minister 
would table the documents that would apply to what kind of a 
deal SEDCO has made with this company, so that the taxpayers 
of the province will realize how much money they are putting 
into it; similar to the kind of deal . . . whether or not it’s similar 
to the kind of deal that was made with Supercart or Joytec, and 
whether or not we’ll see millions of dollars being thrown at 
companies that end up leaving the province in days to come. So 
we will want to see the full documents tabled in this House so we 
can have a look at it. 
 
I want to say as well that it’s interesting that we would have this 
kind of an announcement by the minister at the same time as 
when there are 6,000 people, net, leaving the province in a 
month, we have no such ministerial statement — no such 
statement of the minister coming here saying, look . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t want them here. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, the Deputy Premier says we don’t 
want them here. Obviously we would like those 6,000 people 
here. We would want them here — we would want them here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You may not want those 6,000 people, 
young people and families leaving the province, to be here, but 
it’s ironic that you don’t mention the people fleeing this province. 
There are literally hundreds of people a week now leaving this 
province, and yet you try to cover it up by bringing in a small 
announcement, Ms. Minister, to try to cover up for the massive 
numbers of people leaving the province. 
 
But I want to say in relation to the ministerial statement that we 
would very much like to see how much this is costing the 
taxpayers of the province. Because I say again that when you 
look at the promise of the band-aid factor in Swift Current that 
we remember being promised during the last election, and we 
remember the promise of a fertilizer plant — actually two 
fertilizer plants . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member 
unfortunately is getting into debate, and no doubt he can 
introduce myriad issues. However, I’d ask him to stick to the 
ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I just want to say in conclusion, Mr. 
Minister, that I feel the government is bringing this statement 
here to cover up for the 6,000 people who left the province in 
February, but it is not going to go a long way. Because we know 
that with unemployment rates at 10 per cent in Saskatoon, 
thousands of people looking for work, 25 per cent more people 
on welfare at this time than there was in 1982; that this is a sorry 
excuse for employment creation in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Referring to Actions of the Chair in Debate 
 
The Speaker: — I have some concerns to raise with the 

members regarding one aspect of the proceedings last evening. 
The member for The Battlefords in his remarks on the budget 
motion was critical of the actions of the Chair in refusing 
permission for the filming of a movie in the Chamber. I want to 
remind all members that the Chair should not be brought into the 
debate. I refer all members to Beauchesne’s Rules and Forms, 
Fifth Edition, paragraph 117 (1) and Erskine May’s 
Parliamentary Practice, 20th Edition, page 235, both of which 
state that the actions of the Speaker: 
 

. . . cannot be criticized incidentally in debate or upon any 
form of proceeding except by way of a substantive motion. 
 

Beauchesne further states that the Speaker is: 
 

. . . the representative of the House itself in its powers, 
proceedings and dignity. 
 

In order to preserve the dignity of the House, I caution the 
member that it is important to refrain from criticizing the actions 
of the House incidentally or in debate. 
 
Further, when members have concerns or questions about the 
actions of the Chair, outside of the House, I want members to 
know that my door, as I have repeatedly said in this House, is 
always open, and that such matters should be discussed with me 
in my office, not on the floor of the Chamber where I have no 
opportunity to give explanations. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I think 
the procedure in the House would ask that the Speaker . . . And 
first of all, I say I accept your ruling because there is not an 
opportunity for us to oppose it, nor do I want to. But I think it’s 
customary in the rules of the Assembly that the member be in his 
chair, the member for North Battleford, when the issue was 
raised. And I wonder why that tradition was broken today by the 
ruling. 
 
The Speaker: — I think it’s important, in answer to the hon. 
member’s question, I think it’s important that I bring this 
attention . . . this issue to the attention of hon. members as soon 
as possible, as soon as possible. 
 
Order, order. Order, order. Don’t argue from your seat. Just give 
me the opportunity to give my answer. 
 
I am bringing this to the attention of the House at the earliest 
possible moment, and by so doing, other members are also 
informed, other members are also informed that they are not to 
follow this custom in the event that they are engaged in debate 
today. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

551 
 

proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Lautermilch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, 
Mr. Speaker, to support a budget which will have far-reaching 
and beneficial consequences for education in our province. This 
budget will enable us to take a major step forward toward the 
goal of a lifelong education program in Saskatchewan for 
Saskatchewan people and particularly Saskatchewan young 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But before I discuss our plans for 1989, I want to trace our 
progress over the past seven years since the Progressive 
Conservative government came to office. I will describe in a 
moment what we have done, Mr. Speaker, but first let me 
articulate why we have done what we have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every major industrial nation in the world is in the 
process of introducing educational reform, whether it be Britain, 
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the United States. Virtually every 
industrial nation in the world is undertaking and in some stage of 
educational reform. 
 
And they are doing this, Mr. Speaker, for reasons that extend well 
beyond national boundaries or local interests. They are doing so 
because a new international currency has established itself in the 
last 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not talking about the gold standard or the dollar 
standard when I talk about a new international currency. I’m 
talking about the information standard, Mr. Speaker, the 
information standard. It is the currency of ideas, ideas coupled 
with technology, Mr. Speaker. And so powerful is this new 
currency that old barriers and old boundaries are being broken 
down by it. 
 
This revolution has affected trading patterns. It has altered the 
economic balance of power in the world, Mr. Speaker. It has 
fundamentally changed the work place, Mr. Speaker, and in turn 
it has changed the lives and the requirements of the work-force 
and those who live and work in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here then is the why for making changes in our education system, 
Mr. Speaker. And I know that making change is never easy, 
going from the known to the unknown. And I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that there are change resisters in this province. And I know that 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker, are against making change. And I too 
subscribe to the view, Mr. Speaker, that we do not make change 
merely for change’s sake. But, Mr. Speaker, we cannot put the 
blinkers on and ignore the reality of the world around us. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is why we are prepared to make changes in 
education. This is why we are making changes. This is why the 
Progressive Conservative government in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, is making changes in our education system. 
 
It is because we believe that our children have an absolute right 
to an education which will compare favourably with that of any 
other nation. Saskatchewan has always had a first-class education 
system, Mr. Speaker, and we intend to keep it that way. We 
cannot, nor will we, let our children down. Every parent and 
every young person should be assured of this 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now let us turn, Mr. Speaker, to what changes are being made. 
I’ve articulated why we are making the change, and now let us 
turn to what changes are being made. And let us begin with 
progress to date, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has been given 
permission to make his remarks in the budget debate. Let’s 
restrict it to the Minister of Education. 
 
Order. Order. Order. The member for Turtleford, I have just 
reminded the hon. members not to interrupt and you already are, 
and I’m reminding you once more, and other members, to allow 
the Minister of Education to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — So let us turn, Mr. Speaker, then, to 
what changes are being made, and let us begin with the progress 
to date under the PC government, for much has already been 
done, Mr. Speaker. Let me begin with our elementary and 
secondary school program. 
 
In 1984 our government, under the very capable leadership of the 
MLA for Swift Current . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. My, my, people seem to be in a certain 
mood this afternoon. 
 
I would just like to ask the member from Turtleford and the 
member from Quill Lake that if you have a debate you wish to 
conduct between you, perhaps you might temporarily wish to 
leave the Chambers to do that. But I ask you once more at this 
time, would you allow the Minister of Education to make his 
remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, in 1984 
the Progressive Conservative government, under the very 
capable leadership of the MLA for Swift Current, then minister 
of Education, now Minister of Energy and Mines, published the 
Directions report which laid the basis for a program of 
educational reform in our kindergarten to grade 12 education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The highlight of the report was the decision to introduce a new 
course of study in all Saskatchewan schools, called the core 
curriculum. This new course of study set out to do two things. It 
set out to reinforce, to re-emphasize, the fundamentals of a good 
education — reading, writing, and mathematics. In an 
increasingly competitive world where English is becoming the 
international language of trade, and mathematics is fundamental 
to technology, children more than ever need a solid basis, a solid 
grounding in these basic building blocks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no question about that. Parents know that no matter how 
much the world changes and how rapidly the world changes, that 
it’s in their children’s best interest to get that solid grounding. 
And that’s why this new curriculum, Mr. Speaker, reinforces and 
re-emphasizes that point. 
 
But it goes further, Mr. Speaker. The new curriculum also 
introduces important new skills such as problem solving,   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

552 
 

computer literacy, and communication skills which students will 
need in the work place of the future. 
 
Already much as been done toward implementing the new 
curriculum. We have provided new curriculum training and 
orientation to the province’s 12,000 teachers, Mr. Speaker. It 
goes without saying, I suppose, that if our children are to have 
access to the most up-to-date curricula, and to meet the needs of 
the future insofar as what the curricula provides, that the front 
line in the class-room, the class-room teacher, must too be 
updated. And we recognize that as a first order of importance, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s why last fall our 12,000 teachers across 
this province took training in the new curricula. As well we’ve 
established directions for each subject area in this new 
curriculum. 
 
Well much has been said in recent times about the need to reduce 
high school drop-out rates. Because I view this as important, I 
will be returning to this in a moment to talk about what we will 
be doing in the future. 
 
But first let me draw to the attention of the legislature and to the 
members assembled here today, of what has been accomplished 
over the past few years, Mr. Speaker. If we look back two 
decades ago in this province, only 40 per cent of our young 
people, only 40 per cent of our students went on to complete high 
school. Today, under a PC government, almost 75 per cent of our 
children graduate from grade 12, Mr. Speaker. What a 
tremendous accomplishment when you think of it. Less than half 
20 years ago finished their grade 12, and today 75 per cent or 
thereabouts finish their grade 12. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, although we see and know that much has been 
done to reduce drop-outs, let me be clear on this, Mr. Speaker, 
even more will be done because 75 per cent is not good enough 
for this Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I will be laying out those plans in 
my speech later on, Mr. Speaker. That is some of what has 
happened over the past year, and more in the kindergarten to 
grade 12 education system. 
 
Let me turn now to what has been done to date in post-secondary 
education side, Mr. Speaker. First in the area of universities, we 
committed ourselves to a five-year, 125 million construction 
program on both campuses. 
 
The following new facilities have been completed or started: a 
new $6 million administration building at the U of S; a new $18 
million geological sciences building at the University of 
Saskatchewan; construction of a new $80 million agricultural 
sciences building at the University of Saskatchewan; a $17 
million federally funded language institute at the University of 
Regina; and construction of a five and a half million dollar 
animal resource centre at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Much has been done, Mr. Speaker, and we will do more. 
 
In the technical institute and community college field, 

Mr. Speaker, we constructed a new institute in Prince Albert, the 
first for nearly 15 years. We added a series of new training 
programs, including the Saskatchewan skills development 
program and the Saskatchewan skills extension program, or for 
people who may not be familiar with those terms, Mr. Speaker, 
what we’re talking about there is part of our welfare reform 
package. 
 
What we’re talking about is getting young people off the 
treadmill of welfare, Mr. Speaker. What we’re talking about there 
is giving young people and adults in this province training 
programs and jobs, Mr. Speaker, and opportunities, Mr. Speaker, 
and a rich future — not merely the treadmill of welfare, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Since 1983 we have spent $56 million 
on these two programs which have enabled 27,000 people to 
enter training programs, Mr. Speaker; 27,000 young people now 
facing a future of hope and opportunity, Mr. Speaker, not one of 
gloom, frustration, and despair. But, Mr. Speaker, we will do 
more. 
 
Finally, in 1987 we set out to completely revamp the college and 
institute system. It was not that long ago, Mr. Speaker, that I 
introduced the mandating legislation creating the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. We also have 
created the Northlands Career College. 
 
As well, a brand-new mandate was given to our community 
colleges, now called regional colleges, Mr. Speaker, a brand-new 
mandate to our regional colleges and to the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology to deliver university 
and diploma programs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Long-needed upgrading of programs and equipment was begun. 
And here are the highlights, Mr. Speaker. At SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
which is the short acronym, if you like, for our institute, 46,200 
students were registered in 1988-89, Mr. Speaker. And we hear 
much from the opposition about accessibility to post-secondary 
education. I challenge anyone, I challenge anyone to discuss 
accessibility and to overlook the fact that at Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 46,200 young 
people were registered. 
 
The new industry provided training for the pulp and paper 
industry, for the mining industry, for agriculture, and for 
hydroelectric industries, to mention a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And maybe equally as important as our children face the global 
world of the future, SIAST has established an international 
training program operating in 10 countries including China, 
Ghana, Indonesia, Kenya, the Dominican Republic and the 
Philippines, truly positioning our young people for their future in 
the global village, Mr. Speaker. And I say to you and I say to 
them, and we will do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — At our regional colleges, Mr.   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

553 
 

Speaker, 450 training courses were provided in 1988-89, 250 
university courses. And these were offered, not in Regina and not 
just in Saskatoon, and not just in Prince Albert and not just in 
Moose Jaw, where we have universities and campuses of our 
technical institutes. But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about 
is offering these courses in the Weyburns and the Swift Currents 
and the Nipawins and the Meadow Lakes and the Melforts and 
the North Battlefords of the world, and in centres smaller than 
those by far, Mr. Speaker — truly a success story. 
 
Thirty thousand students were enrolled in ’88-89 throughout 
Saskatchewan. Talk about accessibility under a PC government, 
Mr. Speaker — 30,000 students in our regional colleges. And we 
will do more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Northern training — I want to talk about our northern training 
initiatives, especially since 1983, Mr. Speaker, where 12,250 
young people have been trained. Five thousand have entered jobs 
directly as a result of this training, and 20 training agreements 
have been signed with industry, Mr. Speaker, and a very 
co-operative relationship that exists there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but I want to talk more about these jobs and this 
training in the North, because these jobs in the North, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and there’s quite a clear distinction between the 
approach of the Progressive Conservative government of the 
1980s and into the 1990s than that held by the NDP when it 
governed this province. These jobs in the North, Mr. Speaker, are 
real jobs, not make-work jobs of the kind associated with the 
previous government’s colonial sort of attitude with the DNS 
(department of northern Saskatchewan) system. These are real 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Young native men and women who are working as mill operators 
at $30,000 a year, or as assay specialists making $40,000 a year, 
or as diamond drillers making up to $60,000 a year, or as hard 
rock miners, where one of these young people told some of my 
officials not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, where that person would 
be making $120,000 a year. We are talking real jobs for these 
young people in the North, Mr. Speaker, jobs, as I said, as mill 
operators and assay specialists and drillers and hard-rock miners. 
Talk about opportunity for the young people in the North, and 
talk about commitment to those young people — Mr. Speaker, 
our government stands behind them four-square. 
 
Our government’s training and economic diversification policies 
have paid off in the North with more Northerners being trained 
and hired than ever before, Mr. Speaker. The record speaks for 
itself, but we will do more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To support all of these initiatives in post-secondary education, 
we completely revamped the student assistance program, 
revamped the student assistance program to make sure that we 
can have 30,000 in regional colleges, 46,200 in our technical 
institutes, to have those kinds of numbers so that money will not 
be a barrier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me take you back for a moment, Mr. Speaker, let me take you 
back a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the NDP days of 

1981, to put our commitment to student assistance in perspective. 
I don’t want to go back to those days, Mr. Speaker, because the 
reality is under the previous NDP government in 1981, do you 
know how much student aid was made available to the young 
people across this province, Mr. Speaker? Was it 20 million? No. 
Was it 10 million, Mr. Speaker? No. It was four millions of 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, in student aid. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by comparison, last year our government — 
the NDP 4 million — by comparison, last year, Mr. Speaker, did 
our government double that commitment over a six- or 
seven-year period? Had we doubled to 8 million? No, Mr. 
Speaker. Had we tripled, say, our commitment to students to 12 
million? Now that would be a pretty handsome commitment to 
young people across this province if, in less than a decade, Mr. 
Speaker, we’d have gone from 4 million to 12 million — tripled 
this support. Well the reality is, Mr. Speaker, last year our 
government made $33 million available to the young people of 
this province so that income would not be a barrier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thirty-three million dollars. But the 
news is even better, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP government of 
the past, when interest rates were high, Mr. Speaker, was there 
any protection for those students when it came time to pay off 
their student loans? When interest rates were high, Mr. Speaker, 
was there any protection for the students, never mind the farmers 
and the business men and the home owners of this province. We 
had money for land bank. We had money for dry holes in the oil 
industry, Mr. Speaker. We had money for everybody but students 
and home owners and small-business men and farmers, but there 
was no money . . . no interest rate protection for our young 
people. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is there $33 million available in aid, an 
eight-fold increase, but, Mr. Speaker, much of it at 6 per cent 
interest rate. And I’ll tell you what, you never hear the NDP raise 
that in this House, Mr. Speaker, when they raise questions of 
interest rates. 
 
But we have gone further, Mr. Speaker, in our revamping, and 
the NDP are against this revamping. They have said clearly in 
this House they want to go back to the old system, the old system 
that had no 6 per cent interest rates, the old system that only had 
$4 million. They want to go back to a system that didn’t have 
special assistance for single parents and natives and people with 
disabilities. We revamped the program so there is special help for 
single parents and for native young people and for people with 
disabilities. And we will not go back on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this revamping, all of these changes, the 
changes that the NDP resist but that our Progressive 
Conservative government stands behind, these actions have 
borne fruit. In the seven years of our government’s term of office, 
the number of students attending university has increased by 35 
per cent, Mr. Speaker — 35 per cent. We do not want to go back 
to a time when there was only   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

554 
 

16,000 young people attending our universities. We want to go 
forward. And forward means last year, 21,600 young people, Mr. 
Speaker. Now would I like that number to be perhaps 22,000 or 
23,000? Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we would like to see as many 
young people as possible have that opportunity. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this expansion by 35 per cent 
over seven years is one of the greatest expansions of students, of 
young people attending university, since the end of the Second 
World War. 
 
In total today, Mr. Speaker, more than 56 per cent of students in 
Saskatchewan leaving high school go on to take some form of 
post-secondary education. Now I’m not suggesting we should 
stop there, that maybe the number should be 57 or 58. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we have made tremendous strides forward when you 
think about it. Fifty-six per cent of our young people go on to 
take some form of post-secondary education. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to tell you, the members of this legislature, and the young 
people across this province, we will do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In terms of what has gone on over the 
last few years, too, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words with 
respect to the Saskatchewan Library. Here also we have pursued 
an aggressive agenda. In 1984, my colleague introduced new 
legislation to bring together community groups across the 
province to form an advisory board on library services. Out of 
this initiative grew, in part, a decision to computerize library 
holdings and referrals on a province-wide basis. And I want to 
say more about that in a few moments. 
 
I would also would like to draw the attention of the House to the 
excellent work being done by libraries across the province in the 
field of literacy training, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 
acknowledge the support of the Saskatchewan Weekly 
Newspapers Association and the highly successful summer 
reading program for children. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s safe to say that two themes emerge 
from this list of highlights. The first is an emphasis on 
accessibility. More people than ever before are going on to 
post-secondary education. More students are staying on to finish 
high school, Mr. Speaker. That would be our first clear theme. 
 
The second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an emphasis on setting and 
achieving high standards. We realize that we . . . not only do we 
have to strive for continued improvement, but we have to do so 
in a world where others are also of the same mind. 
 
So now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me come to our plans for the 
future, and specifically the year ahead. First I want to commend 
the Minister of Finance for his most recent budget. There are 
many things I could commend him for in that budget, but I am 
going to confine my remarks to education today as we look at the 
year ahead, because once again this minister, this Progressive 
Conservative government, under the very capable leadership of 
our Premier, has made education a top priority, Mr. Speaker.

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In 1989, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
budget for education will be $841 million. This isn’t an increase 
of 3 or 4 per cent merely, Mr. Speaker, that might be in line with 
inflation across the province, but what we’re talking about here 
is an increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of $52 million or 6.6 per 
cent. 
 
Since coming to office our government has increased funding for 
education by 68 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and some will say, 
but yes, inflation has galloped along at its usual steady pace 
during that same time, so have we really gained anything because 
of inflation? Well the answer, Mr. Speaker, is yes, because even 
after you account for inflation this increase in real dollar terms 
has been 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’re not just keeping up 
with inflation, we’ve zoomed past it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you look at it in another perspective, if we go back and 
look at the decade of the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very startling 
statistic, but one I would I like to share again with the House, and 
one that was referred to by the Minister of Finance in this House 
a few days ago, because it speaks directly, in a very simple and 
straightforward sentence, to this Progressive Conservative 
government’s commitment to education and to our young people 
and to the families across this province. 
 
And that simple statement, Mr. Speaker, that is so relevant — if 
we examine the record of this past decade — it’s so relevant 
because we’re starting a new era in a very significant way in 
education. We’re looking ahead to this next decade and the 21st 
century, of which our children will be walking out under the 
doorstep of, and that simple sentence is, Mr. Speaker, that since 
the start of the new decade . . . of this last decade spending has 
virtually doubled on education in this province — spending has 
doubled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I can think of no simpler way to talk about a government’s 
commitment because that is truly putting our money where our 
mouth is, Mr. Speaker, and I am proud to be part of a government 
that makes that kind of commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let me begin with the allocation of funds for the 
kindergarten to grade 12 programs. In the kindergarten to grade 
12 area we will be providing nearly 350 millions of dollars for 
school operating grants. This represents an increase of almost 4 
per cent or 13 millions of dollars from last year. This will meet 
the cost of living increase estimated for next year, and will also 
cover the cost of last year’s collective agreement in so far as . . . 
that is to say, of the government’s share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There will be too, as well in this budget again this year, fourteen 
and a half million dollars in the education development fund for 
school boards to enhance learning resources, books for our 
libraries, computers for our schools, those sorts of things, Mr. 
Speaker, to improve programs and provide services more 
efficiently. 
 
In this budget there is also 31 millions of dollars for the   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

555 
 

construction and renovation of schools across the province, and 
over 56 millions of dollars for teachers’ pensions and benefits. 
And this represents an increase of 11.6 per cent in government 
funding for teachers’ pensions, an increase of 10.8 per cent for 
teachers’ life insurance plan, and an increase of 16.2 per cent for 
the teachers’ dental plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In addition there will be significant new initiatives, new 
initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a number of important areas, 
and I would like to outline some of them for you. First, we will 
provide a major increase in funds for the development of the new 
curriculum and our assessment program. In total, the budget for 
this essential program will be increased by 70 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. A new curriculum for a new century takes new 
dollars, and they are there in spades with the increase of 70 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, for our children. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in all the meetings I 
had with teachers over this last year — a number of regional 
meetings, my visits on a weekly basis to the schools, and the 
meetings I had in the staff rooms — teachers across the province 
have emphasized their support for the new curriculum. And their 
major question, Mr. Speaker, was: will there be the resources to 
move this agenda ahead. Mr. Speaker, with a 70 per cent increase 
this budget delivers on our commitment, and it delivers on it in 
spades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well how will this new money be used, Mr. Speaker? Well, one 
millions of dollars will be used for additional teacher training 
which I talked about earlier, to make sure that the front line, the 
class-room teacher is brought up to date so that they in turn can 
impart this new knowledge to their students. One million will be 
used for additional teacher-training sessions around the new 
curriculum. One millions of dollars will be used to develop new 
curriculum materials, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and $1 million will 
be used to set up this new assessment process. 
 
With respect to the last item, Mr. Speaker, and to elaborate on 
that a little more fully, you will know that I recently introduced 
the report of the advisory committee on evaluating and 
monitoring. We had a ministerial statement on that in this House 
some few days ago. 
 
The committee has recommended, and those recommendations 
have been accepted by all the partners in education — the 
teachers’ federation, representing the 12,000 teachers across the 
province; the school trustees, representing parents as elected 
representatives across the province; and as well, the 
administrators across the province and our department have all 
agreed on the recommendations forthcoming from this report. 
 
And the committee recommended, with this broad consensus by 
all in the partnership, that we put in place a system of 
province-wide assessment. Since the mid-70s there has been no 
comprehensive assessment process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. School 
boards, teachers, parents, and students have really been left 
without any provincially developed standards by which to 
measure progress.

I don’t think I’ve been at a meeting over this last year where 
parents haven’t stressed to me, because it is they feel so strongly 
about it, parents have stressed to me time and time again how 
important it is to have a fair and equitable standard of comparison 
for their children. Teachers have stressed to me how important it 
is that any assessment process be developed here in our province 
and tied directly to our curriculum, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well the new assessment policy meets both of these objectives. 
It will enable teachers and parents to know what their children 
are learning, and it will enable us to monitor this new curriculum. 
It will also provide a basis for comparing the performance of our 
education program with that of other jurisdictions. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as important as what goes on in 
school is what happens at home. You know that parents can make 
a tremendous difference to their children’s success in school. In 
part, this means that we must work with parents to help them 
better understand what they can do. Over the last year our 
government has been working directly with parents to encourage 
them to read to their children as one of a number of things that 
they can do to help their children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instinctively, as I said earlier, we all know what a difference 
parents can make. And so we shouldn’t be surprised when we 
hear what the research in the educational field tells us about what 
we already know instinctively. 
 
But I would like to share this with you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s in 
a booklet that we’ve sent. I think there’s been something like 
70,000 of these go out to parents at their request across the 
province of Saskatchewan, to parents and teachers to share with 
the parents of their children; it’s entitled “A Lifetime Of Learning 
— How I can help with my child’s education at home.” 
 
Parents want to help, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve provided them with 
this booklet at their request to give them some ideas on how they 
can help. And I just wanted to quote from the first page on this 
to re-emphasize, as I said, what we instinctively know about the 
importance of parent involvement. And it speaks to some of the 
research that’s been done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Studies in 18 countries, including Canada, found that 
students’ intelligence, motivation, and achievement are 
closely related to experiences in the home. Parents can 
and do make a major difference in helping their children 
to succeed at school. 
 

We feel very, very strongly about the role and importance of 
parents, Mr. Speaker. They can make a tremendous difference to 
their children’s success in school, and we know that instinctively, 
Mr. Speaker, and as well, the research backs that up and backs it 
up in spades. 
 
In part, this means that we must work with parents to help them 
understand what process school boards, teachers, parents . . . 
sorry, in part this means that we must work with parents to help 
them better understand what they can do.  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

556 
 

As I said, all the research in the field emphasizes how important 
this is. We’ve sent these booklets to parents, we’ve used the mass 
media and sent support materials to every school in the province. 
 
The reading campaign that we have initiated, Mr. Speaker, is in 
turn part of our government’s larger campaign to emphasize 
literacy skills, to emphasize reading, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at all 
levels. 
 
(1515) 
 
Well you will know . . . as members will know and as you will 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1987 I announced the 
establishment of the Saskatchewan Literacy Council. The 
honorary chairman of that council, Mr. Speaker, is our Premier, 
because he too feels as a parent, as the leader of this province, as 
the Premier of this province, he too knows how important literacy 
is, that basic and fundamental skill that all should have the 
opportunity to have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1987 I announced the establishment of this literacy council to 
work with adults in need of literacy training, and I want to bring 
a bit of a report card to you and to members of this Assembly as 
to how well that initiative is working. We set for ourselves, as 
did the council, some very ambitious targets, and now I would 
like to account to you and to the members of the legislature on 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to report to you and to the members of this 
legislature that over 2,500 adults have already benefitted from 
training in two short years. And more heartening and very 
gratifying for myself, and I think for all in this House, is the fact 
that 2,000 people across this province, 2,000 members of the 
public, have volunteered their time as tutors — 2,500 adults have 
benefitted and 2,000 others, people from all walks of life, have 
walked into libraries and regional colleges across this province 
and said, I want to help. That’s speaks of the Saskatchewan spirit, 
Mr. Speaker, and I want to say to all of those people: thank you 
for taking the time to be a tutor because this has been a 
tremendous accomplishment by all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, if parents are to become 
more involved in their children’s education, it is equally 
important to help them understand what is being taught in school. 
And over the last year I have written to almost every parent — I 
think there was something like 112,000 letters that went out, Mr. 
Speaker — I’ve written to every parent, employees and 
employers at small businesses, and educators at universities and 
technical institutes. I’ve written to them to explain the new 
curriculum that was implemented, at least the first stages of it, 
that were implemented in the schools this past fall. 
 
But it wasn’t just a one-way street, Mr. Speaker; thousands have 
written back to me. The response, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
was overwhelming. And it was overwhelming and it was 
gratifying because they have written back to say they support 
what we are trying to do. They recognize that these changes had 
to be made, and I 

just want to share with you, and with other members of the 
legislature, some of their comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This first one comes from Saskatoon, and they have children that 
have since left high school. And this comment, I think, is a very 
cogent observation: 
 

We are becoming a global village and must gear our 
education to meet this challenge. Ability to communicate 
both orally and in writing is of utmost importance. A school 
atmosphere that is friendly, supportive, less competitive is 
in my opinion the best. A well planned curriculum with only 
limited options is probably best. 
 

We have another one here, Mr. Speaker. This one from Regina: 
 

Mr. Hepworth thank you for the informational letter. We are 
very much interested in the educational program for our 
daughter. Also are pleased about introducing the “New 
Basics”. Our children need to know how to communicate 
and to think for themselves. 
 

Another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from Green Lake, 
Saskatchewan this time, and this was from a teacher. And they 
went on to say: 
 

As a teacher, I fully agree with you — reading has taken a 
“backseat” in the home. Let’s spend more effort (dollars) on 
libraries, appealing books, author visits, story-telling, drama 
to bring back the love of reading. 
 
The U.S. had the community involved in motivating people 
to read. I believe the Pizza Hut (or some pizza place) 
sponsored an incentive program to encourage reading. We 
spend X number of dollars on sports — what about 
something as fundamental as reading — We’ve treated it as 
a “backseat” for too many years! 
 

Another one, Mr. Speaker, this time from Viscount, 
Saskatchewan: 
 

I definitely agree with the information you mailed to me. 
Getting this new core curriculum started in our schools, 
increasing the credits necessary for grade 12 and still 
providing for unique needs will hopefully help my children 
obtain the best possible education. 
 

And this family, Mr. Speaker, this family that took the time to 
write back, has children aged nine, six, three, and six months old, 
Mr. Speaker. And I am so gratified when parents, our future 
leaders, are in that home, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know if there 
is a parent . . . if I could have expressed what this new core 
curriculum is about any better than what they have just said. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, another one, this time from Regina again: 
 

I agree that it is time for a change in our education system. 
  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

557 
 

I digress for a moment, Mr. Speaker, but here is a parent that does 
not fear change. They recognize that change may well be 
difficult, but unlike others, not unlike the NDP, for example, this 
person knows that we must not fear change, we must manage 
change, we must make sure that our young people can adapt to 
change. But I digress. I will start again. 
 
From Regina, this parent writes: 
 

I agree that it is time for a change in our education system. 
We definitely need to have the basics renewed. 
 

And I talked earlier, Mr. Speaker — I digress again. But just as 
this parent has said, it’s time to have the basics renewed. I talked 
about earlier in my speech about the core curriculum and its 
re-emphasis and it’s reinforcement of the basics, or those 
fundamentals. And the parent from Regina goes on to say: 
 

I also agree that parents need to take a more positive-active 
role in helping the education system work. 
 

And another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker — excellent informative 
letter: “Since my wife and I . . . and this is an interesting 
perspective, this one, Mr. Speaker, it’s from Warman, and the 
next sentence will tell us why. This parent writes: 
 

Since my wife and I got our education abroad (Netherlands) 
we want to know more about the Saskatchewan elementary 
and high school systems. I completely agree with the 
minister that despite changing times we have to stress the 
need for the basics (3 R’s). Changing from 21 to 24 credits 
is a good step! 
 

Some of the writing, I can’t quite . . . didn’t come through in the 
xeroxing. He talks about modern languages, and it ends up by 
saying: 
 

Thanks again for a quality, informative letter. 
 

That one was from Warman, Mr. Speaker. And just a few more. 
Because I had several thousand inquiries I obviously cannot 
bring them all to the House, but I’ve tried to bring some examples 
from across the province. This one is from Shellbrook: 
 

I am very glad to see more time being spent on English 
(speaking and writing). Math has also been neglected! We 
have a 15 and a 12 year old who don’t know their 
multiplication tables and have never had to learn them at 
school. They are learning them at home. 
 

Another one, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I am very pleased to see the basics again being brought into 
main focus. Our children for the future need a stable and 
strong background based on fundamentals. Without them 
they are basically weak in all areas and will always need 
guidance. 

Congratulations for listening to the needs of parents and 
implementing them! All good things take time — keep at it! 
 

That one was from Saskatoon. 
 
Now this one from Debden: 
 

I think that Core Curriculum is an excellent idea. The 
children will benefit from it and it will give the education 
staff some guidelines to follow. We, as parents will have a 
better idea of what is being taught in our schools. 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Your call to be a partner in the educational process is like an 
echo coming from the school. How rich the rewards are — 
for parents and children when such occurs. I hope more 
material will come from your office to encourage us, as 
parents. 
 

And that’s why I’m particularly gratified with the response that 
we’ve had to these changes in our core curriculum program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And certainly I know I can’t capture the essence 
of what parents have said in the several thousand replies I’ve got 
back, but those are a few that I selected randomly for the House 
this afternoon. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, it is also important to involve business in 
our education program, and here too we have had some real 
successes in the last year. IBM, a major corporation — I guess, 
as the NDP would have it, one of those awful multinational 
corporations. I do not view it that way, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
going to tell you why, and other members of the legislature. 
 
IBM this past year has donated almost $1 million to a new 
computerized literacy training program. Now does that sound 
like some big, bad multinational, Mr. Speaker? I suggest not. 
They are committed to this program. It’s the latest in technology, 
and it’s one of those things where you see the newest of 
technology being applied to a long-standing and thorny issue, 
illiteracy in our province, Mr. Speaker. And so I thank and 
congratulate IBM for their commitment and role here, and their 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of $1 million. 
 
One of the response cards I referred to earlier, Mr. Speaker, 
talked about a program in the U.S. that they thought Pizza Hut 
was running, and that it was a good program because it spoke to 
that whole issue of encouraging our children to read. Well 
interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, over this past year Pizza Hut 
too, in this country, is working with individual school boards and 
with class-room teachers to help fund local reading initiatives, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The agriculture and the oil and gas industries are working with 
our government to make education resource materials available 
to young people across this province, Mr. Speaker. A very good 
co-operative effort with businesses in terms of their commitment 
of time and dollars to our schools, Mr. Speaker, and to our young 
people.  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

558 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget includes additional funds to 
expand our reading campaign and to extend our work with 
parents and the community. Among other things, this will help to 
relieve the pressure on our teachers who must cope with 
ever-increasing responsibilities. We also want to engage the 
support of volunteers, particularly senior citizens. 
 
What we’re really saying here, Mr. Speaker, whether it be 
parents, whether it be business, whether it be service groups, 
whether it be senior citizens, we recognize that the class-room 
teacher needs our help. They cannot do it all alone. And we 
intend, Mr. Speaker, to form bridges and alliances to help that 
class-room teacher as much as possible. We’ve started on some 
new initiatives in that area, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be continuing 
on them in the new year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I referred earlier to the need to reduce the rate 
of drop-outs at the high school level. I said yes, we’ve made 
headway from 40 per cent staying in school to now 75 per cent 
staying in school through grade 12. But I said then, Mr. Speaker, 
we will not rest on our laurels and we will do more. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, while there are a number of causes for 
students dropping out of school, all of the partners in education 
are agreed that we must act now to confront this issue in an even 
more aggressive way. So I’m pleased to announce that $2 million 
in new funds will be provided for this purpose in addition to our 
ongoing commitments to initiatives through our education 
development fund. And I think there’s something like 287 
drop-out initiatives, or initiatives aimed at drop-out . . . reducing 
the drop-outs across our schools even as of this day, community 
school initiatives and others, Mr. Speaker. But we’re going to put 
in, over and above that, a new additional $2 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now I don’t want anyone to presume, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are easy solutions to the drop-out 
problem, because there are not. There are no quick fixes. 
Children leave school for many reasons such as poor academic 
performance, family and personal problems, drug abuse, 
alienation from the school. And our government’s strategy to 
reduce the drop-out will reflect all of these realities. Our strategy 
will emphasize collaboration among the partners in education — 
teachers, administrators, parents, trustees, our own department 
— and we will involve parents and communities to work on the 
drop-out problem. 
 
An important part of this initiative will be special attention to the 
needs of northern and native students who are particularly at risk. 
Last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appointed a northern education 
task force to examine the special challenges we face in this region 
of the province. I’m looking forward to receiving this task force 
recommendations in the days ahead, and I’m committed and I 
want to tell you and the members of this legislature, members in 
the opposition, that this report will not gather dust, because not 
only am I looking forward to receiving it, I am looking forward 
to taking action on their recommendations, Mr. Speaker.

In a separate but related initiative, the Departments of Education, 
Health, Social Services and Justice will be co-operating to 
introduce a $1 million drug and alcohol abuse strategy to combat 
this tragic barrier to student success in completing school, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We will be working with parents and 
communities once again as well as with educators to help our 
children say no to drugs and alcohol, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We are not going to tolerate that 
tremendous human wastage and that tremendous hurt that befalls 
families because of drugs and alcohol and substance abuse, Mr. 
Speaker. We will be helping our children to say no to drugs and 
alcohol. 
 
Finally, this budget includes funds for new initiatives to assist 
handicapped and special needs students, Mr. Speaker. And at this 
point, I want to raise with members of the legislature the work 
that my Legislative Secretary, the member for Canora, has done 
in this area. He’s taken on a special project relative to educational 
needs of our handicapped and special needs students. He’s been 
investigating and looking at some of the new technologies 
available to assist severely and multiply handicapped children. 
And I anticipate, Mr. Speaker, further announcements in this area 
and some pilot projects in the year ahead in this important area, 
and I thank him for the work he’s done to date in this particular 
area on behalf of all of us and on behalf of all of the parents and 
those special children in our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our teachers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
making a difference in the lives of children who have a wide 
diversity of special needs and problems. They deserve our full 
support in creating class-rooms that are conducive to learning. 
And this budget, too, will assist teachers in their efforts to see 
that all children succeed. 
 
I want to turn now for a few closing comments on the 
post-secondary area in terms of what the year ahead looks like 
there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This budget continues our policy, as 
I said earlier, that single major theme of improving access and 
strengthening quality. 
 
To assist our universities and SIAST maintain and strengthen 
their programs, a $10 million new enhancement fund is being set 
up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Support from this fund will enable both 
universities to deal with pressures arising from increased student 
enrolment and rising cost. And it will enable government to meet 
the budget requests submitted by both universities and by the 
institute, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This fund is intended to enable the 
universities to strengthen existing programs on campus; that too, 
there will be separate initiatives under way to strength 
off-campus distance education programs. 
 
We will be working with both universities to improve the transfer 
of credit between the two of them. Many   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

559 
 

students, especially those taking extension programs, have 
stressed the need for more transferability of credits. So if you take 
a course in a regional college, whether it’s brokered from the 
University of Regina or the University of Saskatchewan, those 
credits will be readily transferred to either university, Mr. 
Speaker, something that the parents, something that the young 
people have told us time and time again. And I thank the 
universities for their co-operation in this area. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget also provides funding for 
the creation of a major new distance education link called SCAN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network). The new 
network will provide a distance education system which will 
enable almost every community in the province to have access to 
the advantages of modern technology. 
 
Our five-year goal . . . and I want you to listen to this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I impart all members of the Legislative Assembly 
to hear this next statement. Our five-year goal is to build access 
to learning and to information for 98 per cent of Saskatchewan 
residents within a 20-minute drive from their home; 98 per cent 
of our population will be within a 20-minute drive of the latest of 
technology in distance education, Mr. Speaker. Talk about 
accessibility for our people of this province! 
 
SCAN, the Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network, 
it is more properly called, will begin broadcasting as an 
educational and informational network in 1990. It will provide 
access to a wide variety of educational programs as part of our 
government’s commitment to expanding access to quality 
education and training in all locations of the province. 
Ninety-eight per cent of the people will be within a 20 minute 
drive of educational programs, university programs, technical 
institute programs, Mr. Speaker, across the province. 
 
And I’ve said in this House before about how important that new 
technology can be. I’m not saying you can do everything by 
distance education. I would never suggest that for a minute, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know there is something, as well, 
fundamentally important about what is learned out of the 
class-room in the milieu of the campus environment. I know that, 
Mr. Speaker. All people know that. But there is so much that can 
be done with this new technology and distance education and 
fibre optics and satellite dishes and teleconferences and two-way 
video conferencing, and the list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
There is so much that can be done. 
 
And I’ve said in this House before. I’ve said in this House before. 
When you think of northern Saskatchewan and bringing 
programming available to that large region with a sparse 
population, I’ve said in this House before, it seemed to me it was 
a tragedy that in this province, in this day and age, we had the 
capacity to beam the hockey games that we’re all going to watch, 
as part of the series, the championship series. It was a tragedy 
that we had the capacity to beam the hockey series to every 
corner of this province for people to watch, Mr. Speaker, but we 
didn’t use that technology to deliver educational programming to 
every corner of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, over the next five years, over the next 

five years, what we will see with this commitment today is 98 per 
cent of our people will have access. Yes, not just to the hockey 
game, but they’ll have access to educational programming within 
20 minutes of their arm chair. That’s what this Progressive 
Conservative government is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I want to talk about one other element. 
I referred to it briefly, because this speaks, as well, to making 
sure our young people can get into institutions and get into our 
universities — as it relates to student assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’m pleased to — and I talked earlier about the 35 per cent 
increase in enrolment, about how we’ve taken student assistance 
from 4 million to $33 million in the last seven years — well now 
I want to talk about the year ahead, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
announce that in the budget for ’89-90, funding for student 
assistance is being increased by a further 34 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In the coming year we will be able to help 18,500 young 
people make sure they can go to colleges or university or 
institutes in any part of this province because there is help there 
from the public purse, Mr. Speaker. That’s accessibility, Mr. 
Speaker; that’s our commitment to education and to our young 
people. 
 
Finally, turning to libraries, I mentioned a moment ago the 
decision to computerize library services across the province. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that this budget 
includes funds for the first of a number of pilot projects to link 
libraries across the province. We’ll be working towards 
establishing a network of computerized link-ups between 
municipal libraries, also university and college libraries. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to summarize then the main points of 
the year ahead in education. For kindergarten to grade 12 
education, a 70 per cent increase in funding to move that 
education agenda ahead, Mr. Speaker; to move ahead with 
curriculum and assessment policy; to make the changes, Mr. 
Speaker, so that our young people can face the 21st century with 
confidence. Also more money to involve parents and the 
community; new support to prevent drop-outs and combat social 
problems in the classroom; a cost-of-living increase in grants to 
school boards, matching inflation; and new initiatives for 
handicapped and special needs and native children. 
 
In post-secondary education, a $10 million enhancement fund to 
assist the universities and SIAST to deal with increased 
enrolments and rising costs; a major increase in student funding 
and student assistance; and the introduction of a provincial 
SCAN network which will provide a means for expanding 
distance education throughout the province. 
 
And finally, for libraries, a start to a new automation program to 
link libraries across the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of this is made possible by a 
significant increase in funding at a time when we still deal with 
the effects of last year’s terrible drought, the effects of trade wars 
and low commodity prices.  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

560 
 

And I raise that, Mr. Speaker, because it, too, speaks to another 
priority of this Progressive Conservative government, of this 
Minister of Finance, and of this Premier of this government, and 
of this caucus, and that is that our children’s future and their 
education, and the families from where they come, is so 
important to us that it doesn’t matter whether we’re experiencing 
in our economy good times or bad; it doesn’t matter whether we 
have drought or grasshoppers or grain trade wars or commodity 
prices that are lowest they’ve been in some several decades; 
through good times and through bad, Mr. Speaker, because our 
children are important to us, we will fund education and we will 
fund it in spades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as I said before, there is no simpler statement that sums up 
our commitment when you look at this last decade, and what you 
see is virtually a doubling of the expenditures in education. Not 
just keeping up with inflation, Mr. Deputy Speaker; that’s not 
good enough. We have done more than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as I said earlier, in all of these areas we will do more, 
because we are not going to be content with merely 75 per cent 
of our young people finishing high school. We are not going to 
be content with native children in the North who have a high 
drop-out rate. We’re not going to be content with just doing what 
we are doing today for special needs children and our 
handicapped children. We’re not going to be content with merely 
56 per cent of our young people having an opportunity to go on 
to post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to help our class-room teachers deal 
with some of the realities that they have to deal with, and we will 
do this through good times and through bad, because, Mr. 
Speaker, our government’s abiding commitment is to quality 
education for the parents and their children across this province. 
 
And I’m not suggesting for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
money alone will do all of this, because it takes more. It takes the 
continued commitment of the class-room teacher that has so 
exemplified our educational system, that commitment that has 
been there over this past several decades, and that will be there 
in the future, Mr. Speaker. It takes the dedication of parents as 
duly elected trustees at the board level. It takes the commitment 
and dedication that has been there in the past and will be there in 
the future, of administrators who, yes, despite increased funding 
there are always challenges to meet, and it takes the dedication 
and support of a government and a caucus and a Department of 
Education and officials as well to be part of that partnership, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so yes, a $52 million increase in the education budget will 
go a long ways, but these people are the ones that will make it 
work, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud to be served by departmental 
officials that give every ounce of time and effort and 
commitment, energy and enthusiasm to making this work, and 
I’m so proud to be a part of that team as well as part of this larger 
partnership. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I again want to commend and congratulate the 
Minister of Finance for a budget that speaks to priorities, but for 
a budget that deals with the 

deficit so that our children won’t be faced with the legacy of one 
big mortgage. 
 
And I haven’t talked about that, but I suppose if I was a child on 
the doorsteps of the year 2000, although that I would be very 
happy that he provided an excellent foundation in this budget 
with a $52 million increase in educational spending, when you 
think about it, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the best thing that he has 
done for that young child is decrease the deficit so that we don’t 
saddle that next generation with the bills. And I say 
congratulations for that kind of financial management and 
prudence by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Spending where it deserves to be spent in areas like education, 
Mr. Speaker, managing the economy even in difficult times — I 
take my hat off. I take my hat off to the Minister of Finance, I 
take my hat off to the Premier, and I thank all of my colleagues 
and caucus members for the tremendous support to move this 
important agenda forward. 
 
So I need not say, Mr. Speaker, but it’s obvious that I will not be 
supporting the NDP amendment. They do not want to make 
change — I accept that — but on this side I will be supporting 
the budget because we want to move forward, Mr. Speaker, and 
this budget will move forward on behalf of our children. Thank 
you very, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of 
order. I didn’t want to interrupt the minister’s ebb and flow of 
debate as he was going on, but at approximately 3:25 the minister 
read from a number of documents — several of them. I called 
out, “Author?” The minister did not respond who was the author 
or didn’t table them. 
 
I want to refer to the rules, Mr. Speaker. Rule number 327 in 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms: 
 

(7) When a letter, even though it may have been written 
originally as a private letter, becomes part of a record of a 
department it becomes a public document, and if quoted by 
a Minister in debate, must be tabled on request. 

 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to ask the minister to table the documents 
he was quoting, which are now being quoted in debate by the 
minister and are now public documents. 
 
(1545) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the Minister of 
Education to table the letters that he read from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no 
difficulty in tabling these. Just so it’s on the record, I haven’t 
asked the authors of the letters who sent them in whether I could 
table them in the House. I’m certainly prepared to table them in 
the House. If I table them, and if I offend any of them by tabling 
them without their prior knowledge, I just apologize to them in 
advance. But to meet the protocol of the legislature is certainly 
. . . I am proud of the comments that they’ve made and of the   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

561 
 

interest that they have shown, and as I give them to the page, all 
I would ask is that I could get a photostatic copy of all of them 
so that I do have a record of them, because in some instances they 
are the original response cards. So with that understanding, I’m 
quite happy to table them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is certainly my pleasure to participate in this budget 
debate, and particularly following the Minister of Education, but 
I do want to spend a few minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
commenting on some of the remarks that the minister has made. 
 
Let me from the outset, Mr. Deputy Speaker, congratulate the 
Minister of Education in some of the initiatives that he has taken. 
There’d be very few that I will congratulate him on, but there are 
some that I do want to congratulate him on, and one of them, for 
example, is the initiative the minister has taken in SCAN. I do 
believe that we must look at those alternative opportunities that 
are available in delivering education. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to criticize 
the minister, however. When he starts a new initiative, he then 
cannot and must not starve the existing processes of education, 
and I will document that a little bit later as I speak in this House. 
So, yes, I want to congratulate him on some of his initiatives. 
 
I also want to congratulate him on the initiative that he took in 
carrying forward what was in the budget of 1982-83, moneys to 
build the Prince Albert technical school. And I know that for a 
fact, and the minister and I have talked about that, and that’s on 
the competency-based learning philosophy which, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I brought into this province when I was the minister of 
continuing education. So I congratulate him on continuing with 
that particular aspect of education. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister is being somewhat 
holier-than-thou, or I could say he’s being a hypocrite when he 
says that he believes in the absolute right to education for every 
individual or every child in this province. He says that that is an 
absolute right. If that is an absolute right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
then it is the obligation of the Minister of Education to make 
certain that all qualified students, and I say all qualified students, 
have access to post-secondary education. 
 
Last year, over 1,100 qualified students could not get into 
post-secondary education in this province. Five hundred students 
were denied access to the U of S, not because they didn’t qualify, 
but because that minister over there did not provide sufficient 
funds to the University of Saskatchewan so that programs could 
be made available for these students. And yet he says it’s an 
absolute right. That to me is hypocrisy. If you believe in it, then 
you have an obligation to fund it. 
 
This morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I met with the president of 
the University of Regina. He also, as did Dr. Kristjanson from 
the U of S, expressed to me the concern, 

the concern that they have if the lack of funding is going to 
continue as it has in the past years. 
 
How, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask you, how can we ask the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina to 
provide quality education and access to education when the 
government opposite in the last four years have only provided 
operating funds on an average of 1.3 per cent per year. 
 
Those are taken, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the government’s 
own estimates. From the government’s own estimates, they have 
increased operating grants to post-secondary education by about 
1.3 per cent. In fact the universities got about 1 per cent increase 
per year. Technical schools survived a little bit better; they got 
1.3 per cent. 
 
When the minister says that he is committed to quality education, 
and he is committed to the right of every individual to education, 
I say, nonsense; then provide the funds if you are so committed. 
 
The minister, in glowing terms talked about the new core 
curriculum and the Directions, and that’s great. But when did 
Directions start? It didn’t start with this government. Directions 
started when we were the government, under the Blakeney 
government. And thanks to the former minister of Education, the 
now member from Swift Current, she continued with that 
Directions report, and it finally ended up in core curriculum. And 
I think we all support it. 
 
But again at recent council, Easter council of the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), the minister got an earful 
from the teachers who were not very happy with the process. 
They weren’t very happy with the funding that was being made 
available. And we told this minister last year that his funding was 
inadequate to bring core curriculum into being. But no, he 
wouldn’t listen. I am glad to hear that the minister, in this budget, 
has at least increased the funds for core and for individual 
teachers so that they can implement core in the way that it should 
be done. 
 
The minister bragged about the number of students who are now 
remaining in high school and go on to post-secondary education, 
and how that has increased in Saskatchewan. And that’s a fact. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also has done the same thing in B.C., 
Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec — every province in Canada 
has had a substantial increase of students staying in high school 
and going on to post-secondary education. 
 
And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a concern, it is a concern to 
all of us, and I am pleased that the minister also expressed that 
concern, of the number of students who are dropping out of our 
high schools. He mentioned that . . . one or two of the reasons 
that he mentioned — in fact he mentioned three reasons — was 
possibly for their poor academic performance in school, family 
problems, drug and alcohol abuse. Those were three that he 
mentioned. 
 
I can tell the Minister of Education, I was teaching this last 
semester, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I found that there was   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

562 
 

another reason, there was another reason why some of our young 
people are not attending school, and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
poverty. When you have about 60,000 children in Saskatchewan 
living in poverty, they have no reason to remain in school. Their 
first concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is hunger, is to feed 
themselves. 
 
How can you expect a young student, a young child in elementary 
school, for example, how can you expect them to learn when 
they’re hungry, when they haven’t had breakfast? And he 
probably won’t have lunch, and they’re lucky if they get a 
half-decent supper. 
 
We have more food banks in this province than we’ve ever had. 
In the ’70s there was no need for food banks because the 
government of the day saw fit, first of all, that there were jobs for 
people; and secondly, that the welfare rates for those people who 
could not work or had no work were adequate so families could 
support their children. And I think the Minister of Education has 
an obligation to provide to school boards adequate funding so 
that lunch programs can be provided for those students who do 
not have adequate food at home. 
 
The minister . . . and this I cannot understand. I agree or believe 
that he is sincere. He says that they are going to put in a lot of 
money to try and stamp out substance abuse. Mr. Speaker, we all 
know that there is substance abuse in our high schools and in our 
grade schools, but what I can’t understand of this government 
and of the Minister of Education, why he allows those advertising 
of alcohol on radio and on our TVs. Why do they allow those? 
 
If he is so concerned about substance abuse and he’s so 
concerned about alcohol abuse, why then don’t they cut out the 
advertising? We all know — the Minister of Education and, I 
know, some people opposite say, well, that has no effect, that has 
simply no effect at all whether children drink or adults drink. 
That is absolute nonsense. That’s why they’re advertising. 
They’re advertising so that people will buy their particular 
product. And I say to the members opposite, if you are sincere, if 
you are sincere about trying to stem substance abuse, then for 
Heaven’s sake, cut out the advertising of alcohol on TV. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — But no, they won’t do that. They won’t do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also refer to the enhancement fund that 
the minister referred to in his speech. He said that there is a $10 
million enhancement fund. On the day when the budget was 
delivered in this House, the Minister of Education was, I am told, 
interviewed by some people. And he was asked, first of all, what 
is this $10 million enhancement fund? His response was twofold. 
First of all, he says, I don’t understand those blue books. I don’t 
read it. That was his first one. Secondly, he said, oh well, that $10 
million enhancement fund, that is a blank cheque to the 
universities and technical schools — a blank cheque. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I doubt that he ever said that.

Mr. Rolfes: — Well he said that and that can be verified. And I 
want to say to the member from Kindersley that if he doesn’t 
believe that, he should talk to his colleague. He said it was a blank 
cheque. And when I talked to the presidents of the university, 
they are saying to me, well if it’s a blank cheque, why doesn’t he 
put it into our base funding and let us decide, let us decide how 
the money should be spent and the priorities at the universities. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, that’s not why the government has done it. The 
government is now going to — and that’s the fear of the 
universities — the government is going to directly intervene in 
the autonomy of the universities. The government is going to 
dictate to universities what the programs will be, where their 
programs are going to be taught, and how many programs are 
going to be taught. And if, for example, the universities don’t 
agree with that, or the technical schools don’t agree, then there 
will be no funding. 
 
That’s one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why there has been so 
little criticism from the universities, because they are afraid that 
if they criticize the government, they won’t get the funds. 
 
Now this has happened before, and the last time that happened 
was in 1969 or ’70, and the member from Regina South will well 
remember this because he was closely united with that individual, 
and that was Ross Thatcher. 
 
Ross Thatcher made a speech at the university in 1969-70, where 
he said that it’s about time that someone other than the 
universities determined what went on at the universities, and he 
as the premier of the province, was going to put some strings . . . 
or attach some strings to the budget that were going to be given 
to universities. Well we know what happened to Ross Thatcher. 
When the next election was called, Ross Thatcher was called to 
account and he was gone. 
 
(1600) 
 
I say to the members opposite, you start interfering with the 
internal autonomy of the university, you are, in my words, 
treading on very sacred ground. The universities, not only in 
Saskatchewan but throughout Canada, must have the freedom to 
operate as an autonomous institution, and it is incumbent upon 
the governments of the day to make adequate funds available to 
those universities so that they can offer top quality education to 
all qualified students and individuals in this province. That is 
your duty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to make a few other 
remarks about . . . the minister made, and I’m running through 
these rather quickly. The minister said that parents play an 
important role in the education of their children, and he read from 
a document. I’m simply astounded that the minister for the first 
time now realizes that parents play an important role in the 
education of their children. Well who didn’t know that? 
Everybody could have told you that.  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

563 
 

But the minister obviously didn’t know it. And now suddenly he 
quotes from a report, a study that was done, that parents play an 
important role in the education of their children. Now that is just 
. . . well I think that’s going to be the finding of the century. 
 
He also mentioned that he was very pleased that IBM, that 
wicked old international corporation, as he referred to it, donated 
$1 million to a program, I believe, in the technical schools. And 
for that, we appreciate . . . it’s appreciated. 
 
But let’s not, Mr. Speaker, go too far on these so-called 
co-operative and generous international corporations. They exist 
to make profits, and that’s fine; and those profits come from the 
people of the country. And anything that is given back to the 
people of the country was the people’s to begin with — was the 
people’s to begin with. 
 
And I want to refer you to one because the member from 
Shellbrook-Torch River made such a big thing about it the other 
day, about talking about Weyerhaeuser — how Weyerhaeuser 
had given 500,000, I believe, to the various communities 
surrounding Prince Albert and the Prince Albert area. Why 
wouldn’t they? That’s very generous; $500,000 is a lot of money. 
But what did Weyerhaeuser get for that? They supposedly got a 
pulp mill for $236 million, which they didn’t pay a cent for — 
not 1 cent. And the pulp mill, I am told by experts, was worth 
$336 million. 
 
So the people gave them a gift of $100 million on the market 
value of the pulp mill. Well Weyerhaeuser then comes back and 
contributes $500,000 and we are to be very grateful and 
appreciative of the fact when they’ve just made $100 million, 
$100 million from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that we get things into perspective, 
you know, when we give a great gift from the province to a 
multinational corporation and a very small per cent of that is 
given back to the people. That belonged to the people to begin 
with. That belonged to the people to begin with. 
 
The minister says that he wants to — another statement he made 
— he wants to form bridges and alliances between teachers and 
parents, and the Department of Education and teachers. After, 
Mr. Speaker, he has gutted the Department of Education — he’s 
fired about 80 per cent of the people in the department, all the 
brains and all the experience that were there for years — now 
suddenly he says he wants to collaborate. He wants to co-operate. 
He wants to listen to the teachers. That’s fine, but it’s just a little 
late. It’s just a little late. 
 
And a lot of the problems, a lot of the problems that have existed 
in education over the last two or three years have been as a direct 
result of the decisions that were made by this Minister of 
Education — this Minister of Education’s decisions, Mr. 
Speaker, that were simply uncalled for. They were political 
decisions so that the minister could replace many, many of those 
dedicated civil servants by his own people and people that simply 
weren’t qualified in the areas that they have been placed in. And 
that’s 

caused a lot of problems. 
 
You go and talk to the teachers, talk to the trustees, talk to the 
administrators, and they’ll tell you, they’ll tell you. And I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, the minister has a lot of patchwork to do and a 
lot of co-operation to seek over the next year or so. 
 
In his remarks on post-secondary education, the minister didn’t 
say one word about the Student Union Centre at the University 
of Regina. Not one word was mentioned. He talks about glowing 
. . . he talks in glowing terms about all the things that he has done 
at the universities. And yet just before the 1986 election, the 
Premier of this province and, I believe, the Minister of Education 
went to the campus of the U of R, held a press conference, and in 
glowing terms told the students there that if they made their 
money available, that the Premier himself would guarantee them 
that there would be a Student Union Centre. 
 
Great! The students gave him a big applause. Everybody was 
happy. Big press headlines. And what happens immediately after 
the election? Not the Premier, no, but the minister announces that 
the Student Union Centre has been put on hold and that he will 
no longer proceed with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had so many broken promises; there’s just a 
litany of them. In question period today I think it was clearly 
established once again, statements made by the Deputy Premier, 
by the Premier, over and over again they say one thing one day 
and completely reverse it the next day, and then they come into 
this House and deny it. They deny it. 
 
But it’s on record, they are on record, Mr. Speaker, in saying one 
thing . . . For example, they said that they would not privatize 
SaskPower. Then they go and split SaskPower and called it 
SaskEnergy. But as my colleague said the other day, SaskEnergy, 
or whatever you want to call it, is still SaskPower. 
 
And the Premier made a solemn commitment, a solemn 
commitment, not once but a number of times, that he would 
never, ever privatize the power corporation of Saskatchewan or 
a utility of Saskatchewan. And that’s exactly what he is doing 
today. 
 
Did he have the integrity to get up in this House and say, yes, I 
made a mistake, I’ve changed my mind? No, no, he didn’t have 
that; no respect at all for this institution or for the traditions of 
this House, and for the integrity of individuals as we stand in this 
House. But he will make those statements — as I say, one 
statement outside of the House and another statement in here. 
And it doesn’t make any difference whether it has anything to do 
with reality or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer also to the statement made by the 
Minister of Education on student assistance. It is a fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the federal government, the federal 
government — and he never mentioned the federal government 
once — under the Liberals and under the Tories, federally, have 
made massive moneys available, massive moneys available for 
student loans in   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

564 
 

this country; hundreds of millions of dollars. And so they should. 
And that money is made available to provincial governments, as 
they did in the ’60s when the program was started, in the ’70s, 
and now in the ’80s. And the money is made available to needy 
students. And I have no difficulty in saying to the government 
that they have . . . and congratulating the government that they 
have made more money available. But much of that money, 
almost all of that money comes from the federal government. 
 
But what this government has done, and what burns me about 
this government, is that they’ve changed the student assistance 
program and have now cut out all the bursaries that existed when 
we were the government. When we were the government, a 
student only had to borrow up to $2,640 and then you had a 
bursary. And a very, very generous bursary it was. 
 
Now you’ve got to borrow the first $5,900, so that a student who 
attends university and needs the maximum each year — and 
many of the students do because there are no jobs available; there 
are no jobs available today — if the student borrows the 
maximum, they will be in debt to the tune of $30,000. Thirty 
thousand dollars today is the debt load that those students will 
carry. 
 
Under the former scheme, under the former scheme the bursaries 
cut in and the bursary was forgiven. So yes it was, I think, a much 
better program, a much better program in those days than it is 
today. And the minister says, well they didn’t make that much 
money available. All students who were in need of loans received 
loans and bursaries at that time. 
 
But when you have high unemployment of 9 per cent and 
sometimes close to 10 per cent — in Saskatoon, 12 per cent 
unemployment, some of our young people up to 17 per cent 
unemployment, is there any doubt at all as to why they need 
loans? No, because they don’t have jobs. And there are more 
students today who will need to ask for loans. 
 
In the budget alone, in this past budget, what did they do? Did 
they have some initiatives to create jobs? No. Instead of creating 
jobs they cut 1,500 summer jobs for our students. So next fall 
again those 1,500 students will be coming to your doors asking 
and begging for more assistance so that they can attend 
university, if they can get into the universities. The moneys, Mr. 
Speaker, that have been made available for post-secondary 
education are simply inadequate. 
 
I have with me, Mr. Speaker, a budget request from the U of S. 
This, Mr. Speaker, was made to the Minister of Education in 
December 9, 1988, just a few months ago. 
 
Let me read to the Minister of Education in case he has forgotten 
or in case he wasn’t listening at the time, what the board of 
governors of the U of S asked him to do in the upcoming budget 
— that’s the budget that we are discussing right now. The board 
of governors said this: 
 

The board of governors of the University of Saskatchewan 
requests and recommends to the Minister of Education that 
the budget crisis at the institution be resolved by having the 
provincial 

government increase the operating grant to the university by 
an amount in excess of 4 per cent for each of the next two 
fiscal years. 
 

In excess of four per cent — what did they mean? In excess of 4 
per cent over inflation — that’s what they meant. 
 
They go on to say: 
 

Given the current budget outlook, the university requires, at 
a minimum, an increase in the operating grant, of 7.3 per 
cent for 1989-90 and of 6 per cent for 1990-91. 
 

The minister stands before this House and before the people of 
Saskatchewan and in glowing terms says that he is committed to 
post-secondary education, that he wants to provide quality 
education to our universities. And yet when the universities tell 
him that they have a crisis on their hands, they need 7.3 per cent, 
what does he offer them? — 1.99 per cent. That’s what he offered 
them. 
 
What is going to happen? What is going to happen at the U of S? 
I’ve talked to the administrators at the U of S and they tell me 
that unless they get a substantial amount of that enhancement 
fund and that that money can be used for programs right on the 
campus, they will have to cut programs; they have no choice. 
 
(1615) 
 
It’s no longer that they will say 500 students cannot attend. They 
will have to slash programs. They will have to slash the 
programs; they have no choice. And I say to the Minister of 
Education, you are being a hypocrite. You are hypocritical in 
what you are saying if you deny the universities their requests 
when they are in a crisis situation. 
 
I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, that I spoke to the president of 
the U of R this morning. I had a meeting with him this morning. 
Naturally I won’t divulge in specifics what he said to me, because 
that is in confidence, but the general theme of it was that he is 
faced with a $6 million deficit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The U of S, or U of R? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — The U of R. The U of R. I met with him this 
morning. He said, look, I’m faced with a $6 million deficit. That 
1.99 per cent is not going to address that problem, is not going to 
address that problem. In fact, that 1.99 per cent will not allow me 
to offer the programs that I presently am offering. I will need a 
good chunk of that enhancement fund that the minister is talking 
about on-campus programs, on-campus programs. 
 
Are they opposed to distance education? Are they opposed to 
regional colleges offering these programs? No, not at all. Not at 
all. But what they are telling me, that if we want quality education 
at the U of R and quality education at the U of S, then that 
Minister of Education has to provide at least 7.3 per cent in 
operating grants, not 1.99 per cent.  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

565 
 

And I think that when he speaks in glowing terms of what he has 
done for post-secondary education, I think he is simply being . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Out of touch. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — . . . as my colleague says, he’s out of touch with 
the situation. He’s simply out of touch. 
 
I could, Mr. Speaker, and I want to for just a second again, just 
in case the minister did not pay any attention — Issues and 
Options at the U of S clearly, clearly states the crisis that the U 
of S is in, and similar remarks could be made about the U of R. 
 
The buildings at the U of R are simply falling apart. I mean, they 
need replacements, and I think the people who, on the opposite 
side, who have their children attending the U of R, know that we 
have to replace some of those buildings. The money simply isn’t 
in the budget. It’s not there. What does the Issues and Options of 
accessibility say, and I say to some of the other cabinet ministers, 
if you haven’t seen this, get the summer report — it’s only about 
six or seven pages — summer report. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Has it got pictures? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, there are even some pictures for that. 
 
But I want to on page 4 read just one section of it. There are lots 
of other important sections and recommendations, but just one 
section. It says this, and this refers to the U of S: 
 

The report (and this is Issues and Options) considers various 
alternatives for expanding accessibility in ways that perhaps 
would generate fewer net costs, but concludes that the 
recommended expansion cannot take place at the University 
without both a $10-11 million accessibility envelope of 
annual operating funding . . . 
 

Ten to $11 million increase in operating funds. What did the 
minister provide? He provided $3 million for both universities — 
$3 million, less than 3 million. The U of S is saying that they 
need from 10 to 11 million. And they say, plus they will need 93 
million in capital spending, eventually, that will have to come. 
 

If the capital spending were committed, short-term 
measures could be taken to speed up the loosening of quotas 
in advance of the completion of new facilities. But without 
the required funding commitments, the University’s chief 
alternative is the further reduction of student numbers in the 
long term. 
 

That is the reality, that is the reality that we are facing at our 
universities. They will have to, unless, as I say, a good portion of 
the $7 million of the enhancement fund is devoted to the 
universities, they will have to shut down — either shut down 
whole departments; they will certainly have to cut classes and 
courses, and they will not be able to offer the quality education, 
Mr. Speaker, that is expected of our universities.

Mr. Speaker, there’s other information that I would like to 
convey to the legislature, but I simply don’t have the time. 
 
But I do want to say to the minister that before I leave the 
education specifics, look, you may think that you’re doing a great 
job. And I thought I was doing a great job when I was the minister 
over there. But there are lots of needs out there. You’ve got to 
face reality. If you look at what you are providing to the school 
boards and what you are providing to the universities and 
technical schools, it is simply inadequate, simply inadequate. 
 
School boards simply cannot continue receiving less than the 
inflation rate and continue to offer quality education from 
kindergarten to grade 12. In the school that I was in this past year 
we had a biology class, I believe, that had 47 students in it. You 
cannot, in my opinion, you cannot have quality education when 
you have 47 students in a class of biology. I agree that that was 
the exception. But there was not the exception to have 30, 35 kids 
in an English class or a history class. That was not the exception. 
In fact, in my own class I had 31. 
 
An Hon. Member: — NDP days. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — NDP days, the minister says. Well I’ll tell you — 
NDP days, the people wish that those glory days were back. They 
wish that they were back, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Not only that, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, they 
would gladly trade you in for a different minister. They would 
gladly trade you in for a different minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to, as I said, I congratulated you on some of 
the initiatives that you have taken. I have to however be fair I 
think, in that I think that you have not adequately funded. If you 
look at your own record, if you look at your own record, in these 
statistics from 1986 to 1990, you will find that you have not 
provided operating grants even to keep up with inflation. That’s 
right in your own estimates. I’ve worked them out from 1986 to 
1990 and there is less offered each year. The minister says to me 
— and I want the teachers and the parents and the trustees to note 
that — that all that the trustees are using is socialist mathematics 
when they find out that they are getting less than inflation per 
year. That’s what the minister just told me — that they’re using 
socialist mathematics. Well I don’t care whether it’s socialist 
mathematics. We know that he has not provided the school 
boards with adequate funding, and consequently property taxes 
have had to increase every year since he’s been a minister — 
every year. And in some instances, Mr. Speaker, the property 
taxes have gone up very, very dramatically. 
 
Let me read from the April 3rd issue of the Leader-Post: 
“Separate board ponders budget.” Just one paragraph. 
 

Local taxes paid for 53 per cent of the division’s expenses 
in 1988, compared to 44 per cent from provincial grants. 
 

Fifty-three per cent at the local level; forty-four at the provincial 
level. And, Mr. Speaker, in the 1970s and   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

566 
 

when we were the government, that was as high as 56 per cent 
from the provincial and less than 44 per cent at the local level. It 
has just reversed. And we see more and more of this, the 
provincial government putting in less and less for education and 
asking the local school boards to pay more. 
 
Just in case the minister figures that’s only one, here is another 
one: 
 

Budget could mean higher city taxes; Director says school 
taxes likely to rise. 
 

Is that socialist mathematics? I don’t think it is. It just goes to 
show that the minister has not been as successful with the 
Minister of Finance as some other ministers have been. I mean, 
the Minister of Finance, for example, has been very successful. 
He has, for example, he has put aside 15.7 per cent to pay off, to 
pay off the debt of the deficit that they have created. 
 
Our share this year in the budget, Mr. Speaker, to paying off the 
provincial deficit has gone up 15.7 per cent — one of the highest 
increases anywhere in the budget, so that today, Mr. Speaker, we 
are paying $380 million of interest on the deficit created by this 
Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just for a few more minutes speak about 
this government’s record and turn away from education, as I have 
done. Education, before I leave it, is in a crisis. It is in a crisis 
right now simply because of the lack of funding that it has 
received over a number of years. That refers to kindergarten to 
grade 12 and post-secondary education. 
 
As I indicated before, I spent five months, from September last 
to the end of January in the class-room, and I know what the 
morale of teachers is like. They are very disappointed at the lack 
of consultation that has taken place between the teaching 
profession and the Department of Education ever since this 
minister has taken over. And I think it would be welcomed, if the 
Premier sees fit, to change the cabinet after . . . in July. The 
teachers, I think, would not shed too many tears if we had a new 
minister of Education. They wouldn’t shed too many tears if we 
had a new minister, and we could at least start afresh with maybe 
some new ideas with a minister who would listen. 
 
I was at Easter council — and I do want to pay this compliment 
to the member from Swift Current. Somebody indicated to me, 
well, they sure wish they had the member — they used her name 
— sure wish we had the member from Swift Current back again 
as minister of Education . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well no, 
I do want to pay her a compliment because although she had her 
problems, compared to the present Minister of Education she was 
a pleasure and a good minister to have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — So I want to put this on the record for the Premier. 
He could do a service to education and to the teachers of this 
province if he made a change in that particular portfolio. And if 
he would like to have a 

suggestion, I could suggest one or two members on the opposite 
side who may fit the bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’m 
not quite certain on that one. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to now turn to other parts of the 
budget. When this government took over in 1982, they took over 
an economy that was flowing, that was vibrant, that was strong. 
 
And it was . . . That’s not just our assessment of it. You can go 
to national papers and they say that the Blakeney government had 
created a mixed economy. They were able, even though they 
were recognized as a socialist government, were able to attract a 
high rate of private investment in this province, which is true. 
 
The credit rating was the highest in the country, which has gone 
down about three or four times since this government has taken 
over. And the people of this country gave credit to Blakeney, and 
I think he was an excellent administrator who knew how to have 
balanced budgets and who spent wisely. 
 
But when this government took over, Mr. Speaker, they made a 
number of promises, lavish promises. Some of them they should 
not have kept, and some of them they should have kept. But I 
wish that some of them they wouldn’t have kept; for example, 
the gas tax. I’ll give you a good example — the gas tax. The gas 
tax was a bad tax to take off. We lost about $800 million by 
taking it off, before they reinstated it again through their tax 
rebate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they made the promise that they would reduce 
the royalties to the oil companies. And those royalties, Mr. 
Speaker, have cost this province at least, at least $2 billion since 
1982 — at least $2 billion since 1982. No one, no one will deny, 
Mr. Speaker, that the production of oil has gone up. In fact, in 
1985-86 it doubled. No one denies that. But did they get double 
the royalties? No. In fact, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There seem to be two debates 
going on simultaneously, and I believe the member from 
Saskatoon South has the floor. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I know that the Minister of Education only spoke for an 
hour and five minutes, and that’s short according to . . . when you 
compare it to most of his speeches, and he likes to continue. 
 
But I just want to say to the members opposite that, yes, you 
increased the production of oil in 1985-86. Oil at that time was 
$30 a barrel. They produced over 2 billion barrels of oil and they 
got less revenue. They only got $654 million, whereas in 1982 
we had half the production. The price of oil was less than $30 a 
barrel, and we got over $700 million in royalties. 
 
Now that is where . . . those two items — the royalty structure 
over $2 billion; the gas tax, $800 million — cost this province 
$2.8 billion. Now those two decisions alone have cost this 
province a lot of money. And if you take that money, Mr. 
Speaker, at 10 per cent, we are paying   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

567 
 

$280 million a year now, $280 million a year now on the interest 
that we pay on that deficit from that government opposite, those 
decisions that they should not have made. Those decisions they 
should not have made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen in this budget again is a 
heavy tax increase for individuals, another $145 million increase 
in taxes for individuals, but a 2 per cent decrease for the 
corporations. 
 
Last year, we had a $265 million increase in taxes. We are being 
so heavily taxed, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province, 
pretty soon they’re going to say, well what’s the sense in 
working, this government is taxing it all away. 
 
So what do we have, Mr. Speaker? We have, under this 
government, unemployment of 43,000. It would be up to 64,000 
if 33,000 people hadn’t left this province last year. And we have 
fewer people paying for the taxes, and this government has no 
job incentive programs put into this budget whatsoever — none 
at all. 
 
And they have the wrong priorities, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has not addressed the problems of education. It has 
not addressed the problems of job creation. It has not addressed 
the problems of how we put this province back to work. Rather, 
they’re spending too much time on privatization and selling off 
our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I believe, and my colleagues believe, that 
those are the wrong priorities. We cannot accept the budget. We 
will, however, support the amendments that are made. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure for me to rise today in support of the fine budget 
presentation made by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, and 
also in support of government programs and government actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I thought I’d like to do today is, in company 
with other ministers on this side of the House who have spoken 
earlier, touch on some of the programs in my department. But 
before I do that, for the edification of all members in the House, 
perhaps I could explain in some degree what kind of programs 
we’re responsible for and what the different branches are in this 
department, because it’s become a very large and very complex 
department. 
 
Indeed last year, Mr. Speaker, we did a count through the human 
resources branch to see just how many people went through our 
books. In actual fact we employed over 4,500 people last year. 
We have many seasonal employees and temporary employees 
and part-time workers, and of course with a big forest fire season 
such as we had last year and the year before, we bring in an awful 
lot more people during those particular times of the year. So all 
in all we employed some 4,500 people last year. 
 
The scope of the department, Mr. Speaker. Well first of all, in the 
parks and renewable resources side I have responsibility for 31 
provincial parks, 101 regional parks, 

responsibility for forestry. We have 15, 16 million acres of 
commercial forest in this province; have responsibility for 
wildlife, responsibility for fisheries, and responsibility for 
resource lands, so we administer about 84 million acres of 
resource land in the province. Now that’s on one side of the 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the other side of the portfolio, in culture and recreation, I have 
responsibility for amateur sport, for arts, multiculturalism, 
heritage programs. I’m also responsible for the western 
development museums, the Centre of the Arts in Regina, the 
Museum of Natural History, museum programs in general, the 
arts board, the archives board. 
 
I have now assumed responsibility and will be within the next 
few weeks taking on the responsibility for our urban parks in 
Saskatchewan, so parks such as Wascana Centre will fall under 
the jurisdiction of this particular department. And we think, Mr. 
Speaker, there are some very good reasons for doing this. There’s 
lots of common ground between what the urban parks do and 
what my Department of Parks also is in the process of doing. 
 
With the work that the New Careers Corporation is doing — and 
for which I am also responsible — with the work that they are 
doing, Mr. Speaker, the parks, the urban parks, fit very nicely and 
tie well into this portfolio. We’re heavily involved with the urban 
parks with the New Careers Corporation, providing projects to 
ameliorate those parks and upgrade the facilities that currently 
exist there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re in the business of service. We’re in the 
business of servicing a large number of client groups. For 
example, the largest group we have are what are called the 
umbrella groups. This is Sask Sport, the Saskatchewan Council 
for Cultural Organizations, and the Saskatchewan Parks and 
Recreation Association. Sask Sport is the umbrella that covers 
off 73 sport-governing bodies. SCCO (Saskatchewan Council for 
Cultural Organizations) has 25 member groups; SPRA 
(Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association) has over 100. 
These are the people primarily with whom I deal. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they are primarily made up of volunteers — 
a large, large number of volunteers. As you would know, sir, and 
other members of this House would know, Saskatchewan has the 
highest volunteerism rate in Canada. Fully 28 per cent of our 
population volunteer their time and their skills, their energy, to 
some individual hobby or pursuit mostly for the benefit of other 
Saskatchewan citizens. And I’m very proud to be associated with 
them. 
 
I can honestly say, Mr. Speaker, that probably I have more fun in 
government as a minister than any of the rest of my colleagues, 
partly because of the scope of the activity of the department, 
partly because of the kinds of contacts I have with our client 
groups. 
 
And I hasten to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these are 
non-partisan groups. These groups existed in the times when the 
members opposite formed government, and before that when the 
Liberal Party formed the government of this province. They don’t 
exist for partisan   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

568 
 

gain. They have recognized over the years that in order to achieve 
their goals and their objectives, that is much better achieved 
through accommodation rather than through confrontation. And 
that’s the kind of atmosphere that we’ve managed to live under 
in this last two and a half years, and I’m very proud of that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I felt that this budget in terms of my 
department has been one of protection, protecting what we 
already have, and building towards the future; protecting the 
strong base we have in our wildlife programs — and I’ll touch 
on those a little later. We just won an international, a prestigious 
international award for the wildlife programs we have in 
Saskatchewan. They’re recognized as being the best in North 
America. 
 
We’re going to be building on those programs in the coming year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, building on our fisheries with a number of 
fingerlings and fry that we’ve been planting in lakes around this 
province; building in terms of sport and recreation. The success 
we had in Melfort last summer with the summer games, and 
we’re looking forward to Melville for the winter games next year; 
and in between of course, that very large and important games 
coming to Saskatchewan, coming to Saskatoon, the summer 
games. 
 
So although I say this budget for us is one of protection, it is also 
one of building. It leaves lots of room to build on what we’ve 
done in the past few years, and looking ahead, to providing 
programs for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens in the years 
ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I outlined for you the scope 
of the department and the nature of the department, so that 
everyone will have a better understanding when I talk about 
building for the future, building on what we’ve done in the past. 
 
And although we’re recognized as yes, we are in the business of 
service, of servicing people, of servicing the people of 
Saskatchewan, indeed at a very small “c” conservative estimate, 
Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that this department touches 
three-quarters of a million people in this province. Whether they 
like to hunt or to fish or to use the parks or use the outdoors in 
any way, shape, or form; whether they’re involved in cultural 
activity, recreational activity, heritage pursuit, palaeontological 
pursuit, archaeological pursuit, ornithology, a host of other 
activities, Mr. Speaker, we touch them in some way, shape, or 
form. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the important thing here that I want to get 
across is that in touching those people and providing programs 
for those people with a budget of approximately $95 million, we 
are also in the business of economic development. And I’ll give 
you some examples. Fisheries and wildlife alone contribute about 
$350 million worth of economic activity every year to this 
province; the parks, 230 to $235 million a year; forestry, 200 to 
$230 million a year; resource lands, $120 million a year. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, that although we are definitely, 

most definitely in the business of service, we are also an 
economic development department because of the amount of 
economic activity we generate for the people of the province, and 
that’s on the resources side. 
 
On the culture and recreational side, Mr. Speaker, it is recognized 
that for every dollar we invest in programs in culture and 
recreation, we realize five in return. Mr. Speaker, I would submit 
to you and all members that a five to one return is an enormous 
return. 
 
But more than that, Mr. Speaker, not just the economic 
development that is generated, but that volunteer spirit and that 
volunteerism of which I spoke earlier, contributes, again 
estimated, another $20 million a year to the economy of 
Saskatchewan — people who are working without wages, 
working without fees, working without honorariums, working 
because they love their province, because they’re happy to work 
for the people of the province, people who perhaps have been 
fortunate in their own life experiences and want to share that with 
others. 
 
And I know there are many people in here on both sides of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, who in past years and currently, do offer of 
their time, whether it be through Lions clubs, Kinsmen’s clubs, 
other service groups, church groups, organizations such as minor 
sports, cultural activities, organization of Saskatchewan arts 
councils. I know we have many people on both sides of the House 
who are involved in that kind of volunteer activity. It’s not only 
rewarding to them personally, but they’re doing great service to 
the rest of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We provide activities through volunteer service, Mr. Speaker, 
that otherwise could not take place. We look at that $20 million 
worth of activity and although I don’t want to be crass and say 
we put a dollar value on one’s time in terms of volunteerism, it 
cannot be ignored, the impact that has on small communities 
particularly, all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I spoke about economic development and I 
talked about protection in the budget and I talked about building. 
I’d like to expand, on the time I have left, on building. In the last 
year or so, Mr. Speaker, it’s become very obvious, not only to me 
and my colleagues — I’m sure members of the opposition have 
had calls from their constituents — that some of our recreational 
and cultural facilities have been falling behind somewhat in 
terms of upkeep. Some of them indeed have been declared to be 
unsafe. Others have got problems with roofs. Some have 
problems with heating. 
 
What we found, Mr. Speaker, is that we need upgrading and 
improvement of existing facilities, and in some communities, 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, you have communicated to me on more 
than one occasion, you have need of new facilities in your own 
constituency. 
 
I know there are others in here, and I look around today, members 
who have been contacting me on behalf of constituents, members 
who have brought delegations of constituents to visit with me, 
some of whom I have gone to see on their own turf and looked at 
their facilities.  



 
April 5, 1989 

 

569 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to say today that the Minister 
of Finance did announce in the budget that there would be a new 
community cultural recreational facilities program, a new 
six-year, $32.6 million program allowed for in this budget and 
ongoing over the next number of years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, there were no details 
contained in the budget speech as to precisely how this program 
would be articulated on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan, 
so I thought I’d take a few moments today and share with 
colleagues on both sides of the House. Because we will all be 
receiving inquiries from constituents on this, I thought I’d try to 
articulate for them some of the details of the program without 
going into the very specific dollars that will be available. 
 
The application forms, Mr. Speaker, will be available by July 1. 
All of the details in terms of how much money a community 
would be eligible to apply for, will be announced prior to that 
July 1 date. Department officials from Parks, Recreation and 
Culture will be available on a consultative basis to go out and 
meet with interested groups, community groups, and recreation 
boards and others to explain how they will apply for the program. 
And we’ll help them with the form filling and all the logistical 
details that of necessity must be completed prior to the processing 
of the applications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the objective of this program is very simple. It is 
designed to encourage and assist communities and voluntary 
organizations to construct new cultural and recreational facilities, 
and of course to upgrade and improve existing facilities. That, 
very simply, is what the program is going to do. 
 
Now as you would know, Mr. Speaker, we just completed a 
previous program that had been introduced in 1982 by this 
government, a cultural and recreational facilities program of 
some $32 million in magnitude. That program just finished. 
 
There are some very discernible differences between the former 
program and the new program. And the first of these, the first of 
these is that in consultation with groups around the province it 
was made abundantly clear to me, to my officials, and to my 
colleagues who’ve come back to discuss this with me, that we 
could not do another program based on a per capita allowance. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll elaborate a wee bit on that. 
 
I live in the town of Spiritwood in north-west Saskatchewan. I 
had the honour of being mayor there for two terms. When 
programs are announced on a per capita basis — we had a 
community of 1,000 population — with $25 per capita that was 
a $25,000 program. At $25,000, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, 
we’d not build a curling rink or an arena. It’s very welcome. It’s 
very welcome in that it assists us with our own fund raising to go 
out and match it and build something. It assists us with upgrading 
and renovation of our facilities.

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s just as expensive to build a curling rink in 
Spiritwood as it is to build it in Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Saskatoon, or any of the larger centres who, of course, 
receive much more money in that program. 
 
Now certainly, based on per capita, those communities do 
deserve more money. Those communities have a larger 
population. They pay income tax like anybody else, but, Mr. 
Speaker, they also have a larger tax base from which to draw 
upon for their programs. 
 
The city of Regina is blessed with a very fine parks and recreation 
department administered by the city of Regina. They have very 
sophisticated programs and they have high calibre employees 
who are capable of delivering excellent programs to the citizens 
of Regina. 
 
Now obviously, given the smaller tax base and the smaller 
population in towns in rural Saskatchewan and indeed, sir, rural 
municipalities, they don’t have the luxury of that volume of tax 
dollar accruing to them. So we tried to design a program, Mr. 
Speaker, that would address that issue in smaller communities 
around Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of eligibility, the program is available to municipalities. 
Of course that includes cities, towns, villages, resort villages, 
Indian bands, northern towns, villages and settlements, organized 
hamlets. 
 
On the question of the North, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out 
that they are eligible for increased funding over the normal size 
of the money that would be available in this program. Funding 
will be available based on the type of facility, the size of 
community, to a maximum of 50 per cent of the total eligible cost 
of the project. Fifty per cent of the total cost of the project, Mr. 
Speaker, would be in the form of grant, should they so qualify. 
 
However, in northern Saskatchewan, I’m very pleased to say, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know the northern members present would be 
pleased to hear this, that will be 90 per cent because, Mr. Speaker, 
we recognize the much lower tax base in the North, we recognize 
the greater distance between communities, and we recognize a 
host of logistical problems facing residents in the North. So in 
the North, I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, it will be 90 per cent 
of the cost of the project, whereas in other areas of Saskatchewan 
it will be 50 per cent of the cost of the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program is in effect as of April 1 of this year. 
But we recognize that in anticipation of a new program being 
announced, and with some problems that have been around 
Saskatchewan for the last year, we’re going to make this program 
retroactive one year. So any projects that commenced on April 1 
of 1988 will be eligible for consideration under this project. And 
of course, if the project had begun prior to April 1 of 1988, we 
are also willing to look beyond that date at any upgrading they 
have done or any expenses they have incurred or have accrued to 
them subsequent to April 1 of 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to look at principal and   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

570 
 

interest payments during that time. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The sound of one hand clapping. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, well, one member says, the 
sound of one hand clapping. Members on that particular 
member’s constituents . . . from that particular member’s 
constituency, I think are going to be very pleased with this 
particular announcement, and they’re going to be very happy 
when they see the details of the program and the amount of 
money for which they are going to be eligible because this 
program is much richer than the last one that we announced. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I touched on some of the details of the 
program, and I would like to mention a couple of other things 
that we’re working into this program. For example, I’ve been 
asked questions — I was in Melfort this morning with my 
colleague, the Minister of Highways, where we announced some 
of the details of the program. We plan on doing this around other 
areas of Saskatchewan, areas who have been contacting me, 
contacting my colleagues, and saying: are you going to have a 
program; what’s in the program; what’s there for us; is there 
assistance for us? So I want to go out and touch in some of these 
communities and explain the details to them. 
 
And a couple of questions I got today, one of them: would 
professional fees such as those of architects, engineers, and 
consultants be eligible costs under this program? I’m pleased to 
say, Mr. Speaker, yes, to a maximum of 10 per cent of the total 
project cost. I’ve been asked: are land and building costs eligible 
project costs? Mr. Speaker, yes they are, to a maximum of 10 per 
cent of the total project costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this program, which has been asked 
for by so many people of Saskatchewan, is timely. I think it’s a 
program that’s going to be very well accepted right across 
Saskatchewan. We recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the core of social 
life, primarily in rural Saskatchewan and in our smaller 
communities, tends to revolve around the skating arena and the 
curling rink, not just for the athletic endeavours that take place 
within those edifices, Mr. Speaker, but because of the social 
atmosphere and the gathering place that it tends to be during the 
winter months. Similarly, community halls, bowling alleys, 
senior citizen complexes; in the summer, passive parks, active 
parks — all of those kinds of facilities will be eligible for 
assistance under this program. 
 
So what we have then: expanded program, an enriched program 
with a few more wrinkles thrown in — the kinds of things that 
the people will be asking for. And, Mr. Speaker, something that 
I would like to point out about this particular program. 
 
When we talked about designing it, when we talked about what 
kind of things should be in the program, what should not be in 
the program, how much money should be in the program, instead 
of asking the officials to take on the sole responsibility for this, 
what we did was we had our MLAs go out and consult in their 
communities and ask people, what is it that you need. Then they 
came back. We brought the officials in and we said to the 
officials, okay, you’re the technical people; please 

articulate onto paper for us the kind of program that we’re 
looking for. And they brought it back two or three times and they 
met with several different committees of the Conservative caucus 
until we hammered out something that we thought would touch 
the most people in the most beneficial fashion in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say today, I think 
we’ve accomplished precisely that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to a couple 
of other topics as they relate to the Department of Parks, 
Recreation and Culture. As you would know, sir, and perhaps 
others would know here, I’ve had a deep and personal and 
abiding interest in wildlife for a large number of years. I’ve been 
a member of the Wildlife Federation and the Natural History 
Society; I contribute to the World Wildlife Fund and other 
organizations like that. So I’ve taken a very keen interest in the 
efforts of our department in conservation, preservation of the 
wildlife that we have, and looking years ahead to improving upon 
the stocks that we have of ungulates and looking at increasing the 
water-fowl numbers that we currently enjoy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by way of background, some 74,000 people 
purchase licences to hunt and trap each year in this province; 3.6 
million days of hunting; $172.6 million are actually spent 
enjoying wildlife each year. We have 320 licensed outfitters in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to keep those kind of numbers 
and those statistics up, we’re going to have to have viable herds 
of wildlife, and we’re going to have to have viable flocks of 
water-fowl. Let me touch on water-fowl. 
 
For the first time, I believe it was last year, the mallard population 
in this province dipped under 1 million. Mr. Speaker, that was 
due to a couple of factors, the primary one of course being 
drought. It’s pretty difficult for ducks to learn to swim in a dugout 
that’s full of not even wet mud, just dust and sand. So we’ve had 
trouble with our numbers, with nesting; the predators have found 
it too easy to feed on our water-fowl and on the chicks, so we’ve 
had all kinds of problems due to drought — less than 1 million 
mallards for the first time in a very long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you would know, and other members here would 
know, in actual fact Saskatchewan is a breeding ground for the 
vast majority of water-fowl on this continent. Thirty-three per 
cent of all of the mallards breed in Saskatchewan; 25 per cent of 
all of the water-fowl breeds in Saskatchewan. In actual fact when 
they begin their fall migration and head south on the three 
flyways that leave this province, when they head south, people 
down there are seeing fewer and fewer water-fowl every year, to 
the extent that in the southern states they are now having to shut 
down their hunting season for water-fowl altogether. 
 
Well what are we going to do about it? Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
involved in the prairie pot-hole project, whereby we have 
introduced artificial nesting. We have   



 
April 5, 1989 

 

571 
 

encouraged farmers to leave sloughs and not drain them, and 
we’re in the first stage, the first step program of a North 
American water-fowl management plan. Mr. Speaker, we are the 
only province in the country that has signed in to this particular 
project. It’s a fifteen year, 1.5 billion program aimed at restoring 
our water-fowl populations to what it was years ago. And I’m 
happy to say that the $6 million first step in all of this was begun 
at Quill Lakes in the last two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s only one program. There are many others that 
we’ve been encouraging, because you can’t force people to take 
part in these programs, but we’ve been encouraging these 
programs around the province. We’ve had great co 
_operation from Ducks Unlimited, the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, the Natural History Society, Wildlife Habitat 
Canada, and the World Wildlife Fund. Without the co-operative 
venture of our partners, we would not be able to boast about the 
populations we have today. 
 
Just on that topic, the white-tailed deer population, Mr. Speaker, 
this year is recovering to the levels prior to the disastrous winter 
of 1984-85 where we spent over $1 million on a deer feeding 
program. So in actual fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that 
the wildlife population is on the increase, the water-fowl 
populations are on the increase, and with a little luck from nature 
this year, I think we’ll see some great strides there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other things I would like to touch 
on, on this department. The scope of the department is enormous, 
as I mentioned earlier. There are so many good projects that 
we’re involved with — the New Careers Corporation, the best 
program of its type in North America, freely acknowledged at a 
national conference in Ottawa last week, the envy of other job 
creation and job employment and training programs across this 
country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, time does not permit today to follow up on all 
of these initiatives. I would like the opportunity, perhaps at a later 
date, to come back into the debate and run through other program 
areas. I’m very proud of the work being done by the officials in 
my department, and I know that they would all like the 
opportunity to have their programs mentioned here on the floor 
of the legislature, and I would like to have the opportunity to do 
so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I’d like to call it 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


