


















































May 16, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 16, 1989 
 

1143 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce a group of eight patients from the Cancer (Patient) 
Lodge here in the city of Regina on Dewdney Avenue. They’re 
here with us to watch question period and do a tour of the 
building. They are accompanied here today by the lodge 
manager, Shirley Murray — I believe they’re in the Speaker’s 
gallery; yes they are — and volunteer workers Myrna Kew and 
Mary Backman. I’m sure all members will want to join with me 
in recognizing these individuals and welcoming them here to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, a group of 
grade 7 and 8 students from St. Bernard School in Saskatoon, 29 
students, and they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Len 
Thomas, and chaperons Sister Juliana Heisler, Linda Smithwick, 
Darlene Parchewski, and Greg Johnson. 
 
It’s a particular honour for me, Mr. Speaker, to introduce this 
class. While I’ve introduced other guests in the legislature, I’ve 
not had the opportunity yet to introduce a class since my election 
victory of a year ago, so I’m privileged that this is the first class. 
We’ll be meeting later for pictures and questions and comments. 
I hope that the students enjoy question period and their tour of 
the legislature, and I would ask that all members extend their 
usual expression of welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
young guests in the Assembly that I would like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the entire Assembly, some 28 young 
people from the constituency of Regina South who traditionally 
make an annual visit to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They are 
sitting in your gallery. They are grade 4 and 5 students from 
Grant Road School. They are accompanied here today by their 
teacher, Mrs. JoAnne Friesen, and I understand that the principal 
is with them today as well, Mr. Keith McNeillie. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit today just as informational 
and as much fun as they have in prior years. It’s not the same 
group, but the school, and I look forward to meeting with them a 
little bit later for pictures and drinks and seeing how they enjoyed 
their visit, Mr. Speaker. I wish all members to welcome them to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to remind our guests, and I appreciate 
they’d like to join in the applause, but we ask our guests not to 
participate in the proceedings.

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 
and through you to the members of the Assembly, a group of 
grade 8 students, numbering 24, in the west gallery, from St. 
Marguerite’s School in my constituency, Regina Wascana. They 
will be in the Assembly for some time and then will be out having 
an opportunity to tour the facility, the buildings, and then later 
this afternoon I’ll have a chance to talk with them. 
 
So please, I ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming the students from St. Marguerite’s School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to colleagues here in the Assembly this afternoon a 
group of individuals from my constituency, from the town of 
Nipawin, and Carrot River, I guess, and Codette area. First of all, 
there’s the mayor of Nipawin, Mr. Jim Taylor; council person, 
Mr. Ron Folstad; the president of the chamber of commerce 
there, René Rusk; and Mr. Bill Hamilton, the reeve of the R.M. 
of Nipawin. And accompanying them are two council persons 
from the town of Carrot River, Mr. David Stanger and Glenn 
Engele. I think the economic development officer from Nipawin, 
Mr. Wayne Tebbutt is along as well, but I’m not sure that he’s in 
the Assembly yet with us. I’d just like to ask all members here to 
welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Grant to Game Farm 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the minister of privatization. Mr. Minister, will you 
tell this House whether or not in your time as minister of SEDCO 
or subsequent to that time, you used any influence with anyone 
to expedite the $120,000 mortgage SEDCO supplied the 
Northern Lights game farm, of which your son Robert is a partner 
and manager. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Another question to the same minister, the 
minister of privatization. Mr. Minister, I have here an April 27 
press release from the Department of Agriculture which says that 
Tanka Research, one of your government’s polling firms, is 
doing a market study for game farms. Can you tell this House 
how much your government is contributing to that research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m not the Minister of Agriculture. I have 
no knowledge of that research. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Another question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, these are just a couple of linkages and coincidences we 
see about game farming, and particularly the Northern Lights 
game farm and this government. As a cabinet minister, you know 
that every piece of legislation has to come before and be 
approved 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1144 
 

by cabinet. And, Mr. Minister, I would like to know, when the 
Bill or any amendments relating to game farming legislation 
came before cabinet, if you exempted yourself from voting? Did 
you abstain? And I would like to know if you notified the Premier 
and your colleagues about the potential for conflict, or perceived 
conflict, and have you got this notice in writing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There is no potential for conflict. The 
Premier was aware of the operations that Northern Lights were 
looking at from the beginning. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — To the same minister, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister knows that his wife sat, or possibly still sits, as a member 
of the federal Farm Debt Review Board. When that board 
considered and allowed the Toronto Dominion Bank to seize nine 
quarters of land owned by one Doug Lyke, and then later sold to 
the game farm, your wife chose to absent herself from the 
meeting. 
 
Was she aware at that time of your son’s interest in purchasing 
the land, and as such did she declare a clear conflict of interest 
with the board? And was that her reason for absenting herself 
from the decision of the Farm Debt Review Board in the 
foreclosure of the nine quarters of land owned by Doug Lyke? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t sit in on the Farm Debt Review 
Board. I have no idea what took place at the meeting. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, you would be aware that, if not 
formally, at least informally, there are consultations between the 
western diversification office and the Government of 
Saskatchewan prior to grants being approved. Can you tell us: 
did this government inform the western diversification fund of a 
potential conflict of interest prior to the approval of a grant for 
$466,000 to the Northern Lights game farm for research and 
development of which your son is involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, there is 
no conflict that I’m aware of at all, and certainly I don’t know if 
there’s any discussion between this government and the WD 
(western diversification) office regarding that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I would think that a $466,000 grant would 
be to the attention of members of cabinet. I would like to ask the 
minister whether or not you can explain why such a grant would 
be needed for $466,000 when the New Zealand government 
would have made a book available for the very same type of 
information for $29.70. And it’s actually . . . On checking today, 
we find that it’s not in the Legislative Library, but the 
Department of Agriculture library does have the book that 
outlines the very type of information that the grant was received 
for some $466,000. Can you tell us about that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ve no idea of a $29 book that he’s talking 
about. I do know that the grant to Northern Lights was for 
research into game farming, and I think if you want to find out 
more you should probably contact Dr. Jerry Haigh, who is one of 
the leading wildlife biologists and veterinarians working on this 
out of the University of Saskatchewan.

Mr. Anguish: — Well we wanted to contact you, Mr. Minister, 
in this legislature . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Would the hon. 
member just indicate if it’s a new or a supplementary question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. People have been contacting us because they’re 
concerned about a perceived conflict of interest with a member 
of the cabinet of this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the principle of any conflict of interest is that 
there should not be or appear to be any conflict of interest. Now 
you said, Mr. Minister, on June 10, 1980, and I quote: 
 

To me, this Bill deals entirely with declaring assets, and 
perhaps more important than that is the ability people have 
to influence. 
 

You made those statements concerning debate on conflict of 
interest legislation on June 10, 1980 in this legislature. I would 
like to ask the minister, do you still hold this opinion, and if so, 
will you table all the relevant documents in order to erase any 
perception of conflict of interest by you as a member of cabinet, 
sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, as I say, there are no 
documents that include me in any way, shape, or form. I’ve long 
since learned to question what the member is quoting from, and 
I really can’t recall what I said on June 10, 1980, but I would look 
in the record and see. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I can recall what you said on June 10, 1980, 
because I looked it up in Hansard and read it, sir. 
 
My question to you is that in regard to the $120,000 loan 
approved by SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation), and the $466,000 grant approved by the western 
diversification fund to the Northern Lights game farm, of which 
your son is a shareholder, will you please table any documents 
that have access to the provincial government that could possibly 
remove this perceived conflict of interest with you, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t believe there’s any perceived 
conflict of influence, and as I said previously, I have no 
documents. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I did not ask that the documents had to be in 
your possession, sir. 
 
I have a new question. Will the Premier give his undertaking to 
this legislature that you will search the records in regard to this 
case and any records that are available within access to the 
Government of Saskatchewan? Will the Premier undertake to 
search that out and table those documents before this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will always satisfy myself 
that there is no conflict, and if there is, I deal with it. I will 
examine anything that I think that should be examined as a result 
of anything that you’ve raised here, and I’ll look at it. I, on the 
surface, don’t see a conflict, but 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1145 
 

I always have to satisfy myself that that’s the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I’m 
sure that you must have been aware of this situation prior. We’re 
talking about large sums of money; we’re talking about a cabinet 
minister in your government. Have you already satisfied yourself 
that there is no conflict of interest in the situation of the Northern 
Lights game farm versus one of your cabinet ministers, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am satisfied that there’s no 
conflict, but the hon. member raised it and I will review it so that 
I can be satisfied that that’s the case. 
 

Public Hearings on SaskEnergy 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
deputy leader, and it’s in regard to the public meetings which are 
presently being held by SaskEnergy. 
 
And I want to say that, given yesterday and last night, the 
travelling road show is off to a rip-snorting start. I noticed that 
while you had the meeting in Elbow last night, there were 12 
people, and in Herbert there were about 13; Rockglen, about six. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact of the 
overwhelming coming out of people to these meetings, can you 
now tell us how much these meetings are costing the taxpayers? 
Is it running about 200 a head, 300 a head? How much money 
are you wasting of taxpayers’ moneys on this foolish idea of 
these meetings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, first it was all of the 
support that we have against . . . for our position, taken against 
the public participation exercise in SaskEnergy. Then it was all 
of the support they had for walking out and ringing the bells for 
two weeks, going on strike for two weeks, and costing this place, 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, $300,000. And then he said, Mr. 
Speaker, this thing is just a propaganda machine that’s going to 
whitewash the whole thing. And then he said, Mr. Speaker, that 
taxpayers’ money ought not to be spent in brainwashing the 
people of Saskatchewan. And now he says, but, Mr. Speaker, 
nobody is interested. 
 
Well he can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. Nobody is 
interested? I think the opposite of what he says, Mr. Speaker. 
People are quite prepared, quite prepared to accept what the 
Premier and the Minister of Public Participation and myself and 
my colleagues in caucus are suggesting, and that is the public 
participation in SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, is a very exciting 
economic opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Now as it relates to cost, I’m going to 
answer the question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, these meetings are so 
exciting that we see tens of people coming out to each of

them. I want to say that in contrast to the thousands of people 
who are coming out to legitimate meetings, expressing concern 
about the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question deals with a 
letter on PC stationery sent out last Thursday by the Progressive 
Conservative Party, signed by one Corey Olynik. And I want to 
quote from the letter that was sent to PC executives, dealing with 
the very meetings we’re now talking about. And in the first 
paragraph this person indicates: 
 

Your association has been contacted to get our members out 
to these meetings. I cannot stress enough the importance of 
using (using) these public meetings to get our message 
across. 
 

Now we see that the Progressive Conservative Party is using 
these meetings at taxpayers’ expense to get your message out. 
And I want to say to you that this is not an accepted policy by 
this government of wasting taxpayers’ money to promote the 
Progressive Conservative Party line. And I ask you why these 
meetings are not being paid for out of party funds, rather than 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points to be 
made here. Number one, while I am a member of the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan — I think my membership 
is current — while I am a member, I do not run the party. But to 
people who do run the party, I would hope have the presence of 
mind to take political advantage of any event that might be done 
out there by either you or us — number one. 
 
Number two, number two, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why 
on the one hand he’s squawking and whining over there because 
we’re holding these things, and on the other hand nobody’s 
showing up. You should be happy that our executive director 
isn’t doing his job very well. 
 
Number three, I would never want to be accused, Mr. Speaker, 
of holding these meetings only in Tory ridings. So we’re going 
to let them go until we get to some of the NDP ridings and see 
what kind of turn-out we have there. 
 
And number four, Mr. Speaker, for that member to talk about 
horrendous costs of offering information to the public by 
SaskEnergy is a little bit contradictory and hypocritical, because 
this is the same group that hijacked this place for $300,000. 
That’s the same man who’s suggesting that we should put 
together a committee on rules and tour them around the world for 
a couple of years to see if we should change the rules of the 
House. Mr. Speaker, from that member, it’s simply not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister, and it too 
surrounds the sell-off meetings that are going on. And I want to 
quote again from the letter from your staff person in the PC Party. 
They go on to say that: most importantly, 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1146 
 

we must organize, educate and stand up for what we know is best 
for our province — we, the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seldom have the people of this province seen that 
kind of arrogance from a government, that they will decide . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . that they will decide what is best for 
the people of this province, not listen to the 70 per cent who are 
opposed to privatization of SaskPower, but the party will use 
government funds to go out and propagandize this issue at public 
meetings. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, why don’t you quit bullying the 
public of this province and let them have their say on SaskPower, 
get rid of the Bills, end the hearings and the meetings you’re 
having. The people don’t want it. They don’t want their tax 
dollars spent on propagandizing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea what goes 
on over at party headquarters, the PC Party of Saskatchewan. I 
have no knowledge of that letter, nor am I very concerned about 
that letter at all, Mr. Speaker, but let me remind you, Mr. Speaker 
— because I’m sure that it slipped the mind of some here — when 
he talks about propagandizing, it wasn’t me, Mr. Speaker, that 
took NDP propaganda into a grade 4 class in Regina . . . 
(inaudible) . . . It wasn’t me, Mr. Speaker, that was running 
around for the nomination buying memberships for the poor 
people, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t me, Mr. Speaker, that was trying 
to buy my way into this legislature, Mr. Speaker. Don’t talk to 
me about propagandizing, Mr. Speaker. They wrote the book on 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Premier, and it has to do as the consequence of 
the last series of questions and answers by my colleague to the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think the facts are, judging by this memorandum 
from Mr. Corey Olynik, the executive director of the provincial 
PCs, that the provincial PC Party is out to politicize the 
SaskEnergy hearings. I think there’s no doubt about that. The 
facts indicate that, based on the questions. 
 
I think under these circumstances, where there’s a deliberate 
attempt to politicize, thereby undermining the credibility of the 
SaskEnergy exercise and, I might add, the officials, there comes 
a time when a solution by a Premier representing all the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan is required. 
 
I ask you, sir: would you in your capacity as Premier of all

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, in the light of this 
damning evidence, do the right thing, save thousands of 
taxpayers’ dollars and cancel immediately these SaskEnergy 
hearings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it obviously is an important 
issue that we’re facing in Saskatchewan with respect to offering 
to the people the possibility to invest in the gas business — 
natural gas. 
 
Let me say to the hon. member — and I throw it out because if 
he’s really interested in the public knowing what it’s like to have 
the opportunity to invest in the gas business, and he is so 
concerned — and I like to assume that he is concerned — that it 
is not the right thing to do, then I say to hon. member with 
greatest respect, if you think that people are really going to reject 
this, why not just let the legislation come in and let us debate the 
legislation and pass it, and allow, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan to participate in the gas business and see if they 
like it, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well all right, 
if you want to . . . Okay look, I’m quite prepared — and I want 
the media to watch this — I’m quite prepared to bring that 
legislation back here, and we will debate it and we will pass it, 
Mr. Speaker, and we will allow the people of Saskatchewan to 
participate in that. And then they’ll know the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now I just throw out the argument. We 
both know the game of politics, Mr. Speaker. They walked out 
of here before the people could see what was actually going to be 
available to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And if he 
thinks they’re not going to like it, why don’t we just put it out 
there and let them participate and let the people see the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. And if they don’t like it, obviously they’ll vote NDP; 
and if they like it, they might just support it, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s what I believe that they’re afraid of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier, based on his answer. Mr. Premier, your argument is that 
SaskEnergy needs to get the facts out. But it’s apparent by this 
memorandum that your political machine, your political party, 
your Deputy Premier, and perhaps you, sir — maybe you don’t 
know about this — are out to undermine the credibility of this 
exercise which yesterday you were portraying to the people of 
Saskatchewan as being a credible and honest and straightforward 
exercise. And it turns out now that what you’re doing is not only 
demeaning the exercise, but you’re demeaning the officials that 
you were defending as a part of that. 
 
Now clearly as a Premier you’ve got on occasion to rise above 
your party interests, including the party actions in this case which 
have so totally destroyed this exercise. All I’m asking you, sir, is 
how about displaying some leadership and doing the right thing. 
Save the taxpayers thousands, if not millions of dollars, and 
cancel these meetings. Simple question. Why not an answer to 
that? 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1147 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the key is to do the fair 
thing and the right thing and to provide the people of 
Saskatchewan the opportunity to see what’s before them. And I 
will say again, I will say it again to the hon. member, if the thinks 
— and sincerely — if he thinks that this legislation and the 
chance to participate in developing the natural gas business is so 
awful, then he should just let me do it, and for sure he would win. 
 
Let’s try it, Mr. Speaker. So I’m calling it, I’m calling it, Mr. 
Speaker, because we have seen Saskoil and we have seen 
WESTBRIDGE and we’ve seen Weyerhaeuser and we’ve seen 
other opportunities world-wide, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, come on. I’m calling you on it. I’m saying, 
let the people have an opportunity and see if they like it. No, let 
them have the opportunity. 
 
See, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ll give the Premier a few 
moments to wrap up his . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — As we know, as we know, the opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, knows that you normally have four to five years to 
deliver programs to the people of Saskatchewan, or any other 
province. All right? If that’s the case, and they believe this is so 
wrong, why don’t they just allow the people to participate? And 
obviously they’d think they wouldn’t like it at all. I say, Mr. 
Speaker, they know the people of Saskatchewan will like this, 
and they will vote for us when they’re given a chance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve a very short supplementary 
question to the Premier. I agree with you; the people should 
decide. Call an election right now to see whether you have the 
mandate to do what you’re doing, because I say you don’t. Call 
an election right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve always known in my 
heart of hearts, Mr. Speaker, that when they walked out of here 
at the time that they did, that they were afraid the people of 
Saskatchewan would like what they saw if they ever had a chance 
to develop Saskatchewan natural gas and to see lower rates, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m more convinced today than I’ve ever been in 
my life. 
 
I will call an election when the people of Saskatchewan see what 
it’s like to own shares in Saskatchewan and build this province 
like they never have before, Mr. Speaker. That’s when I’ll call an 
election, and you’ll watch the results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Appointment to Barber Panel 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I say this to the Premier: Mr. Premier, don’t hold your breath. 
They’ll never, never see this Bill pass the light of day.

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, my question to you is this. My 
question to you is this, sir. For you to spend money to promote 
the PC ideology is your business; for us to protect the taxpayers’ 
money of the people of Saskatchewan is our business. Will you 
confirm, sir, will you confirm that in your blind push to privatize, 
you have now appointed noted Tory lawyer, Gary J. Drummond, 
as counsel to the Barber commission, thereby joining such 
impartial people as that famous privatizer, Dr. Lloyd Barber, and 
Miss Ford, the other lawyer who has gained financially at trying 
to privatize the potash corporation? Will you confirm that Mr. 
Drummond has been appointed by you for another waste of the 
taxpayers’ money in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
be against free trade because we’re going to give them all our 
water. We see the opposition against the fact that we’re going to 
save the water here. We again see the opposition afraid of the fact 
that the rates are going to go up, afraid of the fact that rates are 
going to go down. Why doesn’t the hon. member, if he believes, 
Mr. Speaker, that natural gas and having the opportunity to 
participate in it is so bad, why doesn’t he just stand in his place 
and say, all right, why don’t you do it, Mr. Premier, and let the 
people see what it’s like and then call an election. But he won’t 
do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a natural gas commission and a 
SaskEnergy commission out there because the NDP walked out 
of the House, because they wouldn’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the truth. We’re going to tell them the truth, and 
then we’ll call an election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Use of Government Funds for Advertising 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday last I gave 
notice of motion that I would be rising on this topic today, and at 
the end of my remarks I’ll move the motion which is seconded 
by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had a long history of financial 
mismanagement and waste and incompetence to promote their 
privatization plans in the province of Saskatchewan, and one of 
the things that we’ve heard loud and clear, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Saskatchewan people have had enough; they’re saying that this 
government has gone too far. They’re saying that there won’t be 
anything left for the future of this province of ours after years of 
putting together an economy that would work in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a mixed economy made up of the private sector, 
which is important and we recognize that — mainly the small 
businesses and small firms that have grown in Saskatchewan and 
developed in Saskatchewan and make up a very important part 
of our economy. 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1148 
 

Secondly, the co-operatives, co-operatives that sprang up during 
the days of Depression, and some prior to that, such as the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the rest of the co-operative 
movement in the province of Saskatchewan. They grew up out of 
the necessity of not being served by the private sector and the 
necessity of survival on their own, because governments would 
not assist them at that point in time. The governments wanted 
nothing to do with the co-operative movement. 
 
The governments at that time, when the co-operative sector was 
developing in Saskatchewan, saw their role to help the private 
sector alone, for that to be the only engine of the economy. But 
many people in Saskatchewan, mostly from an agrarian 
background, saw the wisdom at that time to build a very strong 
co-operative movement in this province. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, is the public sector, and the public 
sector came into prominence in Saskatchewan especially in 1944 
upon the election of Tommy Douglas and the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) government at that time, in which 
there had to be public sector involvement, otherwise how would 
farm families in Saskatchewan get electrification? How would 
farm families in Saskatchewan be able to compete, being so 
many miles from ports and international markets? 
 
How could people in this province compete on any level without 
a strong public sector that had more than just a profit motive; that 
had a motive of giving opportunity to Saskatchewan people to 
grow and prosper with their own skills and develop skills that 
would lead them will into the 1950s, the 1960s, the ’70s — in 
fact to the present day. 
 
So those three things have made up a very important part of our 
economy in Saskatchewan, and more necessary here, I would 
maintain, Mr. Speaker, than any place else in the world, but not 
exclusive to Saskatchewan. The private sector, the public sector, 
and the co-operative movement, which makes up the backbone 
of Saskatchewan’s economy — all three of those together, 
working in harmony, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what have we seen over the past few years? We saw a 
Progressive Conservative government come into office in 1982. 
The government came in with a resounding victory, unexpected 
even by the leaders and the current cabinet members of the 
Conservative government of today in Saskatchewan. And when 
they first came into office, I think they were caught off guard, 
Mr. Speaker. But it was clear even from the beginning, they 
wanted to give the upper hand to the private sector in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They did such things initially as do away with the department of 
co-operatives, and for the first time in recent history in the 
province of Saskatchewan there is not a department of 
co-operatives to assist the co-operative movement in the 
province of Saskatchewan. One of the very important sectors of 
our economy — the co-operative movement — has no direct 
linkage with government. That has been removed. 
 
And then later on in this government’s mandate, Mr.

Speaker, especially getting into their second term after the 
October 20 election of 1986, we saw this government make an 
outrageous attack on the public sector. They’ve done away with 
the co-operative link to government, and now they were trying to 
do away with any public sector involvement in the economy. 
 
The list is long, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been gone over many time 
in this House, but I think needs to be gone over again. They did 
away with Highways workers — gave them an opportunity to 
work in the private sector, so to speak. They did away with the 
school-based dental program — 400 dental therapists out of 
work. They sold the Sask Minerals plant out at Chaplin, a 
company in the public sector that had made profits every year 
except one since its inception in the 1940s. 
 
And was it public participation as they state, Mr. Speaker? No it 
wasn’t. They sold Saskatchewan Minerals to a company from 
Toronto, another company from the province of Quebec. No 
Saskatchewan involvement. Workers didn’t have an opportunity 
to buy the Sask Minerals operations. Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan companies, Saskatchewan investors never had the 
opportunity to buy that very valuable, publicly owned Crown 
corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the government is seeing now that they want to change that 
a bit. They want to give the perception that Saskatchewan people 
will be involved in the doing away of the public sector 
corporations in the province of Saskatchewan, but it’s an 
argument they will not win, Mr. Speaker. It’s an argument that 
they will not win because Saskatchewan people know that we 
have an economy in Saskatchewan that needs to operate on more 
than just the private sector. 
 
The private sector needs to make profit and that’s their bottom 
line. They have to make profit for the owners, they have to make 
profit for the shareholders if they trade on the stock exchange, 
but they don’t have to implement public policy for the good of 
people in Saskatchewan as a total rather than for just a few. 
 
And if they don’t have that, Mr. Speaker, where does it come 
from? The incentive and the push certainly doesn’t come from 
the government to look at the good of all in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They want to help a few, and hopefully those few 
will help the many who are much poorer in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we do not allow that to happen in this 
Legislative Assembly, and people will not allow that to happen 
because we will lead them to not allowing that to happen in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The piratization of the resources and the public ownership and 
the co-operatives in this province has got to be stopped for once 
and for all, and we challenge this government to call a provincial 
election at the very first opportunity to let Saskatchewan speak 
in the most democratic and decisive way that people have in this 
province, and that’s with their vote in a general election, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we have to look at some of the waste and 
mismanagement in the province of Saskatchewan 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1149 
 

that has been inflicted upon us. Before I do that though, people 
in the province, Mr. Speaker, say, well will privatization of all 
this public ownership help us in the province. Well I say no, Mr. 
Speaker, but the facts are there to back up my no. Have taxes 
gone down? No, they have not. Are there more jobs? No, there is 
not. Are there more people moving into the province? No, there 
are not. Are there more people moving into the province? No 
there are not; they’re leaving the province, Mr. Speaker. Are 
corporate taxation going up? No, corporate taxation is not going 
up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Any measure you want to use, whether it’s the welfare rolls in 
the province or the unemployed, dictate in factual information 
that privatization is not helping the province of Saskatchewan. 
We know that in the opposition. People in the province of 
Saskatchewan know that, and they will stop this government 
from the piratization of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would look at some of the expenditures. Between the period, 
Mr. Speaker, of March 1, ’84 and September 15, ’87, just the one 
company, Brigdens Photo & Graphics Ltd. — $1.9 million, just 
in printing to one company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look at Dome Advertising, Dome Media 
Buying Services Ltd. from March 1, 1984 to September 15, 1987, 
Mr. Speaker. How much do you think the government spent on 
that firm? — $32,000,877 of taxpayers’ money, in most cases to 
convince people of something that they don’t want, this 
government using our money to sell the piratization moves, the 
privatization moves of the government that’s gone astray. 
 
Rather than spending our tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, many people 
tell me in the province of Saskatchewan that they would prefer 
that the government members just go out and listen to people, 
listen to members in their constituencies, listen to members 
through the communities of Saskatchewan. They won’t have to 
advertise and sell people on something they don’t want. They’ll 
hear very clearly from people in this province of ours that they 
do not want this government doing what it’s attempting to do. 
 
And apparently this government is unwilling to change its ways. 
It’s unwilling to change its ways. And any time a government 
becomes so arrogant, Mr. Speaker, that it won’t change from 
within, the people, in their democratic right in the province, will 
change it for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look at another advertising firm. I just 
mentioned Dome Advertising. Here’s Roberts and Poole 
Advertising for March 1, 1984 to September 15, 1987. The 
government spent with them $6.3 million advertising to people 
for something they don’t want. And, Mr. Speaker, these amounts 
for advertising are for production of ads and the placement of 
ads, have nothing to do with printing costs. Printing costs are 
over and above these amounts that I point out to you. 
 
Then in the period, Mr. Speaker, for Roberts & Poole

Advertising from September 15 of ’87, where the last one left off, 
to May 17 of ’88, another $2.7 million spent on development and 
placement of advertising by this government. 
 
In Dome Advertising from where I left off, September 15, ’87, to 
May 17, 1988, another $5 million spent selling programs to 
people that the people of Saskatchewan don’t believe in, Mr. 
Speaker. This brainwashing will do the government absolutely 
no good — absolutely no good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want also to take a look at some of the polling that’s been done 
by this government, not for the good of the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan, but in fact to gauge how they’re going to 
approach the Saskatchewan public to sell them the things that 
they are so bent on, like piratization and privatization of public 
ownership in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Tanka Research shows up quite often. Department of Agriculture 
between September 8, ’87, and May 17, ’88, the total cost, I guess 
I would say, for polling in the government was over half a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, over half a million dollars that people in the 
province of Saskatchewan don’t need to be spending. 
 
Commercial air travel, Mr. Speaker, between September 8, ’87, 
and May 17, ’88 — about nine months — $3.4 million spent on 
commercial travel, Mr. Speaker. This is not money spent on the 
executive aircraft that the government uses; it’s not money spent 
on the travel pool; it’s not money spent on vehicles that are used. 
This is commercial travel, Mr. Speaker, that we’re talking about 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other things. I could go on to the list 
of patronage appointments. Almost every Conservative 
candidate, MLA, even former members of parliament, members 
of parliament who lost nominations, Mr. Speaker, are on the dole 
of this government. 
 
The point we want to make today, Mr. Speaker, and I know my 
15 minutes is almost up, so I’ll move my motion before I 
conclude — but instead of spending the money in such a wasteful 
way in the province of Saskatchewan, people want this 
government to listen to their concerns, to restore the vibrant 
economy of Saskatchewan with the private sector, the 
co-operatives and public ownership working together in this 
province. They want this government to reduce the debt that 
they’ve created through wasteful spending. 
 
At the same time, the government reduces this . . . or increases 
this wasteful spending, I should say, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
reducing the debt and the services get less in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake: 

 
That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars 
on self-serving advertising to conceal their financial 
mismanagement, waste, and incompetence, and to promote 
the dismantling of 

  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1150 
 

our province through privatization, while other services in 
the health, education, and agricultural sectors suffer from 
lack of proper funding. 
 

I so move, seconded by the hon. member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the outset of 
my remarks, I would want to say that I don’t believe that this is 
a resolution that any opposition member would want to feel that 
they should have to deal with in the term of any government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this government’s agenda, 
when you look at what’s happened in Saskatchewan since 1982, 
and particularly since 1986, it gives all members of the 
opposition and, as well, all people of Saskatchewan reason to be 
concerned about the future of this province, and concerned about 
the direction that this government is moving this province 
towards. 
 
My colleague from the Battlefords has indicated that every 
economic indicator that is published by this government or by 
their federal counterparts, the Mulroney government in Ottawa, 
tell us that this government has been incompetent, that there has 
been mismanagement and waste, and that part of the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is that patronage has overtaken common sense, and we 
no longer have a government that listens to anyone but a select 
few. 
 
And if we compare what’s happened to young men and women 
and business people and farmers in Saskatchewan with other 
jurisdictions, it gives yet more reason for concern. You can go 
through the list of people who have left different provinces and 
who have joined people in other provinces to be part of their 
economy, and it tells you that Saskatchewan is a unique case. 
 
Now the members opposite will want to say that it’s because of 
agriculture and because of the drought conditions in 
Saskatchewan. And no one on this side of the House will argue 
that that hasn’t been part of the economic problem in 
Saskatchewan, but, Mr. Speaker, there’s much more. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But we’re making headway. I think we’re 
making headway. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — The Minister of Education says we’re 
making headway. Well let me tell you, Mr. Minister, how much 
headway you’re really making. Last year there were 14,771 
people that had to leave this province because of the atmosphere 
that your government has created. Now you will want to say it’s 
all because of agriculture, but you know better. 
 
You know it’s because of the way you’re polarizing dollars. You 
know it’s because middle income people in Saskatchewan can no 
longer afford your economic development, your open for 
business, and your future vision of Saskatchewan. You know all 
that, and if you don’t know that, Mr. Minister, it’s time you sat 
down with

some school children in your riding so that they can instruct you 
as to why they feel that there’s no future in this province any 
more. 
 
You compare the out-migration in Saskatchewan of 14,771 
people last year with a province like Manitoba, who experiences 
drought, who has experienced forest fires similar to what we 
experienced in my home riding last week — all of the conditions 
that Manitoba has experienced have been similar — but yet their 
out-migration is only 6,336. You compare an in-migration in 
Alberta of some 5,114 people. And you still have the gall and the 
audacity to sit in this place and say that you’re improving things. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems that your cabinet and your caucus and 
members of your political party are the only people that feel that 
this province is moving in the right direction under the 
stewardship of this Premier. Because you don’t see 14,771 
people leaving the province, unless you’ve got a government that 
cares more about spending money on advertising for the good of 
its friends — Dome Media, Roberts & Poole — those are where 
your priorities are. 
 
And that’s why you’ve chased young men and women out of this 
province, and that’s why you see businesses closing and you see 
downtown Prince Albert with empty stores, and you see small 
towns like Lafleche, Saskatchewan, as an example, with empty 
stores all over the place. 
 
It’s part of your economic reasoning and it’s part of your 
ideology, your privatization ideology, that are chasing men and 
women out of this province, because they know under this PC 
government there’s little future, if any, for them and their 
children. 
 
Forty-six million dollars could have been put towards a 
small-business program, but it wasn’t. Forty-six million dollars 
that could have been put towards education, but it wasn’t. 
Forty-six million dollars that could have been put towards health 
care, but it wasn’t. 
 
Where did it go? It went to fill the pockets of your friends, to sell 
programs that the people of this province are rejecting. And it’s 
going yet again in another flurry of advertising. 
 
And every person in Saskatchewan who turns on a radio or a 
television or opens a newspaper, knows clearly where all of that 
money is going. And they know that your business friends that 
are involved in advertising agencies and that you support more 
than you support the people of this province, they know that 
they’re taking a percentage of their tax dollars in order to sell 
them something that they don’t want. 
 
It’s not enough, Mr. Minister, that you hold a round of 
privatization meetings where you got 6’s and 10’s to sell an idea 
that they don’t want. That’s not enough for you. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not enough for this government because the idea 
that they’re trying to sell the privatization of SaskEnergy, the 
sell-off of the assets of the people of this province, is a disgrace. 
 
And it’s a disgrace when you’ve got to use the people’s 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1151 
 

own money in order to sell an idea that they have rejected 
soundly by the number of petitions that they’ve put before this 
legislature. It’s enough, Mr. Speaker, that government through 
regular channels has to do advertising, but to force upon the 
people of the province a political ideology that they have rejected 
through petition, through public demonstration, is less than fair. 
 
And I see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my time is rapidly coming 
to a close, and I want to close with this. I want to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the people of this province are going to be rejecting 
you whenever they get a chance. Each and every member sitting 
opposite is going to have to go back to their ridings, to the people 
in those ridings, and explain why they’ve squandered the heritage 
of the people of this province. 
 
They’re going to have to go back and try and sell them an idea 
that isn’t working in Saskatchewan, that won’t be accepted in 
Saskatchewan, and it will mean that each and every one of these 
members on that side of the House will be rejected by the 
electorate whenever another election is called. And I want to tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that members on this side of the House will 
continue to carry that message to the people of Saskatchewan, 
will continue to tell the people of Saskatchewan how you’ve 
squandered the assets of this province; how you’ve advertised 
yourself into a hole; how you’ve privatized the people of this 
province into a hole; how you’ve misled the people of this 
province. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconding this 
motion makes only good sense, simply because the people of this 
province feel the same way about you as we have articulated in 
this motion. And I want to say that I look forward to the day when 
you meet the people of this province on the doorsteps so that they 
can reject you as soundly as I believe, and that they believe, they 
want to. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I would want to say that I want to read this 
motion into the record, and this is the motion that we’ve been 
speaking for: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars 
on self-serving advertising to conceal their financial 
mismanagement, waste, and incompetence, and to promote 
the dismantling of our province through privatization, while 
other services in health, education, and agricultural sectors 
suffer from the lack of proper funding. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I’ve 
been sitting here listening with some interest to comments from 
members opposite, and before I begin my remarks, I will have to 
say that I do not agree with the comments previously stated. And 
at the conclusion of my

remarks I will be moving a motion that will be amending the 
motion that’s before us to read as follows: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 

 
urge the government to continue a policy of conscientious 
communications with the people of Saskatchewan, 
including informing them of health and life-styles issues, 
public safety questions, consultations in agriculture, health, 
education, and public participation, and ensuring that the 
people are fully advised of the options and the impact of 
those options available to the government in all areas of 
public policy. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion, as presented by the 
opposition, presents a false picture not only of the unmatched 
performance of this government in the fields of health, education, 
and agriculture, but also the nature of government advertising 
under this administration. 
 
Under their administration we saw — and I mean it was fantastic; 
we saw it everywhere — advertising on the family of Crown 
corporations. Under the NDP government, millions of dollars 
was spend on the family of Crown corporations. They not only 
put ads in newspapers, not only put ads on television, had ads on 
radio, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you couldn’t even go see a movie 
without seeing the family of Crown corporations on the big silver 
screen in front of you. 
 
They used every opportunity that there was to propagandize their 
own particular political beliefs. And then they stand there today 
and criticize this government for putting out information — 
information — that is what is being put out to people. 
 
And I’d just like to bring to the members’ attention that not too 
long ago I was at Laird, Saskatchewan, and we had a very 
interesting meeting, a very interesting meeting. 
 
Laird, Saskatchewan people asked a number of folks to attend a 
meeting that had been designed to talk about agricultural 
financing and concerns that were there. And at that meeting, 
when I stood up and explained to people all of the things that this 
government had done for people in Saskatchewan, one young 
guy at the back of the room said: well tell us about this even 
more; please make sure we know about it; put it out even more; 
give us more information. And you can check the records of that 
meeting. Members of the opposition laugh — you can check the 
records of that meeting. And your member for Humboldt sat 
there with his head down. 
 
Anyhow, the member for Humboldt was quite embarrassed 
because, on a number of occasions, just as we see today, 
members of the opposition said, oh, don’t put out that 
information. What are they scared of? That people will find the 
truth out? 
 
Well the truth is that in agriculture, in agriculture, programs that 
have been advertised, information that’s been put out, has done 
people a lot of good. Farm purchase program, value to the 
farmers, 84 million; counselling assistance for farmers 
guarantees, value to 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1152 
 

the farmers, 21 million; farmers’ oil royalty rebates, value to the 
farmers, 45 million; livestock investment tax credits, value to the 
farmers, 34 million. Not to mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 
programs provide spin-offs into a number of other areas — 
diversification, jobs for the young people that we have. 
 
Well let’s take a look at what else we have: a production loan 
interest subsidy which would be 71 million; a livestock cash 
advance interest subsidy, 61 million; irrigation assistance, 14 
million, and so on and so on and so on. 
 
Now members of the opposition were so proud of their family of 
Crown corporations that they had to go tell everybody what a 
great job they were doing. These types of informational pieces, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are information that will tell people how to 
access, how to access and make use of the programs that we have. 
 
We also have Lights On For Life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Lights 
On For Life. The members opposite laugh and chuckle, but you 
take a look at the number of people whose lives have been saved 
because of a Lights On For Life program. It’s not only backed by 
safety councils, the police, so on and so forth, but manufacturers 
even, Mr. Speaker — manufacturers. 
 
The Everyone Wins program — healthy life-styles. The 
opposition came out against it very forcefully, and the Health 
critic said, well, Everyone Wins is not a good program. Actually 
the problem is, when they say that it isn’t a good program, they’re 
against 20 organizations, private organizations that back the 
Everyone Wins program, and they’re questioning the credibility 
of those individuals in those organizations. It may be fine for the 
Health critic to take political shots at us, but not at those 20 
organizations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The NDP should stop the tom-foolery of claiming that every 
organization and individual and business that works in 
partnership with government to put government programs 
forward is a Tory one. I mean, they always say, they’re friends 
of the Tories. We just heard it. Well that’s not exactly true. We’re 
talking about health care associations, professionals who devote 
their lives to assuring good health for all of us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And Lord knows I could use some today, because I’ve 
got a terrible cold, and I apologize if I have to stop momentarily 
to clear my throat. However, it could happen to members of the 
opposition some day too, and I hope they realize that it’s difficult 
to speak when you do have a cold, but I’m trying my best here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are not only asking us to continue this 
program but to expand it. The Everyone Wins program is an 
excellent one. I mean, what’s wrong, what’s wrong with trying 
persuade children not to smoke? What’s wrong with that? Does 
that mean that all non-smokers are Tories? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
how can the opposition argue that programs that teach both adults 
and children proper nutrition is political advertising? I’ve a hard 
time with that one. 
 
I can see that they might argue it’s unnecessary or that it doesn’t 
work, in which case they’d be arguing with the

health care professionals that I’ve just mentioned previously. But 
how can they argue that it’s in any way political to try to teach 
children about nutrition, healthy life-styles, not to smoke, so on 
and so forth? It goes beyond reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes 
beyond reason. 
 
Well, we’ve also got Crown corporations. They attack the 
advertising of Crowns like SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to stop now because my voice is 
going, but I’d just like to move the motion that I read into the 
record previously, seconded by the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in opposition 
to the amendment that the member has put forward, and I support 
the motion that my colleague, the member from The Battlefords, 
has put forward: that this Assembly condemns the Government 
of Saskatchewan for spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars on 
self-serving advertising to conceal their financial 
mismanagement, their waste and incompetence, and to promote 
the dismantling of our province through privatization, while 
other services in the health, education, and agricultural sectors 
suffer from lack of proper funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is day 37 out of about an average of a 70-day 
sitting. And I note on the agenda today that after 37 days we are 
in this Assembly, not talking about issues that are important to 
the people of this province such as laws which will help the 
farmers in debt reduction; we’re not talking, Mr. Speaker, about 
tax relief for small business or tax relief for working people and 
farm families; we’re not talking about issues that this government 
has put on the back burner for the purpose of putting forward and 
selling their ideology on privatization. 
 
But on top of that, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is a government 
that has become really hell-bent on privatization. They seem to 
be wasting our time on this issue. They’re wasting the time of the 
people of this province on this issue when they know in 
everyone’s hearts that it’s an issue that people do not support 
anywhere in this province. 
 
We’ve seen them waste millions and millions of dollars. My 
colleague, the member from The Battlefords, has talked about the 
millions of dollars that went to Dome Advertising and Dome 
Media Buying Services. And we’ve seen them in this last number 
of days, Mr. Speaker, commit millions of dollars to advertising 
the sell-off of SaskPower through their privatization TV ads, 
setting up these phoney panels to go around and take opinions on 
whether or not the privatization and sell-off of SaskEnergy is a 
good idea or not. 
 
The true test, in my view, Mr. Speaker, of whether a government 
is competent and whether a government can manage a province 
with any kind of efficiency and effectiveness, is the economic 
indicators of the day. 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1153 
 

We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, that the economic indicators in this 
province clearly show that the Government of Saskatchewan has 
mismanaged the economy. We’ve seen the debt of this province 
on an operating basis go from a surplus of about $150 million, 
and a Heritage Fund worth about $1 billion, to an operating 
deficit of $4 billion in seven short years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen as well, Mr. Speaker, the operating or the capital debt 
of the Crown corporation sector go from about $1.8 billion to 
over $8 billion. This government has encouraged the Crown 
sector to highly leverage their circumstances, their financial 
positions, in order to use the money to pay off their friends 
through patronage, in order to spend that money through 
advertising. And they’ve basically wasted the money of this 
province to the tune of about $10 billion, Mr. Speaker, in the last 
seven years. 
 
That wouldn’t be so bad if we had jobs created, because the 
creation of jobs would provide for new tax revenues to make up 
for their incompetence and their giving away of $2 billion to the 
oil companies. But that hasn’t happened. We’ve seen, on the 
contrary, the highest unemployment rate in the province’s history 
over the last number of years. We now have over 37,000 people 
unemployed in this province. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, the housing starts decline to a level 
unparalleled in the history of this province since 1905. In 1987 
there were 6,822 housing starts in this province. In 1988 that 
went to 3,800, less than half from 1987. And the Regina Home 
Builders’ Association, the Saskatchewan Home Builders’ 
Association said that was the lowest number of houses started in 
this province in the history. 
 
Yet when you look at the 1989 figures for the first quarter, they 
are less than half of 1988, which was the worst year — less than 
half, Mr. Speaker — an example, clearly, of this government’s 
economic record. 
 
We’ve seen out-migration of people in this province, a net loss 
in the first quarter of this year of 1 per cent of our entire 
population. We’ve seen as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, total 
investment in this province decline, from 1987 to 1988, by 20 per 
cent. 
 
(1515) 
 
We’ve seen average weekly earnings in Saskatchewan sink to the 
second lowest in the entire country. We’ve seen total retail sales 
growth become the second worst in the entire country out of the 
10 provinces and two territories. 
 
And we’ve seen an unparalleled number of bankruptcies in this 
province. Yet we see the government spending $66,000 a month 
on polling, on paying their polling firms to ask questions about: 
well, what should we do next? That’s what they’ve been 
spending. 
 
We see them spending millions of dollars, $28,000 a day 
approximately, on advertising, telling people in this province 
what a wonderful job they’ve done with the economy. And the 
people of this province in my view,

Mr. Speaker, are not going to be sucked into that kind of 
shenanigans. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much money was that, John? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My colleague, the member from Rosemont, 
has repeated the question: how much money have they spent? 
About $28,000 a day. Yet, when we want the government to be 
held accountable for their actions, they hide. 
 
I had an experience last week, Mr. Speaker, from Weyburn, for 
example. I had a call from the Weyburn radio station to ask me 
to come and speak, to participate in an open-line show called 
Teletalk with the local MLA, Mr. Hepworth, the Minister of 
Education . . . I’m sorry, the member from Weyburn, the Minister 
of Education. And I said, sure, I’d love to come and debate the 
issue of the sell-off of SaskEnergy. 
 
I get a call five minutes later and the manager of the radio station 
says, well I’m sorry about that, but the member from Weyburn is 
afraid of you. He doesn’t want to come on to the radio station the 
same time you do. He doesn’t want to talk about SaskEnergy. But 
if you would like equal time we could make some arrangements 
to provide that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I go out the day following the open line show 
and I’m told by the manager of the radio station that Mr. 
Hepworth was crucified . . . I’m sorry, the member from 
Weyburn was crucified on the open line show the day before. He 
had 12 calls on the issue of the sell-off of SaskEnergy — 12 calls; 
11 of them were adamantly opposed to the government’s 
position. This is in a constituency that has been held by the 
Conservatives for the last seven years, Mr. Speaker. And in my 
view now, because they can’t sell it, they want to advertise and 
spend millions of dollars . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you’d be paying attention 
to the member opposite in his speech, he was twice using the 
member from Weyburn’s name, and he is all of a sudden on the 
issue of SaskEnergy instead of the Bill that was ahead of us. And 
I’d like you to get him back on track, please. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — In reference to the name, the member 
apologized, or said he was sorry. I accepted that and I will ask 
the member to stay on the topic. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do apologize for 
using the member’s name. I get caught up in the moment and I 
tend to forget from time to time. And I appreciate the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster reminding me on that. 
 
What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is a government that has refused 
to go out to the public and be accountable for their actions, yet 
they want to spend tens of millions of dollars annually, 20 to $30 
million a year, $28,000 every day, 365 days a week, advertising 
what a wonderful job they’re doing. And they want to try and 
brainwash people to accept their viewpoint, and in my view, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s totally unacceptable. There’s no problem 
spending 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1154 
 

money advertising and informing people about the availability of 
a program, but in my view . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Your time is up, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to take part in this debate, and it does not surprise 
me as to the motion that we’re dealing with here in the House 
today. Basically I wouldn’t expect anything else but coming from 
the lips of the NDP opposition, a motion of condemnation of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve been kind of shaking in their 
boots for quite some time as to . . . because of the fact of what 
the record is saying and what the record is showing the people of 
Saskatchewan, and the popular mood the people of 
Saskatchewan are actually in. And I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that it wasn’t here but a couple of weeks past 
that they’ve effectively found out just exactly what the mood of 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan actually has been. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it did not 
amaze me as to what the numbers the NDP opposition have been 
discussing here today. I want to indicate to you again, Mr. 
Speaker, that those numbers are not factual, they’re not truthful, 
and it does not surprise me in the least that they come up with 
uncalculated numbers as they have been spurting off here in the 
legislature this afternoon. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. The member 
has indicated the figures that I used were untruthful, and I’ve 
taken them out of responses that the government has provided in 
writing as to what the expenditures were for Dome Advertising. 
So I’d ask him that he is out of order and to stay away from that. 
Ask him to withdraw that remark. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair is not in possession of those 
figures, has no way of knowing, and it’s in the debate, so not well 
taken. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can rest assured that the 
only reason the member is standing on a point of order is 
basically it’s to interrupt the 10-minute time limit that we have to 
be able to speak on this particular subject. And I want to indicate 
to you that the truth do hurt the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to 
health care in this province, this government is not taking a back 
seat to anyone across this country or, indeed, across North 
American or the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to say that we’ve been leaders —

leaders, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in health care. And I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at our health card 
system that we have in this province, it is absolutely second to 
none — second to none. I want to indicate to you that seniors and 
young people and parents and families have all told me in my 
riding and across this province, wherever I’ve travelled, that this 
is the best thing since sliced bread. 
 
So I want to indicate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that’s 
right. And I want to indicate to you . . . I guess it’s . . . Anyway, 
Mr. Speaker, touched the nerve . . . that old saying has touched 
the nerve of the Highways minister, so I want to indicate to you 
I’m sorry that I touched a funny nerve. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, this is what has been 
told to me. So when the members opposite say that these dollars 
that are spent on information through advertising and things like 
this is to bring this information to the public of Saskatchewan, to 
allow them to learn about the programs and to know what the 
government programs are about. I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not wasteful spending; that is useful spending. 
And that is spending that every taxpayer out there appreciates, to 
know the programs of a government and to know that there are 
various programs available such as health care, such as the 
essential services that government put out. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that when they talk about those 
dollars should be spent in the areas of health care and education 
other than getting the information to the public, well I want to 
indicate to the members opposite, although we give that 
expenditure in advertising in the programs to the people and 
show the people what are there for them, we have also increased 
in health care since we’ve come to government. We’ve increased 
health care expenditures 91 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 91 per 
cent. 
 
And that is something that I want to tell the NDP opposition 
about this afternoon. I want to tell them about that fact that this 
91 per cent increase in health care expenditure has now been 
more than doubled what they had spent when they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker, through the good times. 
 
I want to also indicate to you, sir, that when we look at health 
care expenditures in the expansions in hospitals and nursing 
homes and health care equipment and new equipment every year, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just indicate to the members opposite that 
it was this administration that has been pouring the dollars into 
health care, not stymieing it, not trying to centralize health care, 
but decentralize health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that when I hear the 
members opposite talk about mismanagement, they tend to have 
a short sight and are promptly looking at their track record and in 
sheer amazement, and cannot understand the fact that we’ve done 
so, so much in so little of a time — this government. 
 
I want to thank my Minister of Health, my Minister of Education. 
And I want to indicate to you, sir, that 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1155 
 

education, they said how was it affected. Well I would say in 
education in such a short time, in a period of about six years, 
we’ve more than doubled the education expenditure in this 
province. And we’ve expanded out in information services and 
advertising and telling the students and parents and teachers just 
exactly what’s available to them in education. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, and I can list off some of the things 
we’ve done in education. And this here has been tabled in this 
House, on the floor, for the NDP and government’s information 
. . . members’ information. And this was from the Minister of 
Education. Saskatchewan’s four institutes and urban colleges 
will be emerged under a board of directors. And that had been 
done. The province will sign a $160 million training agreement 
with the federal government. That was done. Rural community 
colleges will be restructured into a network of regional colleges 
offering expanded training in university programs. That was 
done. A $3 million distance education fund will be set up. That 
was accomplished, sir. A distance education council will be 
established. That was done. 
 
A trade language centre will be established at the University of 
Regina in conjunction with the Luther College. The centre begins 
operation this summer. 
 
An Agricultural Commodities Institute will be set up at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Plans are virtually complete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first and second year arts and science courses will 
be offered off campus at an expanded number of locations. That’s 
being done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, like I can go on and on, and I intend to. 
Saskatchewan will host a post-secondary education forum in 
Saskatoon. The forum was held last October, and it was a great 
success, sir. 
 
And then the minister promised to advocate a national literacy 
campaign. The secretary of state introduced just such a campaign 
last summer. I promised . . . “And this government,” he says, 
goes on, “has promised to set up a provincial literacy council in 
Saskatchewan, the first of its kind in Canada.” The council is in 
place, and several hundred adults already received help. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on and on about the different 
programs that have been put into place, programs in health and 
education and services. And I’ll tell you, when I hear members 
from the opposition stand up and condemn this government for 
giving and allowing that information to be accessed to the people 
of this province of Saskatchewan, I want to warn the people of 
this province that if they would get their way, they would not be 
allowed the knowledge of what governments are doing for the 
people in the province. And what they are, they’re absolutely, 
they’re absolutely afraid, Mr. Speaker, for the truth to get out to 
the public in Saskatchewan here because they know they’re on a 
downturn. 
 
I can point out to many of these people across the floor that come 
the next election, Mr. Speaker, they will not be sitting over across 
that side of the House. I can point to them, and there’s a member 
from Saskatoon Nutana, the

member from Regina Rosemont. I can name you many of the 
NDP opposition that will not be coming back to this legislature 
because they have not been truthful with the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, my constituents are happy about 
this government’s commitment to them. We’ve kept our word. 
We’ve delivered services to the public at large, and to rural 
Saskatchewan as well as the urban centres. We’ve been fair right 
across this province. We delivered facilities that have never been 
delivered before . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Time has elapsed. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to speak to this motion today that condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars on 
self-serving advertising to conceal their financial 
mismanagement, waste, and incompetence, and to promote the 
dismantling of our province through privatization, while other 
services such as health, education, and the agricultural sector 
suffer from lack of proper funding. 
 
Now the member who just spoke from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
talked about the truth. If the people of the province only could 
know the truth about this government, and yet, Mr. Speaker, I say 
it’s this government opposite that does not want to share that 
truth . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — . . . that does not want to share their own 
information and their own actions when it comes to the tabling 
of information requested by the opposition in orders for return. 
The people of Saskatchewan should know that it takes up to two 
years to get information, to get the truth from this government 
when we ask questions about the government’s expenditures. 
 
And when we find out from the government’s own information, 
when they table responses to questions about government 
advertising, the cash register bill rings up to $45.8 million, from 
1984 to 1988. And, Mr. Speaker, those aren’t New Democrat 
figures; those are figures of government spending, money spent 
by the PC government to ensure their own re-election and not to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — If the people of Saskatchewan were to take a 
calculator out and to divide that $45.8 million by the number of 
days covered by those orders for return, the total would come to 
$33,000 a day — by the government’s own admission — in 
advertising and spending costs for advertising. And I say that’s 
no longer acceptable for this government to use the taxpayers’ 
money in that kind of fashion. And yet they continue to do it 
when it comes to the privatization of SaskPower. 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1156 
 

And the people of the province know that full well as they see 
what’s unfolding these days. The people of Saskatchewan know 
that this government has $9 million to celebrate the so-called 
85th anniversary or birthday party of the province — $9 million 
— at the same time that people across the province have to go to 
food banks because the Social Services isn’t providing adequate 
services for people to allow them to live in dignity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m indignant when I look at some of these 
figures. I’m indignant when I look at some of the specific figures 
in the orders for return, and I see that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs can spend, in eight months, $129,396 on 
advertising with just one agency, Dome Advertising services. 
That works out to about $20 for each and every individual in 
Saskatchewan that deposited money with Principal Trust, only to 
see their life savings vanish by this government’s negligence and 
its failure to regulate. 
 
Looking at it another way, if you take the total of all of the 
government’s advertising in only an eight month period to one 
agency, Dome agency, that would work out to $800 per 
Saskatchewan depositor in the Principal Trust company that went 
belly-up because of this government’s failure to regulate. If you 
take the total figure for all of the government advertising to this 
one agency, Dome Advertising, from March 1 of ’84 to 
September 15 of ’87, there would be $5,000-plus for each and 
every depositor in Principal Trust to be compensated. 
 
And I say that would be a far fairer way to use government money 
than to pay for advertising services. At least there would be, Mr. 
Speaker, some restitution, some justice for those people who lost 
their life savings because of this government’s negligence. And 
I say that’s symptomatic. It doesn’t just come to a matter of 
advertising with Dome agencies. 
 
This government, this Minister of Consumer Affairs, will have 
money to pay for an observer to go to the Code inquiry and sit 
for a year watching the proceedings in Edmonton; will have 
money to pay for an observer to go there and to report back on a 
daily basis to himself and to the Minister of Finance; and at the 
same time will have no money to share any kind of information 
or details with the Saskatchewan people who lost money in the 
demise of the Principal Group of companies. I say that’s totally 
unacceptable. I say that government is covering its own actions, 
its own ineptitude, with public funds. 
 
And the same sort of situation applies to when we look at free 
trade. This government has spent $6,250 a month in payments to 
a Michael Cohen to promote the free trade agreement with the 
United States — from September 1, 1985 to August 31, 1988. 
 
The same government has spent $4,000 on the free trade 
agreement — $4,000 a month to one individual, Norman 
Andrews, to promote the free trade agreement with the United 
States; $7,000-plus to a Cyril MacDonald to promote that same 
free trade agreement; $7,000 a month to Art Wakabayashi to 
promote that same agreement. 
 
And then — it’s not just to individuals, Mr. Speaker —

then in these motions for return, these orders for return that are 
tabled in the legislature, the government admits that its 
department of trade and investment has $88,000 for a free trade 
conference that took place in Saskatoon a year ago in March 
1988; $88,000 dollars for a free trade conference to promote its 
own linkages to Grant Devine and to save his hide. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, it didn’t work, because the people of Saskatchewan 
turfed out their federal Conservative members. 
 
This government doesn’t stop with the Americans to promote its 
own ends and its own re-election. This government opposite, the 
department of privatization, has $27,000 dollars to pay for Mr. 
Oliver Letwin to come over to Saskatchewan from England and 
to promote privatization. Mr. Letwin was in Regina just this past 
February to talk to the issues and technology dinner at the 
University of Regina. And it costs the people of Saskatchewan 
$27,000 for such a trip by Mr. Letwin. 
 
We have another privatization study carried out, in the same 
information tabled by the government — these aren’t invented 
figures; they’re government figures — a privatization study 
conducted by S. G. Warburg, for which the government paid 
$390,000. 
 
The government, the people of Saskatchewan will know, 
promised before the 1986 provincial election, that SaskTel would 
not be privatized. And when challenged on that issue, that there 
had been a survey or a study conducted by the government, the 
government said that’s not the facts. Well the facts come out, in 
the orders for return, that Pemberton Houston Willoughby was 
paid $77,000 for that privatization study — $77,000 for a study 
that the government said at the time, before the election, was not 
conducted into privatization. 
 
And no wonder, then, we see Saskatchewan people leaving this 
province, when the government has money for its own priorities 
but not for public priorities. And it’s no wonder, then, that in the 
first quarter of this year 9,000 people plus have left the province 
of Saskatchewan — a net loss of some 9,000 people plus — 
because the priorities of this government are wrong. 
 
They aren’t in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have listened with 
interest to the members opposite as they have spoken to the 
member from North Battleford’s frivolous motion. And I 
particularly listened to the remarks during question period to the 
members opposing the communications program of SaskEnergy, 
and I would like to deal with this a bit at a time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this motion says and what the remarks during 
question period reflect, are simply self-serving words of silliness. 
Now let’s consider the case about whether or not SaskEnergy 
should be allowed to hold public meetings at which the people 
can appear and ask questions, as well as make their own concerns 
known. 
 
Now on the one hand the NDP tells us that we should listen to 
the people, then if we have public hearings they 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1157 
 

tell us that we shouldn’t listen to the people. Then they say we 
should listen to the petitions that we’ve collected and that’s 
enough. Well, Mr. Speaker, some 40 per cent of the people in this 
province voted for the NDP in 1986, and they have succeeded in 
collecting only one-half of 1 per cent of the population’s names 
on their petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP were unable to get most of the folks who 
voted for them in 1986 even to sign their petition, and yet they 
say that we should not hold public meetings to listen to the 
people? Well, Mr. Speaker, these meetings are legitimate and 
they will be held. 
 
I listened to the member who seconded this motion rant on about 
people leaving the province and about the population’s size in 
this province. Let me tell you, to the members opposite, the 
population of this province in the NDP’s best year has never been 
up to what it’s been in our worst year, and that’s right. Our worst 
year has been better than their best. 
 
So it isn’t enough to say that we New Democrats are really new 
now. They’re not enough, because everyone knows that they’re 
the old NDP Party who spent huge amounts of money on 
advertising their ideology and philosophy, and that had nothing 
to do whatsoever with the average person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP advertising that is going on right now is 
an example of the same kind of hypocrisy that this motion 
represents. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition says the government is selling 
SaskPower, and he says talking about SaskEnergy is a shell 
game. Then I challenge him, Mr. Speaker, I challenge him to 
stand before the media this afternoon and say that there’s no 
difference between the public participation in SaskEnergy and an 
announcement that the hydro dams and the power lines and all 
the electrical systems are up for sale. That’s what the Leader of 
the Opposition is saying when he’s telling us that SaskPower is 
up for sale. It’s untruth and it’s . . . it is an untruth, and it’s in 
advertising the same as we’ve got when the members opposite 
formed the government. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that kind of propaganda was taken 
to a grade 4 class here in Regina and put to nine-year-old children 
to listen to and to believe in. Well it’s reprehensible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people have the right to know what government 
is up to and they have the right to be informed of the choices 
available to them. We have an obligation to advertise the many 
programs of the government, and the opposition know full well 
that advertising budget goes to providing such information as 
reminding people when a deadline for crop insurance 
approaches. 
 
Should we stop advertising such information as that, Mr. 
Speaker? Should we stop advertising the heritage grant for senior 
citizens? Should we stop informing the people how to apply for 
their home improvement grant of nine and three-quarter per cent 
interest to protect their homes. Obviously, these programs should 
be continued and the opposition know it.

Mr. Speaker, the biggest beef is the advertising being done with 
SaskEnergy. Well I think there’s a genuine need for a sound 
communications programs on a matters that affect a broad range 
of people on matters on which people must make a choice. 
Clearly, the purchase of shares in SaskEnergy is a matter of 
choice. Clearly, before deciding whether or not to get involved, 
a public participation of SaskEnergy is one that most people 
would want information on before they make that choice. 
 
(1545) 
 
As an aside, Mr. Speaker, I noted that the member from Regina 
North stated that we were here today . . . he said today we’re 
talking about issues that are of no importance, and I have to agree 
with that assessment. The main motion put before us by the 
opposition is not important, but rather a frivolous attempt to get 
attention. 
 
And what’s more, Mr. Speaker, the member from the North West 
mentioned that it was 32 days into the session and the opposition 
is still holding the Assembly hostage with extended and witless 
speeches detailing the staffing of potash companies, and a 
rambling silliness designed to obstruct the work of the Assembly. 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that today our caucus office, we 
counted almost 2,000 letters demanding that the opposition allow 
the Assembly to get back to work and quit with their stalling 
tactics. 
 
As this resolution on advertising, aside from the clear fallacies it 
contains, is simply another stalling tactic. Well the people are 
increasingly tired of hearing the NDPs repeat their arguments of 
the 1960s and the ’70s, and we’re looking at this Assembly to get 
on with the work before it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would briefly return to my primary theme, that the 
need for a sound communications plan for the government . . . 
that there is a need. 
 
Let me read to you, Mr. Speaker, in the NDP resolution that was 
passed, and emphasize that it was passed and has never been 
repealed, to my knowledge. But it is important to know that it 
was passed because the opposition likes to pretend that most of 
the crazy resolutions never get passed. 
 
The point, Mr. Speaker — the following policy of the NDP — is 
government advertising should be fully controlled by political 
considerations, and I quote resolution no. 6275 of the 1980 
convention: 
 

Be it resolved that a cabinet committee oversee and 
co-ordinate all major advertising campaigns by government 
departments and agencies. 
 

Well you know why they want that, Mr. Speaker. And I must say 
that since it is still their policy, I will consult my colleagues and 
see if we might be able to accept the policy of the NDP and 
perhaps implement it, as it calls upon the government and not 
upon the NDP government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my time is almost out, and I’d like to 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1158 
 

support the amendment and oppose the motion. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the debate on this 
motion is about the misspending of money by this government 
on advertising and what the advertising is being used for. 
 
What has happened over the last two years of this government, 
Mr. Speaker, and particularly during this session, is that the 
government has found itself on a mission of privatization which 
is not being accepted by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have asked members of the 
opposition, and I assume they would have also asked members 
of the government, to just hold off on this privatization scheme, 
to hold off on it. But instead of holding off on it, the government 
has made up its mind in a different direction and has decided, 
well the people . . . and I assume has said, well the people don’t 
really know what we want to do, so we’ll advertise it. 
 
I interpret it a slightly way, Mr. Speaker. I interpret it as a 
government that’s bull-headed, that does not want to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan any longer, and a government that is 
going to try to push its agenda on the people of Saskatchewan 
whether they want it or not. And the government that believes 
like an advertiser does, or a government that believes like a 
salesman of soap does, that you can eventually sell it if you just 
repeat it often enough and sell it often enough to the public. 
 
In this case, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it won’t work. In this case, 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you that not only won’t it work but it’s going 
to work against the government, because the people object to 
having their money misspent in this fashion. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have had 
several experiences with privatization. And the money that we’re 
talking about being misspent here is money to be spent on the 
advertising for privatization and the privatization schemes, 
whether it be privatization of potash or whether it be privatization 
of SaskPower. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan have had some experience with 
privatization. We saw our highway equipment sold, $40 million 
worth of highway equipment sold for about $6 million. What was 
the result of that privatization? Really it didn’t benefit the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan saw the dental program 
privatized. That was a privatization initiative. We didn’t see any 
benefits result to the people of Saskatchewan; didn’t see any cost 
saving. If there were any benefits at all that were positive in this 
privatization move, the people of Saskatchewan would definitely 
have recognized them by now. But we haven’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we see instead of any benefits is a continued increase in our 
debt; we see continued increase in our debt, Mr. Speaker; we see 
continued increase in taxation, Mr. Speaker, in taxation; and at 
the same time we see decrease in services. Taxes going up, debt 
going up, and services going down — exactly the opposite way 
as was

promised. 
 
And now what’s happening is, to add an insult to that injury, 
we’re getting a government that’s coming out and saying, we’re 
going to spend more money to convince you, the people of 
Saskatchewan, that you’re wrong, and that we, the PC 
government, is right. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that what the government should be doing is 
instead of hiring a commission at the cost of $1,200 a day — the 
Barber commission, that’s a form of advertising — instead of 
sending out civil servants from SaskPower to 80-some meetings, 
they should take the message out themselves. If they really 
believed in what they said, they could take this message and go 
to the people themselves. There’s a couple ways of doing it. One 
is simply to get in your car and go and travel to your neighbour. 
Let him go see; let him go see. 
 
If they haven’t got the guts to do that, to go and see their 
constituents and ask them about that and reverse a decision, if 
they haven’t got the guts to do that, the least the government 
could do would be to call an election on this very important issue. 
They could call an election, then the people would decide. 
 
I find, and the people generally find it rather objectionable to be 
subjected to brainwashing on television, through commissions, 
and through committees travelling around the province doing the 
work of a politician, the work of a politician which should be to 
go and listen to the people. They’re using this as a stalling tactic. 
 
What I don’t like in particular, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this 
stalling tactic is costing the people a lot of money. Last year this 
government spent $46 million in advertising in total — $46 
million in total. 
 
The SaskTel bond issue in itself cost, I would say, well over $2 
million, probably between 2.5 and $3 million in terms of 
advertising. Now think of it. Advertising SaskTel bonds, 
something that people already believe in, this government spent 
$3 million on. How much is it going to cost to convince the 
people of Saskatchewan to accept this SaskPower privatization? 
Just do a comparison on that — something the people have 
already rejected. Is there going to be any limit to the amount of 
money that this government is willing to waste on advertising? 
 
Now I would say that the task is at least tenfold. Are they 
prepared to put in three times 10 — $30 million into advertising 
this? If it was such a good idea, the people of Saskatchewan 
would be knocking down their doors and saying yes, do it; yes, 
privatize it. That’s what they were doing. That’s what the people 
of Saskatchewan would be doing. Instead they’re doing the exact 
opposite. The people of Saskatchewan are going to the members, 
are going to the opposition, are writing letters to the members, 
I’m certain. They’re talking . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 2 — The Problem of Unemployment 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1159 
 

Mr. Hagel: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
may I first of all say I am pleased to see you back into the 
Speaker’s chair and to say to you that while you were absent and 
unable to perform your role of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that my thoughts and sympathies were with you, 
and I’m pleased to see you back here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my combination of pleasure in terms of 
opportunity but sadness in terms of necessity to have to address 
today resolution no. 2 in the private members’ motions. It seems 
to me, quite simply, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan today 
these are times of tragedy — times of tragedy for many, many, 
literally thousands upon thousands of Saskatchewan families. 
 
I noted with interest, as I listened to the debate on the previous 
motion, that these are not times of tragedy for Dome Advertising 
or for Roberts & Poole advertising — not times of tragedy for 
those corporations of preference by the PC government today, 
Mr. Speaker, in their mad rush to advertise anything that’s 
unpopular, and Heaven only knows that that list is increasing 
every day, Mr. Speaker. And so these are not times of tragedy for 
those advertising firms. 
 
And I noted with interest, Mr. Speaker, as well, that as the 
government members stood in their place to speak about this 
previous resolution condemning them for the excess waste of 
literally millions upon millions of taxpayers’ dollars spent in 
advertising a government perspective, many times what would 
be most appropriately spent as partisan political advertising, I 
noticed that none of the government members, when they stood, 
even gave the slightest recognition that maybe there was 
something slightly erroneous about that kind of perspective, and 
that there are other matters to attend to; that in making those 
decisions about priorities which are the responsibility and the 
prerogative of government day after day, week after week, month 
after month, year after year, that somehow it just might be 
appropriate to reduce the amount of excessive taxpayer dollars 
that are being spent on public advertising, political advertising, 
when they could and should be spent on a number of other issues. 
 
And it’s on one of those other issues, Mr. Speaker, one of those 
crises that faces the people of Saskatchewan today, that I want to 
focus my attention and direct my remarks this afternoon. 
 
We are seeing in the province of Saskatchewan, in the late 1980s 
and possibly into the first year or so of the 1990s, a headlong rush 
towards piratization at the initiative of the Government of 
Saskatchewan today. And while the PC government engages in 
this piratization mania, Mr. Speaker, people are fleeing the 
province, literally fleeing the province, looking elsewhere with 
hope that their dreams and aspirations can be realized somewhere 
in our nation other than in their home province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the facts — and I intend to 
share a good number of facts this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, with 
the members of the Assembly and those who pay attention to the 
debate of this legislature — the

facts tell me clearly that there are two undeniable crises, two 
undeniable crises going on in Saskatchewan today. What are 
they? 
 
Number one, Mr. Speaker, is our loss of people. People are 
literally fleeing the province of Saskatchewan. And the other 
undeniable crisis, Mr. Speaker, and not unrelated — it is 
intimately related — is our crisis in unemployment in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And you can’t talk about one without 
the other because largely the reason that people are fleeing the 
province of Saskatchewan is because there is so little hope that 
their employment aspirations can be realized in this beautiful 
province of ours. 
 
And so accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I give notice to the Legislative 
Assembly that at the conclusion of my remarks I will move a 
motion to the effect: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the total failure of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to address the tragic problem 
of unemployment, which has caused a dramatic increase in 
the out-migration of Saskatchewan young people in search 
of education and employment opportunities elsewhere. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let me begin then with a recitation of some of the 
facts, the undeniable facts, the source all of which is the 
Government of Saskatchewan in its own documents. And let me 
relate to this debate and to this Assembly some of these facts that 
depict a tragedy going on in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a fact, a fact that over the past 16 months there 
has been a net loss, a net loss of over 24,000 people from the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now I’m not talking about the 
number of people who have left the province. That number is 
substantially higher. When I talk about net loss of people, Mr. 
Speaker, I am referring to the fact that some people move into 
our province and others move out. And when I say 24,000 people 
in the last 16 months, let me make it very clear that I am referring 
to the fact that 24,000 more people have left this province than 
have come into Saskatchewan over the last 16 months alone — 
16 months. 
 
And is it getting any better? Is it getting any better when we 
review the government’s own statistics? Has the government 
recognized that there’s a problem here which needs to be 
addressed, a problem which is impacting on literally thousands 
upon thousands of Saskatchewan families? Is it getting better? 
Well sadly to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s not getting better; it’s getting 
worse. 
 
In 1989, in the first four months of this year alone, Mr. Speaker, 
in 1989 literally 10,700 people more have left this province than 
have come to choose Saskatchewan as their place to live. In the 
first four months of 1989 alone, nearly 11,000 people have fled 
this province with shattered dreams and loss of hope for a future 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you know what’s saddest of all, Mr. Speaker? And set 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1160 
 

aside the fact that if you extrapolate that over an entire year, that 
would mean that we would suffer a net loss of over 30,000 in our 
population this year alone. I shudder to even consider that 
possibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what’s saddest of all? When I look at the 
characteristics or the categories of people who are leaving this 
province, 35 per cent, over a third of the people who are leaving 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are in their twenties, 
between the ages of 20 to 29. 
 
And clearly Saskatchewan is undergoing a brain drain and at the 
same time a youth drain. The crisis can be summarized, Mr. 
Speaker, by saying what we have going on in Saskatchewan 
today is a human energy drain, a human energy drain. And can 
any province, can any province cope with that kind of loss of our 
most prized, our most valuable resource, our people. And 
especially, Mr. Speaker, when those who are fleeing this 
province are those who are usually considered to be the future, to 
be the future of a province, the young people. Those who have 
the greatest amount of energy and creativity and initiative, those 
are the very ones, Mr. Speaker, who have been most affected by 
this crisis in Saskatchewan. Those are the ones we are losing to 
the largest degree. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this brain drain just didn’t begin this 
week or this month or this year. This brain drain has been going 
on for some time, and some of it, I contend, Mr. Speaker, has 
been specifically cast as part of the game plan by the government 
opposite. It was part of the agenda of the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan to initiate a brain drain from our province. 
 
Now I don’t tend to be one, Mr. Speaker, who approaches life 
looking for bogymen. I don’t tiptoe around the house looking into 
dark closets wondering what might be there, Mr. Speaker. I 
prefer to think the best of people and to be optimistic in looking 
at what’s going on. But I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I 
look at the realities, when I look at the realities, one can conclude 
nothing other than that the brain drain began by design back in 
1987 — by design. 
 
Now many of us in this House will remember in those times, 
1987, the first year following the re-election of the PC 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the fall, in October 1986 we came back to this House for a 
short two-week session before Christmas. And while the 
government was assuming that the people of Saskatchewan 
weren’t paying attention because they were doing their 
pre-Christmas shopping and attending to personal family matters 
and those sorts of things, we had a Bill No. 5 go through this 
Legislative Assembly, giving this government the authority to 
create and disband and manoeuvre and change government 
departments without ever having to set foot in the Legislative 
Assembly. That could all be done behind closed cabinet doors. 
Significant changes in the very structure of the delivery of 
services and the administration and enforcement of legislation 
could be done behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
And that was a crucial issue. Obviously it was — we had

to come here within two months of the election, in December 
1986, to deal with this very important matter. So we’re led to 
believe. 
 
And then when did we come back? We did not come back to this 
Legislative Assembly until nine months, I believe it was, nine 
months after the actual election, in the middle of June 1987. And 
I recall, as I hope all of us in this Assembly recall and never 
forget, the literal devastation, the deprivation of the spirit of the 
people of Saskatchewan that was experienced by citizens and by 
our constituents all across the province as day after day 
announcements were made, brutal announcements about cuts in 
services, wiping out organizations. 
 
And then in that whole environment, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Minister of Finance at the time said, oh my goodness gracious, 
you know, before we went into this election we knew that there 
were some financial problems and it was in control, but my 
goodness gracious, we thought that the deficit was going to be 
less than $400 million this year, and whoops, after the election 
we discovered it was $1.2 billion; we made a little mistake folks, 
but now times are tough and we’re going to have to start cutting 
to the bone. And that message was given to Saskatchewan people 
through a series of cuts in services like this province has never 
known before. 
 
And mixed into this whole mood of the province of 
Saskatchewan that we were going through a psychological 
depression that I’m sure, although I wasn’t around in the times 
of the Dirty Thirties, the economic depression that was as 
devastating psychologically to the people of Saskatchewan as the 
Dirty Thirties were, was introduced an early retirement package, 
this government called it — an early retirement package. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Speaker, receiving several phone calls from 
constituents who were long-time civil servants who had served 
the people of Saskatchewan proudly as a statement of a 
professional career, but who were over the age of 50, and who 
were simply devastated by the coercive overtones, the coercive 
overtones that were part of this government’s hack-and-slash 
mentality; wondering, wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether they 
should take this coercive early retirement package that was being 
“offered” — and I use that word in quotes, Mr. Speaker — that 
were being offered to them by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Literally devastated. 
 
And the Government of Saskatchewan justified all of this by 
saying, well we made a monumental mistake, but what the heck, 
we’re only human. So what if we made an $800 million mistake. 
Somebody’s got to pay the price, and the person who’s going to 
pay the price is you. That’s what this government said to the 
people of Saskatchewan and said to its own employees. 
 
And so the early retirement packages were offered. And what 
happened in the province of Saskatchewan? A large number of 
dedicated professional civil servants who had served — many of 
them had served at least three different political stripes of 
government; under three different political stripes of 
government, had served the most important people in this 
province, and that’s the people of the province, not the politicians 
— were faced with a 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1161 
 

critical decision: do we take this early retirement or do we stay 
and run the risk of being cut and left with nothing? 
 
And it seems to me as I look back at that, Mr. Speaker, there was 
the beginning of a divine plan, a plan to create in the province of 
Saskatchewan a brain drain, to remove from this province some 
of the most capable professional people who best understood 
what conduct of good government was all about and the 
implications on the people of Saskatchewan. And we saw it. We 
saw people leaving the civil service by the hundreds, by the 
thousands. 
 
And who was leaving? It was those who had the most experience; 
in many cases, those with the most education, those who were, I 
suppose another way of saying it, the most expensive on the 
payroll — without any sense of cost-effectiveness and 
recognizing that people with experience and professional training 
and dedication, who have proven it under several stripes of 
government, have got something to offer any government, and 
most importantly the people that it serves. 
 
And so we saw back in 1987, in the spring of 1987 the beginning 
of a brain drain in the province of Saskatchewan, initiated by 
design by the PC government of the day. 
 
And what’s going on today, now, Mr. Speaker, is simply a 
continuation of something that started over two years ago. And 
the brain drain in this province is trickling down. These folks love 
the trickle down theory. Well it’s trickling down all right. It’s 
trickling down to people who are in their 20s. 
 
Two years ago we saw people in their 50s leaving this province, 
devastated by the vicious decisions of the government of the day. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we have literally thousands of families in 
Saskatchewan feeling devastated by the brain drain that’s going 
on among the young people who are leaving our province; many 
of them people with young families, just newly out of school — 
academic training, high school and post-secondary education — 
and looking to establish a future for themselves and their families 
with the hopes and the aspirations that all young people have, that 
they will realize the opportunity to make their mark in the 
province of Saskatchewan and to provide security and 
opportunity for themselves and their families. 
 
Many of these people with young families themselves, and many 
others of course, Mr. Speaker, who are the children of long-time 
Saskatchewan residents, families in this province who had the 
hopes that their children could grow up and be educated and find 
their professional niche here in the beautiful province of 
Saskatchewan, being devastated by what is going on in 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
I don’t think a single week goes by when one of us in this 
Legislative Assembly doesn’t have at least several conversations 
with constituents who are concerned by the fact that their 
children or their brothers or sisters or neighbours or good friends 
are either packing up and leaving or have already left, because 
there just isn’t an

opportunity for them to realize their dreams, to realize their 
aspirations, to realize their hopes in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so we’ve got depression by design, depression by design 
brought to us by the PC government of Saskatchewan today. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, 24,000 fled the province in the past 16 
months — 10,700 this year alone. 
 
Let me share some other facts, Mr. Speaker, facts from the bureau 
of statistics of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan 
today. These are not my numbers; these are the numbers that are 
published by the Government of Saskatchewan today. I’ve talked 
a bit about the numbers who are leaving this province. The fact 
of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan today — the 
most recent statistics being from last month, from April — in 
Saskatchewan today, literally 8.9 per cent of the people of 
Saskatchewan are unemployed and looking for work. That’s up. 
 
I said before, is the situation getting better? Is it getting worse 
than a year ago? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of obvious, and it’s 
kind of sad; it’s worse. That number is up 0.6 per cent, over half 
a per cent from a year ago. And so when you compare — because 
it’s not always fair to compare one month to a different month of 
a different year — compare April of this year to April of last year, 
what’s happening for the people of Saskatchewan? The picture’s 
getting worse. 
 
(1615) 
 
Literally in Saskatchewan today, one out of 11 — one out of 11 
Saskatchewan people are unemployed, 42,000 in total; 42,000 
men and women in this province unemployed and registered as 
looking for work, 42,000. Mr. Speaker, that’s more than either 
our second or third largest city, Moose Jaw and Prince Albert. 
More people than every man, woman, and child — you could 
probably include the pets — in those two cities to make up the 
total number of people in this province who are unemployed and 
registered as looking for work. And how does that compare? Two 
thousand worse than a year ago. April of last year there were 
40,000 unemployed; in April of this year, Mr. Speaker, 42,000 
unemployed. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . my colleague 
asked me how that compares to 1982, and I’ll deal with that a 
little later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because it seems to me, and I want to get a clear . . . paint a very 
clear picture of what it is we’re dealing with today and make 
some recommendations as to how we can address those kinds of 
problems. Because in fact the province of Saskatchewan has 
addressed very effectively the significant responsibility of 
government to employee and to provide the opportunity and the 
environment to create employment for its own people before. 
There are some principles that have been applied effectively and 
that can be applied effectively again, and I’ll address those a little 
later. 
 
We can talk about the other side of the coin; we can talk about 
employment. Maybe some of the members of government will 
say, well yes, unemployment 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1162 
 

percentages are up, but goodness gracious, population numbers 
differ and maybe there’s more people working in Saskatchewan. 
Maybe there’s some success, if you look at it that way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is, again from statistics Saskatchewan, 
from the bureau of statistics, that the number of people employed 
in Saskatchewan today is down — down literally 9,000 fewer 
people working in the province of Saskatchewan today than a 
year ago, than in April of last year. The number of people fleeing 
the province is up, the percentage of people unemployed is up, 
and the number of people actually employed is down. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about drought? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well the member from Weyburn raises drought, 
and we’ll get to drought. We’ll get to drought, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll get to drought and we’ll get to there in good time, because 
there are a number of facts, Mr. Minister, that you may want to 
attend to. If you are not feeling uncomfortable with the 
performance of your government and trying to stimulate a little 
common sense action in your cabinet meetings and in your 
caucus meetings, then you may want to. 
 
And let me give you a few facts, sir, to back up what any kind of 
initiative you may want to take to get the Government of 
Saskatchewan working for the people of this province again. 
We’ll get to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, another measure of success of 
a government can be the size of its labour force. I’ve talked about 
out-migration, I’ve talked about the percentage of 
unemployment, I’ve talked about the number of unemployed. 
What about the actual labour force itself, the size of the labour 
force — the number of men and women who are available to 
work in the province of Saskatchewan. Has there been any 
measure of success there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The fact of the matter is that the bureau of statistics of 
Saskatchewan tells us that there are 6,000 fewer people in the 
labour force in the province of Saskatchewan today as compared 
to a year ago — 6,000 fewer in the labour force; 6,000 fewer men 
and women available to work in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, and again I refer to the 
Saskatchewan bureau of statistics, is that the Saskatchewan 
unemployment rate today, the Saskatchewan unemployment rate 
today is higher than the national average for the sixth straight 
month. 
 
Now never before, Mr. Speaker, since unemployment statistics 
were kept, never before has the province of Saskatchewan had a 
higher rate of unemployment than the rate of unemployment 
across the nation. We’ve always been better. We’ve always been 
better, but in Saskatchewan today under PC government, we hit 
yet another new low, Mr. Speaker. For the sixth straight month, 
for the first time since statistics have been kept, the 
unemployment rate in Saskatchewan is higher than the average 
across the nation.

And so clearly, Mr. Speaker, it is undeniably true that in 
Saskatchewan when you look at unemployment, no matter how 
you want to measure it, no matter how you want to look at it, 
we’re worse than we’ve ever been before, and we’re worse than 
Canada as a whole. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, if we want to speculate a little bit it 
gets even worse. The fact of the matter is that the only reason that 
our unemployment figures, our unemployment statistics — and 
let us not forget that those are not numbers; most importantly 
those are people — the fact of the matter is that the only reason 
that they’re not worse is because people are leaving. The reality 
is that if those who have fled this province had stayed at home in 
Saskatchewan and looking for work, Mr. Speaker, our 
unemployment rate in Saskatchewan today would be 
approximately 14 per cent or one in seven, and we would be right 
in there with New Brunswick and Newfoundland. 
 
And how long have those of us in the western part of our country 
looked at what’s going on in this nation and said the most 
deprived economies, the most deprived provinces in which to live 
have been some of the Maritimes, Newfoundland, the most 
frequently quoted. 
 
And so here we are. If our people were not fleeing our province, 
the reality would be that Saskatchewan would be another 
Newfoundland when it comes to unemployment. We already 
recognize that Saskatchewan is another Newfoundland. We’re 
second only to Newfoundland in the rate of poverty in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and the devastation for Saskatchewan 
families goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the number, at the impact of 
employment on young people, maybe there is this massive 
unemployment going on, and somehow it’s affecting those who 
haven’t caught the stream or haven’t jumped onto the raft, going 
with the flow of technological change. Maybe what’s the 
problem, this government may suggest, is that some of our people 
who have been at the same job for a long time just haven’t been 
able to make change. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that one group that is 
particularly paying the price are our young people. That’s the sad 
fact of the matter. When I look at the numbers again, the 
government’s own statistics, from the bureau of statistics of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it says to me that the number of 
young people working in this province between the ages of 15 
and 24 years old, is 74,000. There are 74,000 young people 
between the ages of 15 and 24 years working in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
How does that compare, Mr. Speaker? Is that better or worse? 
Sad to report, Mr. Speaker, that that is down literally 10,000. 
There are 10,000 fewer young people between the ages of 15 and 
24 working in the province of Saskatchewan today than there 
were a year ago at this time. 
 
Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, sometimes we can get caught up 
in debate and place a bit of an over-emphasis 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1163 
 

on numbers. We politicians perhaps spend a little too much time 
on occasion looking at numbers and not enough time looking at 
people. 
 
I was doing some reading through some of the newspapers of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and I draw the attention of the Legislative 
Assembly to an editorial by the editor of the Prince Albert Daily 
Herald, that was in that paper on April 15 of this year. The title 
of the article that I refer to, Mr. Speaker, is, and I quote, “Leaving 
the province becoming thing to do.” Leaving the province 
becoming thing to do. What a sad statement! What a sad 
statement about what’s going on in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me just draw a couple of . . . three or four paragraphs from 
this article, comments of the editor of the P.A. Daily Herald, Mr. 
Speaker. He writes, and I quote — he leads off his article this 
way: 
 

One of the more popular things to do in Saskatchewan, it 
seems, is leave. 

 
The province suffered a net loss of 16,000 residents to other 
provinces last year. It is the largest loss in the country. 
 

Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker. “. . . the largest loss in the 
country.” That is a factually correct statement. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

It is Saskatchewan’s highest net loss in 20 years. 
 

Then he continues the article, Mr. Speaker, by saying this: 
 

Sadly, it is most often our young people who are leaving. 
They hear about the booming economies of Ontario and 
other provinces. They look at their prospects in 
Saskatchewan. They leave to find their fortune. 
 

They leave to find their fortune. 
 

It is understandable that Saskatchewan young people are 
dreaming of a better future. People without dreams are no 
longer young. 
 

Is there a more explicit way that it can be said than that, Mr. 
Speaker, when we try to understand the tragedy of 
unemployment and out-migration affecting Saskatchewan people 
today, when Mr. DeGurse says in his editorial: 
 

People without dreams are no longer young. 
 

Young people in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, are growing 
up fast; they’re growing up quickly because it’s getting tougher 
and tougher to dream in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have a crisis on our hands, an undeniable crisis on our 
hands no matter how you look at it — whether you want to look 
at human beings and look at your neighbours and your friends 
and your relatives, or if you want to look into the government’s 
own bureau of

statistics and see what it has to say about employment and people 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what has been the response of the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan? Let’s assume the kindest for a moment, if we 
may, Mr. Speaker; let’s assume that this government recognizes 
that there is a crisis going on in Saskatchewan today. Let’s 
assume that this government has the insight. What have they said 
then? If they’ve said we have a crisis on our hands in the province 
of Saskatchewan, what has been their response? Their response 
has been to say, give them more of the cause. Give them more of 
the cause; that’s what they say. 
 
Piratization, Mr. Speaker, piratization has been the cause, and 
piratization has been what this government has promised to 
people in Saskatchewan — more of the cause. They say: you 
think there’s a problem now; hang on folks, because you’re going 
to get more of the same. That’s what we promise you — more of 
the same. What a bunch of unadulterated balderdash. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn raises, he 
raises — he said, what about the drought? Well let me take a 
moment, Mr. Speaker, to reflect on the drought, because I admit 
we’ve been having a drought and that’s made it more difficult for 
the economy in our province. Not denied at all. But has the 
drought started at the western border of Saskatchewan and 
proceeded across this province and ended at the eastern border, 
end of drought? 
 
If the drought is the cause of the problem, Mr. Speaker, then we 
either accept that Saskatchewan is the only province to have had 
a drought or we look at those provinces that have had a drought 
and see how they compare to the province of Saskatchewan. If 
we want to be realistic, if we want to be realistic . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Morse will have an 
opportunity to debate this too, and I invite you, sir, to take a look 
at the facts. 
 
If there’s a drought anywhere, Mr. Speaker, the drought goes on 
in the minds of the members opposite. That’s where the real 
drought is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, Statistics Canada has recently 
released the in-migration and out-migration numbers for the 
provinces and the territories in Canada. And let me take a look at 
these and review them and put them into context and specifically 
look at what is going on in Saskatchewan compared to the rest of 
our country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1988, according to Statistics Canada, the province that had the 
largest in-migration, the largest number of people coming to their 
province, was Ontario, over 79,000, followed by British 
Columbia at 46,000; Quebec, nearly 12,000. 
 
Alberta. Now has there been a drought on in Alberta? Has 
anybody noticed whether there’s been a drought in Alberta? Mr. 
Speaker, have those rain clouds been coming over from the 
Pacific Ocean across British 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1164 
 

Columbia and Alberta, dropped all their moisture and then got to 
the Saskatchewan borders and went dry? Or has their been a 
drought in Alberta? Does Alberta have any agricultural 
economy? Do they grow any grain in Alberta? Mr. Speaker, some 
of the best grain in the world comes from the southern part of 
Alberta. 
 
And what’s happened in Alberta? While Alberta, our neighbour 
to the west, has suffered this same drought in 1988, they’ve 
managed to have an in-migration of 5,114 people. While Alberta 
has been going through this same drought, their population has 
been increasing because people have been coming there. 
 
(1630) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Prince Edward Island — Prince Edward 
Island had an increase in population, 740. Not many, but some. 
And then the Yukon — the Yukon increased its population by 
nearly 300. Mr. Speaker, last year six provinces and territories 
literally increased their population because people were moving 
to those provinces or the territory of Yukon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there were six — six provinces or territories 
that had a net loss. A net loss. When I referred to these before, 
those were net in-migrations; that’s a net increase. There are six 
provinces, Mr. Speaker, that had a net loss in population in 1988, 
and who were they? 
 
Well the sixth worst, Northwest Territories, they lost 382, a net 
loss migration of 382. Nova Scotia had a loss of over 700 people 
— they were the fifth worst. 
 
Newfoundland, Newfoundland had a loss, and we sometimes 
count our blessings that we don’t have to deal with the hardships 
and the difficulties of Newfoundland. Newfoundland had a loss. 
They had the third worst . . . sorry, New Brunswick, New 
Brunswick was fourth worst at a loss of 962, and then 
Newfoundland was third worst — a little over 2,000. 
 
The two provinces that affected the most — and here, I admit we 
see a reflection partially of the drought — Manitoba was the 
second worst in 1988 with a little over 6,300 net loss 
out-migration of its people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Statistics Canada, who do 
Statistics Canada say had the worst record in the nation? Who 
had the worst record in the nation by more than double the next? 
Saskatchewan! Here in the province of Saskatchewan, according 
to Statistics Canada, we had a net loss of 14,771 people, Mr. 
Speaker — a net loss of nearly 15,000 people last year alone. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, these rain clouds that came across 
the Pacific and dumped moisture on British Columbia and 
Alberta, because somehow they were removed from the drought, 
and then leap-frogged over Saskatchewan and then started to 
dump rain in Manitoba again, what a ridiculous explanation, 
what a ridiculous explanation. 
 
Obviously it didn’t happen. Obviously Manitoba had a drought 
that was at least as harsh as that here in Saskatchewan, and with 
a population base greater than

ours, suffered a loss of only 6,300 people, while here in 
Saskatchewan, here in Saskatchewan, we said goodbye to nearly 
15,000, to nearly 15,000 people. And that’s the reality. 
 
So when someone tells me from the other side, Mr. Speaker, that 
the explanation for our population loss for 1988 was drought, I 
say balderdash. Balderdash . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
here’s the member from Shaunavon. He says we don’t know 
anything about it. So I tell you, I tell you, I can read government 
statistics that your government puts out. I wish, sir, that you 
would read them, that you would understand them, and you 
would understand the implications and would start putting a little 
pressure on your front-benchers here to start doing something 
about it. Then you’d be doing your constituents and the people 
of this province a favour for a change. 
 
Do you . . . Is it your contention, sir, is it your contention that 
these rain clouds, that leaped over Saskatchewan and brought us 
drought, started dropping moisture at the Manitoba border? They 
rained up to the Alberta border, went over top, and then started 
dropping moisture in Manitoba? Will you get real? Will you get 
real? Will you start looking at fact, and most importantly, will 
you start looking at the future and what needs to be done for the 
people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And so what have we got? What have we got 
today, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan today? We 
have a government that says piratization is the only thing that 
matters. That’s what distinguishes us. That’s what distinguishes 
us from Manitoba and Alberta — two provinces, one on each side 
of us, that had the same drought that we’ve had here. What makes 
us different? If it’s not the weather, then what makes us different? 
And I contend, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at what’s 
different, what’s different is the political agenda of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have in this province a government that says not only that 
piratization is the thing, they say it’s not only the thing, it’s the 
only thing. That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker, and they say, Mr. 
Speaker, that if we right-wingers . . . we are right-wingers, and if 
we go down in the next election, we’re going to take the people 
of Saskatchewan kicking and screaming with us. If you look at 
the actions, that’s got to be the message, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well part of that prediction, I think, will come true. They will go 
down, but it will be Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition that would 
be doing everything it can to keep this government from taking 
the people of Saskatchewan kicking and screaming when they go 
down, the next time that the people of Saskatchewan have a 
chance to make a choice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So when will they learn? When will they learn, 
Mr. Speaker? Is this a new phenomenon that just cropped up this 
year and has been going helter-skelter, hell-bent for leather? The 
fact of the matter is, Mr. 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1165 
 

Speaker, when I look back at the government statistics again, the 
fact of the matter is this: the piratization agenda largely began in 
1984 and 1985. That’s when it started, not that long before the 
last election, although this government — and I’ll make reference 
to that shortly — was quite hesitant to admit that that’s what it 
was about. Didn’t want to talk about piratization in an election. 
 
But the agenda had already begun. And when I look back, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last four years, over the last four years, 
shocking as it may seem, Saskatchewan has had a net loss of over 
41,000 people in the last four years — over 41,000 people have 
left this province with shattered dreams over the last four years. 
What a measure of success, what a condemnation of the 
performance of a government! 
 
We have a Premier who likes to say we’re number one. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to many of the most 
negative numbers that impact on people’s lives in the province 
of Saskatchewan, sadly to say, without even being close, we are 
number one — we are number one. 
 
And I say for the benefit of the member from Wilkie, who seems 
to have a little difficulty grasping what’s going on here, that this 
is a sad time for the people of Saskatchewan. And it is a sad time 
because of the kind of leadership that has affected the lives, the 
lives of literally thousands upon thousands of Saskatchewan 
people and their families. 
 
And what’s been the record of piratization? Has this been the 
employment boom that it was supposed to be? I mean, has 
privatization been working wonderful? Has privatization reduced 
our debt, or has it reduced our taxes, or has it increased our 
services, or has it reduced our out-migration, or has it increased 
our employment? None of those, Mr. Speaker, none of those — 
none. 
 
When we look at the reality and this government’s record on 
piratization, going back to 1984, when the former minister of 
Highways, in his offhanded kind of way, referring to the cuts of 
highway workers — they were going on and saying they were 
going to transfer them to the private sector. We had the Highways 
workers being cut — 400 jobs went lost; went lost, Mr. Speaker. 
And they weren’t picked up by the private sector; they just went 
lost. The fact of the matter is, what little Highways work was 
being done was often being done by out-of-province firms and 
out-of-province employers and employees who went back home 
and paid their income tax, because that’s where they lived on 
December 31 — 400 jobs lost as a result of piratization. 
 
What about the dental care program? We celebrated the 25th 
anniversary, to the day, of the introduction of medicare in this 
province by taking the school-based children’s dental care 
program out of the schools and transferring them to the private 
sector — another 400 jobs lost; 400 dedicated, professional 
dental therapists who were effective at working with children and 
teaching them good dental health. Best doggone preventive 
health care program that this . . . not only this province — this 
country and this continent have ever known — gone. And not 
only that, 400 workers — gone from the province of 
Saskatchewan.

Saskoil — did the privatization of Saskoil, all the great wonders 
of Saskoil — and we can reflect on all of these as we see Bill No. 
20, The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, before us. 
 
And all of the tunes sound familiar, Mr. Speaker, how we’re 
going to expand and diversify and provide investment 
opportunity and create jobs, and how all the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to become rich and profitable and create 
employment, and the province will boom. 
 
Saskoil was privatized. Within two years, three-quarters owned 
outside the province of Saskatchewan, the shares. And within six 
months, within six months, 25 per cent of the jobs gone — 
privatization — from Saskoil. 
 
And so what does this government say? Well we know, they’re 
saying, we know, we took Highways and we privatized it. We 
piratized it and it lost 400 jobs. And we know that we took the 
school-based children’s dental care program, we piratized it and 
it, and we lost another 400 jobs. And we piratized Saskoil and we 
lost another swat of jobs. And we know that people are fleeing 
this province, and we know that unemployment is up and we 
know that employment is down. So what are we going to do 
about it? We’re going to give you some more. That’s what they 
say. 
 
And how do we know that? All we have to do, Mr. Speaker, all 
we have to do is take a look at the documents that we get every 
day in this Legislative Assembly, and remind ourselves of the 
legislative agenda of the Government of Saskatchewan today. 
Bill No. 1, the first Bill brought into this Legislative Assembly, 
presumably because it’s such a high priority to deal with the 
problems of the people of Saskatchewan today; Bill No. 1, an 
omnibus privatization Bill that gives the minister of piratization 
the right to do whatever he wants, wherever he wants, however 
he wants, without having to wiggle his big toe in the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. Boy, is this what we’ve been 
looking for! We’ve hammered here for the last four years, and 
we’re going to hit you again, they say, to their legislative agenda. 
 
And then along we move; we move to Bill 20, to piratize the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Never mind the fact that 
back in the ’70s private potash companies were refusing to pay 
their taxes and royalties; never mind the fact they refused to open 
their books to the Government of Saskatchewan; the people of 
Saskatchewan, by the Canadian constitution, owned those natural 
resources — never mind all that; never mind the fact that they 
refused to allow the government to influence the extraction of 
potash from Saskatchewan soils. Never mind all that. 
 
And so how did the people of Saskatchewan respond? The people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, responded with pride, and they 
responded with assertiveness. The people of Saskatchewan, 
through their government of the day, said: those natural resources 
belong to the people of Saskatchewan. The people of this 
province have the right, by the Canadian constitution, to benefit 
from those God-given natural resources below the surface of our 
soils, and if you’re not going to pay your taxes and allow 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1166 
 

for the government that represents the people, the democratically 
elected government, to influence how that happens, then we’re 
going to have to get into the business ourselves. 
 
And it happened. And by 1982 the original investment, without 
one single penny having been charged to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan — not a single penny — by 1982 the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan had been completely paid for, had 
paid dividends and royalties in excess of over $400 million. 
 
(1645) 
 
Yes, the Minister of Health laughs. Yes, I guess it would be kind 
of humorous when you look back. Those were the good old days, 
weren’t they? Those were the days when the Government of 
Saskatchewan was managing the economy of Saskatchewan, 
where the benefactors of the management, most importantly, 
were the people of this province. 
 
And it strikes us all a little odd today as we look back, as we look 
back at what was once done with good quality management, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan having been completely 
paid for. And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, some $271 million 
in taxes and royalties paid to the province in addition, as well. 
While that $413 million profit was paying off the original 
investment, another $100 million dividend to the general revenue 
to the province of Saskatchewan — money to keep down the 
taxes charged to Saskatchewan people, and money to provide 
improved services to the people of this Saskatchewan. 
 
And people were working. My goodness gracious, you need only 
look at the statistics. People were working — 4.1 per cent 
unemployment at that time. I was kind of shocked by the fact that 
more than one in 25 people in Saskatchewan had to look for work 
back in 1982, Mr. Speaker, when I first ran for election to this 
Assembly. I was ashamed of that, to tell you the truth, but my 
God, compared to today it sounds like heaven. 
 
And so what have we got? We’ve got a Government of 
Saskatchewan saying, well never mind the fact that people are 
fleeing, never mind the fact that people aren’t working, never 
mind the fact that we’ve been hammering away at piratization for 
over four years now, we’re going to give you some more of the 
same; we’re going to piratize the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And somehow this is going to provide a solution 
to all our problems. What a joke! What a joke! 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — That’s Bill 20. And then they come in and they’re 
going . . . not only that. I mean, never mind the fact that it’s not 
working, we’re going to give you an omnibus piratization Bill 
that lets the minister do whatever he wants. Never mind the fact 
that the potash corporation, when the New Democrat government 
was managing it, made money, and it loses money when the 
Tories are in charge of it; never mind all that, we’re going to 
piratize it, too.

Then we’re going to piratize the SaskPower, the natural gas side 
of SaskPower. That’s going to be the solution that we’re looking 
for, Mr. Speaker. That’s going to really be the breakthrough in 
terms of bringing down rates in both gas and the loss of the 
cross-subsidization for electricity rates for home owners, 
business people, and farmers. That’s really the breakthrough that 
we’re going to be looking for. 
 
And then yet, the minister of piratization tells this Assembly: and 
there’s more to come. Never mind the fact that we keep swatting 
you over the head, we’re going to give you an SGI piratization 
Bill, too, just to prove how good this all is for you. 
 
And the people responded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I find it kind of interesting. Every now and then there is an 
intellectual breakthrough on the other side, Mr. Speaker. I find 
with interest . . . I note with interest as I look at the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald in January — I believe it’s January 23 of 1985 — 
prior to the last election. At that time the member from 
Kindersley, who was the minister of Finance, came to Moose 
Jaw. And what did he have to say, Mr. Speaker, when he came 
to Moose Jaw prior to the 1986 election? As I note with interest, 
when we went through the election, whenever the word 
“privatization” came up, my goodness gracious, none of that. 
They weren’t going to have any of that. What did the minister of 
Finance have to say before the election? 
 
Well it’s reported in an article entitled, Mr. Speaker, “Crown 
corporations aren’t for sale” with a picture of the Minister of 
Finance. In the article it says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker. There is 
some reference to some Tory resolutions . . . If the member from 
Redberry, member of Redberry would like to reflect on party 
resolutions, and just gives me a shout here, we can get in, we can 
get into party resolutions. 
 
But the coverage of the article, Mr. Speaker, and making 
reference and following some coverage of PC Party resolutions, 
says, and I quote: 
 

Some party members see the sale of Crowns as a method of 
raising capital for a cash-starved government currently 
facing a billion dollar cumulative deficit. 
 

Oh, Mr. Speaker, that was back in the good old days, compared 
to today. In 1985 our deficit was only a billion dollars. We’ve 
had the best business minds of the PC Party just applying their 
little calculators ever since, Mr. Speaker, and we’re now up to $4 
billion cumulative deficit. 
 
So that’s what it says. But then it goes on to say, and I quote, “. . . 
but Andrew doesn’t agree.” It says that the Minister of Finance 
doesn’t agree with the pressure being brought by the PC Party 
members. Well what does he have to say? It says, and I quote — 
the Minister of Finance, the PC Minister of Finance in 1985, Mr. 
Speaker, he says, and I quote — “Privatization is yesterday’s 
theory.” Well there is the intellectual breakthrough that we’ve 
been looking for, a glimmer of hope in the cabinet of the PC 
caucus. 
  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1167 
 

And why does he say it doesn’t agree? Because he didn’t want to 
make a wild ideological statement. He had a reason for it, Mr. 
Speaker. The Minister of Finance went on to say, and I quote: “It 
doesn’t make sense for one government to build these things and 
for the next one to come and sell it all off.” 
 
Well whatever happened to that worldly advice to the PC 
government from its Minister of Finance prior to the 1986 
election? “Privatization is yesterday’s theory.” And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, I finally found the statement that the now Minister of 
Justice and I can agree upon. I agree, privatization is yesterday’s 
theory. It’s the economic theory that took us kicking and 
screaming out of the 1920s and into the Dirty Thirties here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of Finance in 1985 had the insight to recognize it, 
and if he could just get his colleagues to recognize the wisdom 
that he had back in 1985, the people of Saskatchewan would be 
a lot better for it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you see a drowning man, 
you don’t throw him an anchor. You don’t throw a drowning man 
an anchor, and you don’t help unemployment and out-migration 
with piratization mania, pure and simple. 
 
And that’s the nub of the question, Mr. Speaker. Piratization is 
yesterday’s theory. It’s the economic model, the unfettered free 
enterprise, free market, market determination understanding of 
the world that took not only this province but this country and 
much of the world into an economic depression of the 1930s. 
 
And so it’s a joke. You know, I have to laugh, Mr. Speaker, when 
I see the members opposite talking about moving into the ‘90s 
and the turn of the century with piratization. My God, do we need 
to look any further than the government’s own statistics to 
understand that already their 1930s economic theory of 
piratization is taking this province back to the previous biggest 
disaster it ever knew. 
 
And that’s exactly where it’s taken us. This province has known 
piratization before. It knew it from the ’20s and throughout the 
’30s, and out of that time, Mr. Speaker, was born a political 
movement, a political movement made up of farmers and 
labourers and business people and educators and working people 
— people who believed, who believed that the piratization 
economic model of the ’30s didn’t have to be the way it’s done. 
And they created a new political movement to put that into force, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we will all know our Saskatchewan history, our Prairies 
history. They created the Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation, the forerunner of the New Democratic Party, to begin 
to turn around that archaic, outmoded, ineffective, unfair 
economic system now known in 1989 terms as piratization. 
That’s what they were changing.

They were changing. They were people motivated by a vision, a 
vision of social fairness and justice where ordinary men and 
women would have the opportunity to see their dreams realized 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And what they were motivated 
to do, Mr. Speaker, was to take the piratization economic model 
of the day and make it part of Saskatchewan’s history, never to 
be seen again. 
 
And so here we have the great forerunners of the future in the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan today saying there is 
nothing so terrible that we can’t learn from our mistakes all over 
again, intending and consciously leading this province through 
the kind of depression that we saw back in the 1930s, taking us 
there all over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I say, I say very simply, Mr. Speaker, that when I look at 
the facts of the matter, piratization is not the cure, piratization is 
not what will cure what ails us in the province of Saskatchewan; 
piratization is the cause. And it’s piratization that’s got to go, not 
the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, clearly what we need is a 
government plan that will keep our young people home in the 
province of Saskatchewan and that will let the ideologically 
motivated piratization economic model go. Clearly that’s what 
we need. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we can go beyond the facts, we can go beyond 
the facts and we can draw from the information. What I’ve said 
so far has been factually based. I’ve quoted my sources and you 
know that. What I can draw now . . . And if you want to debate 
the wisdom of this one, I guess we can do that too. I’d like to 
make reference to the government’s own labour market and 
population forecasts . . . projections into the future that were done 
by a policy secretariat of the Premier’s Executive Council, a 
confidential economic forecast for the period of 1987 to 1995 
that, to say the least, Mr. Speaker, indicated that the prospects for 
the future are not encouraging in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so what did the Premier’s own economic forecast, 
confidential forecast, say, Mr. Speaker? It illustrates the 
implications of the Tory government’s mismanagement of the 
provincial economy over the last few years, and forecast . . . it 
forecast at that time significant out-migration because of the poor 
economic opportunities here. The report stated, and I quote: 
 

Economic prospects in Saskatchewan are worse than in 
central Canada encouraging people to leave the province. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with all of that — and my colleague will have 
more to say — it is my privilege to move in the Legislative 
Assembly at this time: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the total failure of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to address the tragic problem 
of unemployment, which has 

  



 
May 16, 1989 

 

1168 
 

caused a dramatic increase in the out-migration of 
Saskatchewan young people in search of education and 
employment opportunities elsewhere. 
 

I move that, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve got some comments to make 
on this important motion. Given the time, I’d like to adjourn the 
debate at this time. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


