





























































Hansard: August 04, 1989


August 4, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Time Allocation 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the listeners who are just starting to listen to the debate, 
I’ll do a recap then of the overview. We are this evening, we’re debating the super-closure motion that 
the Tory government has introduced which will essentially limit the debate to two days. And it also 
limits each member to 20 minutes on the debate; regardless of how many amendments are brought in, 
each member is only allowed an allotted 20 minutes. And also, too, on third reading, a total of two hours 
is allocated. 
 
I guess what I did mention at the beginning was that this whole issue was centred in around democracy 
and the freedom of speech and freedom of debate by individual MLAs in the House, and that this 
closure, this super-closure motion, which some members are calling time allocation, and historical 
documents will also call the guillotine, is basically a position that has been strongly opposed by leading 
parliamentarians, not only in Europe, but also in North America; and more particularly, I mentioned, the 
strong opposition that was brought forth by the late John Diefenbaker in the ’56 pipeline debate, and 
also Mr. Coldwell and Stanley Knowles. 
 
And I gave very strong quotes on their opposition, and basically their opposition was one where they 
stated: number one, the reason why these closure motions are introduced and the reason why they go 
against the democratic rights of debate and the freedom of speech in the House is because they stated 
that it’s meant to silence the opposition. The right to oppose is, therefore, taken away by the motion of 
closure. 
 
The other aspect to the closure motion which I have mentioned before is that it not only silences the 
individual members. It silences the people, it puts a muzzle on the people in the sense that their 
representative cannot put the people’s views out in front in the legislative process. 
 
I also mentioned that it was extremely important because of the poor written coverage that the potash 
debate has taken, that it was very important that a stronger debate and a longer debate take place in the 
legislature so that people can not only understand the historical overview of potash, but also the 
sociological and economic realms of potash development. 
 
So basically I went also through the history where this was introduced. The first closure was introduced 
back in 1881, introduced in Canada in 1913. And one of the major debates I was getting into was the 
1956 pipeline debate at the House of Commons, and that’s where I made the quotes. 
 
And I also mentioned that this closure has historic significance because it puts aside all roles of the 
House and puts at precedent the closure motions. And it’s of historic significance because no leader in 
the history of Saskatchewan had ever used this closure motion. No government, whether Conservative, 
Liberal, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), or NDP has ever, ever, ever used the closure 
motion. Everybody has recognized, in the history of Saskatchewan, that the closure motion is something 
that goes against the grain of the democratic nature of our legislative institution, and it simply hasn’t 
been part of the Saskatchewan heritage. 
 



Before I get into the substance of the debate, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also make a few more quotes from 
expertise in the field and their comments on the issue of closure. I will start out by a quote on Erskine 
May on the 17th Edition, page 474, and this one is quoted in an article called the Allocation of Time: The 
Guillotine and Voluntary Timetabling by John Palmer. This article is written in Parliamentary Affairs, 
Volume XXIII, 1969-1970, page 232-247. And I quote from page 232-233. It says: 
 

The guillotine is the ultimate deterrent. The “extreme limit to which procedure goes in affirming 
the rights of the majority at the expense of the minorities in the House . . .” 
 

And I mentioned that it did come from Erskine May, page 474, 17th edition. 
 
Notice that one of the top experts, Mr. May, has suggested this the extreme of any procedure that can be 
used in the House. This is the extreme of the extremes. 
 
As I talk with people, a lot of them have suggested that the government was moving more and more in 
certain particular realms in a more extreme direction. And the utilization of this particular motion to 
guillotine or to cut off debate is a sign that the hard-liners in the PC Party have taken control of the 
executive of the government; that indeed probably, I might state, that many of the front-bench 
hard-liners have had their way in finally coming out with one of the most undemocratic tools that even 
an expert such as Erskine May, which he happens to say, is the extreme. 
 
This extreme view, of course, is not going to be taken lightly by the members of the opposition and by 
the people of Saskatchewan, because the democratic rights of people, the democratic right to speak, the 
democratic aspect of being heard, the fact that the government in the past six years have silenced a lot of 
people and have put a lot of fear into people’s lives because of the fact that many had lost their jobs in 
’82 and even post-82, and the fact that this type of extreme thinking still exists with the PC Tory Party in 
the second decade . . . in their second term and towards the end of their second term, it shows very 
clearly that the implied threat that privatization would not only be in potash but in all of SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) and many other areas, including health, is not something to be 
completely disregarded; that it indeed hides there by the simple fact in regards to this latest aspect where 
the democratic right to speak in the legislature is absolutely crushed by the government in power today. 
So the hard-liners have indeed taken over in regards to how this government is run. 
 
I also looked at certain aspects of other parliamentarians, parliamentary experts, and I would look at the 
study by Josef Redlich. The title of the book is The Procedure of the House of Commons, a Study of its 
History and Present Form and this is one of the historical books on parliamentary procedure that is 
always quoted from in many of the academic journals. What Redlich says in the development of 
procedure in regards to the issue of the majority position and the minority position in the party is as 
follows. On page 49, volume 1 of the 1908 edition, he writes: 
 

The most important of these characteristics which must be dwelt on here rests upon the 
recognition of the perfect equality of all members of the House: it is the assertion of freedom of 
parliamentary action, for each individual member and for the House as a whole, within the limits 
laid down by custom and enactment. Hence has grown a principle which is especially distinctive 
of English parliamentary life — the principle of the protection of the minority as the fundamental 
basis of parliamentary government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, implicit in the statement are two aspects: one is the individual rights of members of the 
legislature; and also the rights of the minority opposition. I think that the statement by Redlich in this 
case is a very important aspect of the debate that we’re getting into, which is the aspect of the right to 



oppose and the right to speak and debate. And I fully agree with this important characteristic of our 
parliamentary history and parliamentary tradition. 
 
Another aspect that I’ve always picked up on in the debates from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is 
the fact that we have made lengthy speeches. I might add that these lengthy speeches have been full of 
sound historical information, and they have also been dealing with the various aspects of each debate 
that goes on. And I would like to state what Sir Erskine May has to say. And this one again is from the 
book by Redlich on page 81. He said: 
 
(1915) 
 

The development of freedom (this is on Erskine May), he says, has enormously increased the 
desire to speak in the House. Delays and even obstructions must not always by regarded as 
illegitimate parliamentary weapons, as they afforded the means of collecting the opinions of 
constituencies and the public. For the future, on important legislative proposals, long debate 
might always be reckoned on. 
 

Two points on this particular quote by Erskine May. I think it’s very important to recognize that the 
debate that is put forth by the individual members of the opposition and the fact that the government is 
muzzling the opposition is that a lot of the opinions of the people of Saskatchewan are put through the 
words of the individual MLA, and that the public at large is therefore being put down in a direct way by 
the utilization of the weapon of closure. 
 
The other aspect is that it must be expected that when important issues are debated in this House, that 
when there are various changes in regards to various directions in the House, and substantive 
philosophies and directions are changing, that proper debate has to take place. And there is no way that 
major shifts in governmental strategy, even if they don’t have the mandate of the people, even if what 
was not stated before the election that this would be brought out, even if all of this has been there, the 
fact still remains that the public in the long run, the public that’s out there in the long run can listen to 
the debates whether or not they are long, medium, or short. 
 
The basis of any debate is whether or not it has qualitative significance. Some of the worst nonsense you 
can hear sometimes in the legislature are stated in two words, and some of the most qualitative gems 
could also be stated in two words. But the same also holds true in medium scale or long scale debate. So 
the question of the qualitative nature of debates is what is at issue, rather than the length. 
 
As I also looked at another section, I also examined the 17th Edition of Erskine May which again is 
reprinted in the article by Palmer. He says: 
 

. . . the allocation of limited amounts of time to the stages of bills, and occasionally other kinds 
of business, forms no part of the general procedure of the House, but is applied in each case . . . 
by a special order. 
 

You’ll notice that in the news release and, of course, in the last comment of the motion, it reads: 
 

That consideration of Bill No. 20 pursuant to this motion be a special order of this Assembly to 
be called immediately and after orders of the day. 
 

A mistake in regards to Erskine May’s comments, that it forms no part of the general procedure of the 
House, is an important aspect because it does get away from the general rules of the House. It’s very 



important for people who are listening to know that this particular rule is being introduced for the first 
time in the history of the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
I mentioned before, no leader or no government in the history of Saskatchewan had dared challenge the 
democratic rights of individual members to speak in this House. It’s only taken a right-wing, hard-line 
government for the first time to introduce such an extreme measure in the House, where they said that 
they wanted us to be back in the House to debate, and yet they chose not to debate themselves. So this is 
an extreme measure in regards to parliamentary tradition. 
 
I would also like to get into the area in Canadian parliamentary tradition in regards to statements made 
by Eugene Forsey. This article, of course, is under a book edited by J.A.G. Griffith, and the book was 
entitled Public Law: the Constitutional and Administrative Law of the Commonwealth, written in 1957. 
In it, Eugene Forsey had an article entitled the “Constitutional Aspects of the Canadian Pipe line 
Debate,” and this debate formulated some of the more recent aspects of the issue of closure, which of 
course John Diefenbaker was vehemently against. He spoke at great lengths against the whole issue of 
the undemocratic nature of the closure motions and the fact that it tries to get away from the truth, and 
it’s simply a way of challenging people. 
 
I will quote from the fact of . . . the aspect of speech which was related by Forsey in his article on page 
12. He states: 
 

Parliamentary government is not just a matter of counting heads instead of breaking them. It is 
also a matter of using them. It is a government by discussion, not just by majority vote . . . 
essentially, a talking place, a parlement. 
 

These are very important words by one of the leading experts on Canadian parliamentary history. And 
Mr. Eugene Forsey says: 
 

While voting is very important, the essence of a democracy of a democratic institution such as 
the parliament or legislature is a fact that people have to debate . . . 
 

People have to speak, people have to bring forth the ideas of the public; people have to bring forth the 
ideas of farmers; people have to bring forth the ideas of small business, of workers, of women, of Indian 
and Metis people, of youth, of many others who live in the province. And the essence of a democracy is 
therefore the right to speak in the legislature. 
 
And again, for those who are just listening, we are debating the closure motion where the right to speak 
of an individual member is going to be eliminated after two days debate. 
 
The other aspect that has been raised by the members opposite has been the whole issue of obstruction. 
Many times they say we are obstructing the House because of the debates that are an important and 
integral part of the legislature. And this is a statement by Eugene Forsey on page 18: 
 

On a great issue of public policy, a Government defeated in Parliament is entitled to appeal from 
Parliament to the people, because it believes the existing Parliament has lost the confidence of 
the people. Equally, on a great issue of public policy, an Opposition facing certain defeat in 
Parliament is entitled first to try to rouse public opinion and so force the government to back 
down; and secondly, if that fails, to try to force an appeal from Parliament to the people, and for 
precisely the same reason which entitles a defeated Government to appeal: that it believes the 
existing Parliament has lost the confidence of the people. 



 
In this case, in this particular quote, we are seeing that debates are a very important aspect of getting 
public opinion participating in the legislative process. Without the information, there is no debate; 
without the information, the public will not be able to formulate their opinions based upon the facts that 
are reproduced. They will only hear them on hearsay. In fact, dealing directly with the debates in the 
legislature can get the people on the first hand to develop a sounder public opinion on which various 
facts can be weighted from what is debated in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Eugene Forsey furthermore states that: 
 

A Government makes its appeal by dissolution. An opposition makes its appeal by trying to force 
dissolution, by obstruction . . . Used, as it should be, and almost always has been in Canada, only 
for the gravest reasons, it is a legitimate and indeed essential part of the parliamentary system; in 
the last resort, with the Government’s power of dissolution, the only way of keeping Parliament 
responsible to the people. 
 

So obstruction, when it comes down to debating issues at length, is an important part of parliamentary 
tradition; that indeed, that form of obstruction which the government calls simple obstruction is part and 
parcel of our parliamentary system. 
 
And an expert such as Forsey agrees that it has its rightful place because no government can just go 
ahead and not be opposed by whatever it does, whether it means dismantling the dental plans, or 
prescription drug plans, or selling off Saskatchewan Power Corporation, or whatever. The right to 
oppose always has to be there, and the right to debate at length is an important part of the parliamentary 
aspect. And the members opposite simply call it obstruction, but it’s also an important part of our 
parliamentary process. 
 
The other thing that is stated by Mr. Forsey in relation to the pipe line debate, which was a debate on 
closure in Canada back in 1956, he also states in regards to majorities and their responsibility. It says, 
quote, page 25: 
 

They had no understanding that parliamentary government rests on the rule of law: that the 
Government must no break the rules any more than any private member; that majorities are not 
enough; that they must be majorities acting within the rules. 
 

When we look at this government in the past while, Mr. Speaker, they have simply not operated within 
the rules in many cases. Whether it was not following the law in regards to the auditor and the auditor’s 
report and not giving out 50 per cent of the information required by the auditor, by hiding the facts on 
privatization, by hiding the facts on joint corporations, this has been one of the most serious mistakes 
that this government has made in the past while. 
 
And we look at the fact that when SPC was put out and the energy aspect was going to be sold, they 
bypassed regulations and the Securities Commission so their whole process of privatization has been 
replete with the fact that they have not followed the law as stated out and laid out in the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. As such, therefore, in many cases, a majority is not fit to govern. In many 
cases a majority, when it only uses brute force, the brute sum of majority to put forth an issue that is not 
acceptable to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, when a government can stoop that low, then 
we are in a serious mess. Some people have called this issue the gigamess of Saskatchewan history. 
 
(1930) 



 
The other aspect of the debate on closure by Forsey, and I quote on page 25. In regards to the people, he 
says that, in regards to the government of the day when they introduced closure he says this: 
 

They had no understanding that parliamentary government rests on unwritten conventions of 
self-restraint and fair play; that if any one part of it uses all its legal power it can wreck the whole 
thing. All their conduct showed that. 
 
The had no understanding of the sacredness of an Opposition, of the fact that the decisive 
difference between parliamentary democracy and “people’s democracy” is the existence of a 
freely functioning Opposition, an Opposition with a means of becoming the Government 
peacefully, decently and in order. 
 

I think it’s very important to state, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Forsey recognizes the freedom of the 
opposition members to speak freely in the House and not be muzzled. Mr. Eugene Forsey recognizes the 
fact that the opposition has to have the right to oppose. Closing debate after a particular time simply 
because the government is in trouble is not a good enough excuse. 
 
The fact that the government is low on the polls, and they know it from their own polling, the fact that 
the majority of the people in the province are very worried about the way they are operating, whether 
it’s dealing with the gigamess or the fact of the high taxes, or whatever, people are becoming very, very 
disappointed and disillusioned with this government. And the only way to get around that 
disillusionment is sometimes to bring out the facts, that indeed the truth that is brought out in the 
legislature is an important part of people and their democracy, that a parliamentary democracy cannot 
function properly without the knowledge that the people can have in order to function on a daily basis. 
And I think as we go on in this debate, that will be stated time and again. 
 
In regards to the aspect of a . . . he makes another comment on obstruction on page 26. He says that — 
and again I’m quoting Mr. Eugene Forsey: 
 

. . . the Government and the presiding officers showed no understanding that obstruction is a 
necessary part of the parliamentary system. They were not even clear about the necessity of a 
device for ending obstruction when it has performed its function: they thought it was a device for 
preventing obstruction. 
 

So whether you examine the words of Erskine May, who says this is the extreme of extremes in regards 
to procedures, or whether you listen to great parliamentarians, whether its M.J. Coldwell, or whether we 
look at the position put forth by Knowles, or by John Diefenbaker, one recognizes that all of these 
parliamentarians have had a strong disregard for the whole procedure of closure, whether it was different 
forms of time allocations or whether it was called the guillotine. 
 
I must state also that guillotine is probably the proper word for this because not only was it used a 
couple of hundred years ago to cut off the necks and the heads of people, that indeed this closure is 
rightfully called a guillotine because it is cutting off the life-blood of the essence of parliamentary 
debate, and that’s the right to speak in the legislature. 
 
When I look at the rationale, Mr. Speaker, in regards to why a government would introduce such a piece 
of legislation, the first thing it shows is that the government is either very, very desperate because of 
poor public opinion or maybe it is arrogant. Maybe it feels, look, we can do whatever we want to do, and 



we’ll get back in and win another election. We are so arrogant is maybe what they’re thinking, that we 
will be able to do those things that the majority of the people of the province of Saskatchewan oppose. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, they had done away with many important aspects of our Saskatchewan 
heritage. The fact that they did away . . . they said they would never touch medicare, they did away with 
an important part in the historical development of medicare, and that was the prescription drug plan. 
They completely did away with that and without absolutely any feeling in regards to the people. 
 
The dental plan and 400 people and families and their lives were more or less destroyed by the action of 
the government when it unilaterally did what it did by knocking them right out. It shows, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government is introducing this motion not because it is so desperate, but because it 
simply doesn’t care any more. It’s become too arrogant. It feels it’s been elected twice and it can just 
walk right in again for the third time. 
 
I think it’s very important to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the government in its arrogance has developed 
a very hard-line position. I was in Chile last year, and I know the hard-line position of a government that 
is controlled with extremities and extreme measures. Places such as that do not provide the freedom of 
debate. They go ahead and do whatever it is that they want to do. The military junta can just go ahead 
and go against the wishes of the people, not matter how strong the issue is and how devastating it is, and 
they don’t even allow the people the right to speak. They silence the people. And there was tremendous 
fear over there when I went there last year. 
 
I must state, as I watched international affairs as we were debating potash and I looked at a China and I 
looked at the youth trying to get the right to speak, the type of extremity wherein you deny the 
democratic right of speech if something that is abhorred by all the countries of the world except . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I must state, Mr. Speaker, that when I look at historical tradition in Europe and many of 
the issue of stoppage of the democratic rights came into play, most of the things were done not by the 
total government, by all the government members that usually exist; it’s always done by the hard-line 
extremists of a particular government. And while I might not say that we have extremists in the PC 
Party, I would say that they are indeed having a hard-line position. I would state that this type of attitude 
is something that is going to bring the government into great trouble as time goes on. 
 
The other aspect in regards to the rationale as to why the closure on the debate. I think we were bringing 
the notion, Mr. Speaker, that we were producing the facts of mismanagement, that never in the history of 
this province have we ever seen such sheer, the worst and terrible management. We have seen not only 
$4 billion, $1 billion a day in taxes, $1 million a day we have to spend in interest payments, that in fact 
we have to even pay bingo tax and gambling tax and gas tax. And the only thing that is a growth 
industry in this province has been bingo, economics, and gambling. That has been the only thing that has 
grown economically in this province. 
 
I think it’s very important to recognize that the mismanagement forces governments to gamble on 
people’s lives, and now they are gambling on closure. They are gambling that they have the absolute 
authority. This is like back in the Middle Ages where the serf and the lord . . . where the lord reigns 
supreme. That indeed this is the type of situation where the opposition becomes completely muzzled by 
the government in power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The other rationale for the introduction of trying to get a quick exit out of this House — 
the fact that the government is scared to debate, that they simply did not stand up and debate the potash. 
They sat in their seats and — apart from two or three members, and I think to a maximum of five — 
whereas we debated the potash Bill 20 thoroughly, they did not dare speak up because they were afraid, 
afraid that what they had to say would be shown to be at odds with what the people thought in this 
province. 
 
When I look at the aspect of rationale, I look also at those things that come on the edge of corruption; 
that indeed we have talked about the Securities Commission, the Pioneer case before, but we also looked 
at GigaText — $5 million of taxpayers’ money was used. So I use that as an example, wherein this 
government wants to run away from the debate, they know that the GigaText scandal brings them 
problems, so they want to get out of this House; so they want to get out of the debate; so they don’t want 
to debate potash; they don’t even want to debate the democratic procedure of the House, except on a 
very shallow basis. 
 
All they say is that we make long speeches, all they say is that we’re radicals. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, for all the people who are out there listening: every time we speak for seniors in this province, 
they say we are radical; every time we speak for the youth in this province, they say we are radical; 
every time we speak on the protection of the drug prescription plan, they say we are radical. When we 
talk about protection of the dental workers, they say we are radical . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the hon. member for some time, and I would like to 
ask him to make his comments more relevant to the topic under discussion. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was replying to the comments on their type of a debate on 
radical, but I think I’ve used enough examples for people to recognize the point that I was making, that 
indeed that’s a false argument. 
 
The real substance of the argument is that they are giving away potash to the foreign corporations. 
That’s the substance of the argument. What the substance of the argument states is this, Mr. Speaker: 
that they are afraid of the people of Saskatchewan; they do not trust the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan to control their own economic destiny. That’s what it means. 
 
They know, they know very well that the basis of democracy, Mr. Speaker, is not only the question of 
procedures in the House, the fact that we are debating the closure motion. The fact of democracy is not 
only political democracy. We have known from the past history of Saskatchewan and in Canada that 
private control of schooling was only benefitting a few and the rich, that we had to move to buy public 
control of education. We now know, over a 100 years later, that that was the right way to go. 
 
Many of the Conservatives and the status quo people of the day 100 years ago opposed the public 
control of education. And the same type of people today will even move towards the privatization of 
education if we allow them. Because little by little, that privatization will also occur. 
 
No Conservative believed also in public control of health. They opposed it tooth and nail. And the fact 
that they opposed the prescription drug plan is an attack on medicare because the prescription drug plan 
was an important historical component of it. The dental plans, all of these things are in important part of 
our political democracy, but people recognize that democracy is not only educational democracy, it’s not 



only political democracy; that democracy has to come to the foundation of what life is all about, and that 
is in the economics. 
 
We also require economic democracy. And unless you have economic democracy and economic control, 
you will always have the foreign, outside control dealing and doing everything for you. You can never 
do things for yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, as we debate the closure motion, the question of democracy, as I mentioned 
is one where the economic basis, the mixed economy approach where we see the right of private 
corporations to work side by side with co-ops, to work side by side also with publicly controlled Crown 
corporations, as important part of Saskatchewan history. 
 
This is the type of debate that is being closed by the members opposite. They want to muzzle these 
statements because they don’t want to see the people not only control their institutions democratically, 
but to control the economic destiny of the future of their children. And that is the essence of this debate. 
 
We are looking at very important aspects of Saskatchewan history. And for us to be muzzled in a couple 
of days, for us to be silenced by the simple majority is just not right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I think it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that some of the other rationale are out front as 
we . . . the rationale and their impact is also an important part of the debate, as we deal with what closure 
is trying to hide. It’s trying to hide that privatization is costing us money. That’s what it’s trying to hide. 
It’s trying to hide the fact that big corporations, when they completely control everything, monopolize 
not only economic power, but political power as well. That indeed the wishes of the majority of ordinary 
people cannot be heard basically because the economic might of the large corporations and the large 
amounts of money that they give to the status-oriented people is a way of control. We don’t only have to 
look at the Exxons or the fact that they don’t even do anything about polluting our Canadian shores. 
They can go ahead and defy the law; they can defy the law any time because they are so big that none of 
the politicians dare go against them. 
 
The challenging aspect of this debate is one where we put the control in the hands of Saskatchewan 
people. What the Tories are scared of is they’re afraid that the people of Saskatchewan will run things 
better than the corporations. And of course the record shows very clearly, Mr. Speaker, in the potash 
debate, that when the NDP was running potash, when they were forced in the early ’70s to get into, to 
establish the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, that indeed in a few short years when the Liberals 
and their private enterprise ideology was only able to get $2 million a year from the big corporation — 
when that’s all they were able to get, was two measly million dollars a year — when the NDP took over 
and PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) came in, there was a total of $985 million taken from 
the corporations, including the public corporations, to the public purse in a five-year period. Close to 
$200 million a year came to the public purse. 
 
And when we talk about the fact we can’t build roads and we can’t have anything for seniors or for 
health, no wonder — basically because the Tory ideology and the Liberal ideology preceding it was one 
of giving in to the big corporations. 
 



Indeed when we look at the debate, when I examine the debates of the Liberal era and when I examine 
the fact that they were the ones who brought in prorationing, they were the ones who caved in to the 
U.S. potash industry . . . When they introduced those things and we challenged that aspect and weren’t 
going to go, the big corporations came running and said, we want prorationing. And when the NDP 
introduced prorationing along with an increase in royalty, they took the government to court. 
 
The big corporations didn’t even follow the law in the same way that the Tories don’t even follow the 
laws of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — They simply withheld 30 million and more and did not . . . They even took the 
Saskatchewan government to court. That is the controlling might of the corporations. In just a few short 
years, though, the competitive edge that was put in by the establishment of a public Crown corporation, 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, competing side by side with the American giants, they were 
able to stand toe-to-toe with them and have the best record of any potash company in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the Assembly to present an introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, we have a distinguished guest in the galleries this evening. Seated in your 
gallery is the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Barb Byers. 
 
As members of this Assembly will know, Ms. Byers is the democratically elected president of the 
federation of labour representing some 60,000 organized workers in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m 
pleased to see her taking an interest in the debate here this evening and I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to join in bidding a welcome to Ms. Byers. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Time Allocation (continued) 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in continuation of the debate on the closure motion, these are majority . . . 
This information that I presented in short summary form is the type of information that was going to the 
people of Saskatchewan in order to make their own decisions as to where they fit in on the debate. 
 
It was important, these particular substantive issues at each level, whether it was in the profit margins or 
the production margins, or whether it was in regards to employment that these were presented to the 
people. 
 



When I looked at the potash record and I looked at the close to $1 billion that the NDP made during the 
five-year period after the PCS was established, I compared that record to the PCs following the next five 
years. What did I find out? That they had sold approximately the same amount of production, 32 million 
tonnes a year; approximately the same amount of cost in regards to potash, $109 for NDP years, $106 
for the PC years. 
 
And when I examined the record in regards to return for the people of Saskatchewan, we saw that the 
PCs, in terms of royalties and taxes, had returned $274 million. When I looked at that historic record, we 
know that the PCs were in bed with the big companies, that indeed we had made $711 million more in 
the comparative five-year period at a time when the production rates were approximately the same and 
the price per tonne was approximately the same. 
 
It shows very clearly in the record that these are the issues that the Tories don’t want to debate When we 
look at the issue of employment, we know that, in PCS alone, we lost 1,000 jobs. The Tories say you 
never lose anything in privatization. Well the dental workers, 400 of them, know that they lost. The 
highway workers know what they lost. When we look at potash, 1,000 jobs have been lost. We keep 
hearing from the Tories, privatization creates jobs, and that’s one of the biggest myths and untruths of 
the government of the day, that indeed their attack on workers and their employment rights are a very 
basic aspect of this Tory government. 
 
And as we debate this motion to shut down this debate, that’s the type of information that they don’t 
want the people to know. Because when it comes down to the next election they’ll have all kinds of 
fancy ads paid by the big corporations that say, this has been the greatest diversification exercise in the 
history of Saskatchewan, and the greatest amounts of jobs were produced, and the facts remain that to 
this date 1,000 jobs have been lost. 
 
(2000) 
 
These and many others were the types of things that we were debating. When the Tories said they didn’t 
want long speeches, those were the types of information that we were providing. And the whole idea of 
all of this is pretty simple. When we look at the fact that we can debate a gambling tax on moral grounds 
or economic grounds or whatever grounds, we debate the gas tax and we debate all of these taxes, the 
only reason why it’s happening is because more money is being drained by the big corporations. They 
are simply not paying their fair share. 
 
We know that the oil companies, if they had paid the same as ’82, we would have an extra $2 billion in 
the kitty; that’s half of the deficit. In potash it would have been an extra billion dollars; that’s 
three-quarters of the deficit. In other words, the people of the province of Saskatchewan would not be 
paying $1 million a day in regards to interest payments to the banks and other financial institutions, 
basically because we know that they simply will not stand up to the big corporations. 
 
Yes, they stand up: they will beat up on the ordinary people of Saskatchewan; they will beat up on 
Indian and Metis people; they will beat up on workers; they will beat up on welfare people; they will 
beat up on the people who need it. They will act pretty tough when it comes down to the people in need. 
 
But they never act tough when it comes down to the corporations. They kneel down and beg and say, 
how much do you want? What, where, how much, what royalty do you want now? Last year they gave 
them . . . When they were making $700 million in uranium, they gave them an extra $7 million, just like 
that, in royalties. And they have been doing the same thing with all the major resource industries in this 
province. 



 
So when we debate closure and we look at potash in regards to closure, it’s a lot more to it than meets 
the eye. There’s many things to debate and a closure motion is not only something that muzzles an 
opposition individual member, it is also meant to crush any people’s opposition because the people want 
to know the facts. This becomes a way of hiding the facts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I debate this historic debate, I would again like to do . . . Before I get into a 
summary statement, I would like to say a few words in Cree to outline the basic aspects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, in summation, I would like to state that I am in total opposition to the introduction 
of the closure motion, or what we have called the super-closure motion; other members have called it 
time allocation motion, and others we have called it the guillotine. I prefer to call it the super-closure or 
the guillotine basically because, like the guillotine that cuts off the head of the people, it cuts off the 
people’s right to speak in the legislature. It cuts off the right of the member to speak in this legislature 
and it cuts off the voice of the people in the legislature, and that’s what it does. 
 
We are also very opposed to it because of the substantive nature of the debate. In many cases we have 
seen economic history of potash, we have social history of potash, we have seen the issue of profit 
margins, production margins, all of these things that are very important for knowledge building in a 
democracy. These types of things have been taken away. 
 
As I debate the motion, I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that the reason why the government is doing it is 
debated. Whether or not they are very desperate, it’s a sign of a desperate government. But other people 
just say, they are getting too arrogant. 
 
It’s a government who has been too long in power. They feel that they can do whatever they want to do 
at any whim and at any time. They feel they can do what they did to the prescription drug plan and 
dental plan, highways — name it, they can do anything. They will do things that they said they would 
never do; they said they would never, ever privatize SPC, and they proceeded to do so. They said they 
would never ever do the privatization utilities and they proceeded against their very word. 
 
And the words are very important n regards to debate. Their words cannot be taken for granted; that 
indeed their words are very hollow in regards not only to this debate on closure, but because they didn’t 
even have the courage to stand up and debate potash. They just sat there and whimpered away because 
they were scared to deal with the fact that the people out there are opposing them. 
 
The only time that they will stand up and where they have the absolute power and control is on the 
debate on closure. When they have the fact of the majority, the brute force of majority to be able to force 
a closure so that they can shut and muzzle every opposition member, they can shut and muzzle the 
people’s ideas of the province of Saskatchewan. That is a sign of hard-line government. It’s a sign of a 
government that is out of touch. It’s a sign of a government that’s on its way out. It’s a sign of a 
government that has just touch with the people. 
 



They are simply out here trying to hide the facts. They’re trying to hide the facts from the people, 
whether it is potash facts, whether it is GigaText facts. This has got to be the gigamess of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, we are debating this motion because we are standing up for the people’s 
future. We are standing up and saying, enough is enough; that the privatization mania must stop; that it 
is costing us too much money in regards to royalties and taxes; it’s costing us too much money in 
regards to livelihoods, in regards to jobs, in regards to everything. The fact that foreign control will be 
the basis of Saskatchewan history, rather than the people of Saskatchewan that we should be proud of, 
the Tories have no pride in the people of Saskatchewan. They are even ashamed of the people of 
Saskatchewan. When we control economic destiny, which is the basis of control, the Tories are ashamed 
of their own people and ashamed of their own institutions. 
 
And that’s the essence of the debate, the fact that the Tories do simply feel that the big corporations are 
the only ones, they’re the only ones to control and monopolize everything. 
 
And I must state that I am in total opposition with this closure motion and the attempt by the Tories to 
muzzle, not only the opposition members and their right to speak in this legislature, but also muzzling of 
the people of Saskatchewan in such an important decade in the history of Saskatchewan. And with that, I 
oppose the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to join in this debate, although I’m not as usually 
pleased as I would be in other circumstances. It’s necessary to rebut some of the arguments that the 
members of the opposition have made, but it’s unfortunate that it’s necessary to get into this debate at all 
because the members of this Assembly have had many months to debate the merits of potash ownership 
and the type of business that is best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’ve had many months, many days, and the members opposite have had many hours of opportunity to 
make their point, which they have done over and over again, I might say, Mr. Speaker, which they have 
done repeatedly. And it is unfair, Mr. Speaker, that they should ask for unlimited time to make the same 
points over and over again. 
 
It becomes apparent after a period of time, Mr. Speaker, that the chief aim of the members of the 
opposition is to absolutely, completely stop the sale of any shares or bonds in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Whether this is good or bad, they intend to stop that procedure. I submit to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is essential that this legislation be passed, enabling legislation, so that given the 
appropriate time and the appropriate opportunity, the Government of Saskatchewan can do what’s best 
in the potash industry, what’s best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, therefore, Mr. Speaker, you get to the fundamental principles as have been laid out today, the 
principles of do you elect a government to govern, or do you elect 64 members to make noise for four 
years and accomplish nothing. We have a duty, Mr. Speaker, to govern in a responsible manner. I have 
heard much, much discussion over the last few days about the rights of the opposition. 
 
But let us talk about the rights of the people. The people have a right to stable, solid government. The 
opposition has a right to oppose. They have a right to point out errors, if we have any. They have a right 
to indicate things could be done a different way. In this case they have expressed that right. 



Unfortunately, what they have told us here is that their way is the only way and that no other way should 
be tried. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard many arguments here. One of the big arguments I have heard is that the 
potash companies would not have paid taxes if the members opposite did not purchase or expropriate all 
of the potash industry, and the remaining companies have continued to pay taxes on royalties ever since 
they first started production in this province. They have paid whatever the law has provided. Yes, they 
have taken their legal right to contest that law and they lost. And that is democracy because democracy 
also includes the judicial system and people have a right to use it. 
 
But we have heard nothing but talk of rights of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we also have to consider 
responsibility. The government has a responsibility; the opposition has a responsibility, and the people 
have a responsibility. 
 
In this Assembly we need deal primarily with the responsibilities of the government and the 
responsibilities of the opposition. The government has a mandate to lead. The government has a 
mandate to innovate. The government has a mandate to do what we believe is best for the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people. The people then, whenever an election is called, have the right and the 
responsibility to decide whether this government or any other government has led properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not at this time yet have the necessary information to determine exactly whether the 
sale of shares in the potash corporation will be absolutely beneficial, partially beneficial, or, to believe 
the opposition, of no benefit whatsoever. 
 
What we have here is a Bill enabling legislation. What we have here is a debate that the opposition 
raises on philosophical grounds; that they believe only in one form of ownership — ownership by the 
Government of Saskatchewan — which, Mr. Speaker, is not necessarily the same as ownership by the 
people of Saskatchewan. This government is prepared to give the people of Saskatchewan a chance to 
participate in the ownership of this corporation. 
 
The question we have before us then is: can the opposition stall the government’s duty to govern for 
ever? Yes, I will concede that they have a right to oppose for a reasonable period of time. I submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that reasonable period of time has now expired, that they will have a continued period of time 
under this legislation, another four days which is a possible 40 hours of debate. In 40 hours you can say 
a great deal, Mr. Speaker. A great deal can be said in 40 hours, on top of the 80 hours that have already 
taken place in this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hours go on and on, and nothing new, no new points are made by the members 
opposite. We will have further points to make in this debate, but now is not the time, Mr. Speaker. 
Today we were discussing the principle of reasonable period of time for debate. And you can consult 
and confer with senators like Eugene Forsey who are knowledgeable, but who, Mr. Speaker, is an 
expert? Who is the ultimate authority in how a government should govern and how reasonable a 
government should be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people have that ultimate decision, but in the meantime, this government has the 
responsibility to govern. There are estimates to be passed here. There are Bills to be passed here. And 
the opposition says, well go ahead and do all that work; we will pass anything that we agree with, but we 
absolutely, flatly refuse to pass anything that we disagree with. 
 



Well the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are beginning to say, why do we have elections? If we 
don’t have elections to elect a government to lead, then why do we have elections in this province? It is 
certainly not to have the people govern who have been rejected, and the NDP can’t face the fact that in 
the last two elections their theories and their policies have been rejected. They now have the 
responsibility to accept that decision of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard long, long speeches from the members opposite, and I do not intend to fall into 
that same trap and set that type of an example. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it being reasonably late on a long 
weekend, I move that this debate now be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR CLOSURE 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give notice, pursuant to rule 31: 
 

That at the next sitting of the Assembly, immediately before the orders of the day is called for 
resuming debate on the motion moved by the member for Melfort for the allocation of time to 
the debate on Bill No. 20, an Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and any amendments or subamendments proposed thereto, I will move that the 
said debate be not further adjourned. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:27 p.m. 


