


















































May 9, 1989 Hansard Evening


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 9, 1989 
 
 

1037 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, prior to 5 o’clock being 
called, we had gone through a couple of questions that I had 
asked you with respect to consistency in the income tax form 
with respect to two issues: one about the child tax credit and 
another with respect to a Saskatchewan deduction for disabled 
dependants. 
 
In both cases you indicated to me that you didn’t feel that they 
needed to be consistent, or you didn’t necessarily need 
consistency between the federal form and the provincial form, 
but you also conceded in both cases that perhaps it’s something 
that should be done. And you said that for next year you’re 
going to include the child tax credit for 18-year-olds, and you 
indicated that you perhaps should take a look at the disabled 
dependant deduction for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
I want to take just a minute recapping the entire picture so that 
somebody who might just be reading this portion or listening at 
this might grasp the entire problem here, and then I’m going to 
ask you one more question about this child tax credit. 
 
When you take a look at the 1988 Tax Guide, which a lot of us 
have just finished being frustrated with this year, and you’re 
filling out your income tax form, if you happen to have an 
18-year-old, you will notice on page 3 that you can deduct an 
amount from the federal for any child born in 1970 or later, 
1970 or later. And there is a claim here, claim $388 for each of 
two children and $776 for each additional child, so you can 
deduct it from the federal income tax. 
 
And then when you look for the same parallel deduction in the 
Saskatchewan income tax, you turn to the Saskatchewan 
income tax form and you look at the child tax reduction. It says, 
claim $200 for each dependent child resident of Canada, and it 
says born in 1971 as opposed to 1970. So here we had an error 
that the government made, just a little glitch here, but the 
trouble with the glitch is it cost anybody that had an 18-year-old 
a sum of $200. The minister has admitted that yes, that it 
shouldn’t have been that way; that it would have been better, 
that it would have been consistent had it been 1970. 
 
The question that I have to you, Mr. Minister, is, having gone 
through that and having had it pointed out, why didn’t you not 
actually go through the process of contacting the federal 
government and asking them . . . I think it would merely . . . All 
it would require on your part would have been to ask them to 
adjust their computers, and I think you can still do it, ask them 
to adjust their computers, have people file an amendment to this 
and anybody with an 18-year-old would still have that $200 
reduction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In fact, the provincial tax credit comes after 
that so we do piggyback to that extent. Where the  

problem comes is not there, with respect, it comes with the low 
income tax credit. Okay? And that adjustment made by the 
federal government was made after their imposed deadline of 
July 1, and they didn’t allow any of the provinces to make 
changes after July 1. 
 
They made their changes, I believe, in the fall, of their system. 
I’m not sitting here arguing or defending the situation. I’m 
trying to explain how it operated. They made the changes after 
July 1. They didn’t allow any provinces to make adjustments in 
the tax forms prior to . . . after July 1, and so that’s the reason 
for the differential. And it’s the low income tax credit, I’m 
advised, not the child tax credit. So I’m simply advising you 
that the problem comes . . . The 17- to 18-year-old increase by 
the federal government comes on the low income tax credit. 
 
And then secondly, I’ve committed and said publicly that the 
legislation we’ll be bringing in this session will adjust the 
provincial age up to 18 as well. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well you mention that it’s the low income 
tax credit, low income tax bracket. In actual fact, it says here, 
“Saskatchewan tax reduction if net income exceeds $36,000.” I 
would suggest that that’s probably over half of the province of 
Saskatchewan’s taxpayers would have a tax which would 
probably . . . net income which would probably not be in excess 
of $36,000. Is that not true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But it doesn’t apply there. It only applies to 
low income. Now I understand the difficulties with the form, I 
mean, and the hon. member is certainly joining a cast of 
thousands that are having difficulty with the tax form. But it 
only applies, the problem only applies on the low income tax 
credit provision. So when you use that figure of 35,000, we 
piggyback on to the federal at that level, so it only applies in the 
low income tax credit. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well that, I guess, is something that perhaps 
can only be settled by taking it to my tax consultant, and I’d 
come back on that after, but I understand it to be 36,000. But 
let’s leave that alone for the time being. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you wish, I’m prepared to set out for 
your tax consultant or whatever the calculation as my officials 
have indicated, if that will be of assistance. 
 
I accept the argument on the conversion where the federal 
government raised the eligibility to 18 and we were at 17. So if 
we want to stay with that problem, which what I’m indicating is 
a low income tax credit, I agree with you that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Screwed up again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, we tried to make the adjustment. The 
federal government insisted that all provinces have any changes 
in by July 1. They made their change subsequent to that and 
didn’t allow any provinces. So I’m not disagreeing with you on 
the problem, and I have undertaken that the legislation coming 
in will make sure it doesn’t happen in the next tax year. But if 
you want the calculation, I’m prepared to send it over to you or 
submit  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1038 
 

it to you in writing so you can take it up with your tax 
consultant. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And you also mention in your previous 
statement that it was imposed by the federal government. Now 
could you advise me whether this applied to all provinces, 
please. Does it apply equally to all provincial governments? 
Were they all caught in this? Because I’ll tell you that the 
advice that I got from the Alberta tax department when I 
phoned them in Edmonton was that they didn’t have this 
particular problem. I didn’t pursue it any further, but could you 
explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, it was because it only applies, the 
problem only arises to those which have special low income tax 
credits and Alberta doesn’t have a similar program to ours. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And now could you give me an indication 
of just how much money is involved here. You disputed the 
figures that I had. I used figures from the Department of Health 
statistics that there could be up to 20,000 youngsters, I believe, 
involved in this and I . . . But you dispute them. Could you give 
me an accurate figure at this time as to how much money you 
expect to collect on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Because it’s a low income level it doesn’t 
apply to all children anyway; that our estimate is that it applies 
to between 1,500 and 2,000 families. So it doesn’t apply to all 
of them anyway. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Okay. So 1,500 to 2,000 families and that 
would be at $200 a piece. So if we took 2,000 families times 
200, that’s two with five zeros. That’s what — 400,000; 
400,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — About $250,000. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a 
few questions to the minister. Today the terms of reference 
were announced for the special committee which will deal with 
the SaskPower privatization and we’ve spent a number of 
weeks now dealing with this issue. 
 
During question period today I asked the Premier a number of 
times what would the cost be of that commission between now 
and October 1. I wonder if you would happen to have those 
numbers; given the fact that the money we’re allocating tonight, 
at least part of it, will be spent on the commissions, whether 
you can indicate the total amount of that expenditure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You know, as the Premier indicated, it will 
depend on the number of hearings, number of sittings, and the 
number of days spent by the commission. So that can’t be 
estimated. It may well be that the public, after seeing the 
commission operate, the number of hearings are at a minimal 
. . . We simply can’t estimate that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, you’re asking us to 
approve, on behalf of the taxpayers, an expenditure to go out 
and, as you say, review the Bill on privatizing SaskPower, 
which our members have, I think,  

appropriately called a whitewash. But surely to goodness you 
would have an estimate of the cost of this process which would 
include, I would imagine, per diems to the members on the 
board, staff to the board, rental of halls. Can you give us any 
indication, a rough estimation at this time, of what kind of 
money you’re going to be spending? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the amount of money will depend 
again on the number of hearings, locations. And we should give 
the commission time to both review the information and get 
started. They will have a pretty good estimate of the number of 
hearings that the commission determines are necessary. It will 
be in the hands of the commission. 
 
If the commission decides that it should hold a couple of 
hundred hearings around the province, then it would depend on 
locale, the rental of the hall, secretarial, the number of people 
that they feel are necessary. So it’s up to the commission to 
make those decisions. We don’t have an estimate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to go back one step there and 
maybe we can get things in perspective of cost per meeting. But 
when the minister of privatization was holding his similar 
hearings earlier on and was spending thousands of dollars in a 
similar process before the Bills were introduced, can you give 
us an estimation of what those meetings cost? And here I’m not 
asking about the millions spent on advertising; the back-up 
artillery where you’re using millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money to try to sell this flawed economic concept. 
 
But can you tell me what were the cost of the meetings that 
your colleague and desk mate spent in terms of trying to sell 
this concept at the public meetings in the past year. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don’t have that information with us. 
You can get that in the normal course of asking the minister 
during his estimates. That’s what they’re there for, and I’m sure 
he will, as he always is, be completely forthcoming with the 
information and give you all of the information that is 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, you say that you don’t 
know how much money was spent. I find that shocking for the 
Minister of Finance, and maybe it tells us why, back in the 
election year, we ran up a deficit that was more than $800 
million more than what you estimated, for a total of 1.2 billion. 
But I say to you, with this kind of an attitude by the Minister of 
Finance, that he doesn’t know what’s going on in terms of 
spending, that maybe that is why we have the deficit problem 
we have. 
 
But I want to go back to the Barber panel, the panel headed up 
by Lloyd Barber. I would very much like to know, Mr. Minister 
. . . Certainly you would know what the chairman of that panel 
would be paid in per diem. Now you may not know how many 
days he will collect on, but what is the per diem allowance that 
the government is paying Mr. Lloyd Barber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have that, but I’m prepared to 
undertake and get it for you. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1039 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — What staff would the committee have, the 
panel have? Do you know at this time and can you give us a 
rough estimate of cost for the panel in terms of how many 
people will be working; what time frame they will be hired 
over; whether it will be . . . the positions will be advertised to 
the Public Service Commission or whether they will be cabinet 
appointed. How will that process work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have that information, but it will be 
up to the commission to hire its staff. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well what’s the budget for the staff? I 
guess what I’m wondering is how many dollars are you, as 
Minister of Finance . . . I mean, surely to goodness you don’t 
make the public believe or try to make them believe that you’ve 
given a blank cheque to this commission. No government in the 
world would do that. Here you’re spending millions of dollars 
on privatizations that the polls show nobody wants; nobody 
wants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And you come here to this Assembly, and 
we ask you some very pertinent questions. Surely you’re one of 
the people who play an important role in cabinet. You sit right 
beside the Premier; you sit right beside the Premier. Surely to 
goodness you would know what kind of money you’re going to 
be spending. 
 
This is a very legitimate question when we’re talking about 
hundreds of millions of dollars being allocated today or 
tomorrow or whenever we complete this process. And you’ve 
got to be able to tell us where the money is going, otherwise the 
people of the province simply can’t have confidence in you as 
the Minister of Finance. I think you’re capable of doing that and 
I think you know those numbers. So I want to ask you again: 
how much is the budget for the staff and their expenses? Will 
they have vehicles at their disposal? Will they have cars? What 
kind of access to capital will they have? 
 
You, as Minister of Finance, will surely have some scrutiny and 
an upper limit on the amount of money that this group can 
spend. You’re hiring them. You’re the Minister of Finance. 
You’re hiring a group of people. And I’m not arguing — that’s 
your prerogative to do that. If mean, the public will judge 
whether it’s a good idea or not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And someone mentions that the public will pay. That’s obvious, 
but I say to you, we want to know before we pass this portion of 
the budget, how much it will cost to hire the staff that will be 
allowed for the commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated to you now on three or four 
different occasions that the commission will make those 
decisions. I don’t know if the commission has even had its first 
meeting yet to assess its logistical needs, the needs for its staff, 
the secretarial needs. I don’t think the commission has even 
decided that yet. And the commission — I have confidence in 
their good judgement — will use good judgement in terms of 
the expenditures. I think most people will accept that and expect 
that of the commissioners. 
 

So having said that, I expect them to be reasonable, and again, I 
can’t tell you what they’re going to spend. We don’t have a 
budget set for them. We expect them to be reasonable. I’m sure, 
as in the normal course, they will be coming forward with a 
proposed budget. We don’t have it yet. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well really what you’re telling the public 
of the province is you’ve given them a blank cheque. And I just 
say to you that we have a difficult time accepting that, when 
you’re trying to get the members of the opposition to accept a 
proposal that will spend hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
That’s what we’re talking about here tonight. Part of it will be 
what the public is calling a whitewash in terms of privatizing 
SaskPower. There’s no demand for the privatization of 
SaskPower. There’s no demand. And the member from 
Assiniboia obviously agrees with the privatization. He stood 
and voted — or maybe he wasn’t in the House; I don’t know. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He ducked. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well they say the member from 
Assiniboia ducked on the vote. He may be one of the few that 
gets re-elected. But the public record will clearly show that 
these members voted for the privatization of SaskPower. You 
can’t hide from it, nor can you hide the fact of what you’re 
going to be continuing to spend in terms of this panel’s 
expenses. 
 
I want to ask you now, Mr. Minister, because you refuse to 
answer that portion of the question: what is your plan, as 
government, for advertising privatization during the next six 
months? I want to know this because, here, I don’t think you 
can skate around it and say, well the panel will recommend the 
advertising, because I don’t think that’s what you’re saying. I 
don’t think you’re saying that Lloyd Barber will be deciding the 
TV advertising, the radio advertising. 
 
Can you tell us how much your government intends to spend on 
privatization ads over the next six months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have that information. I’m sure the 
hon. member could check with the appropriate Crown 
corporation if that’s the case with regard to their expenditures. 
And I’m . . . The hon. member has had enough experience to 
know the proper procedure in that regard. And secondly, the 
hon. member can ask the appropriate departments as to what 
their expenditures will be in estimates in the normal course, and 
I’m sure, as is the case historically, you’ll get full and complete 
information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can tell me 
if you think it’s fair to the public of the province, your last few 
statements and answers — that you don’t know; that you’re 
giving the committee, the panel, a blank cheque; that you don’t 
have any idea what your government is spending on 
advertising. I mean, we’re estimating that it’s going to be in the 
millions, and every time people see those ads on TV, they’re 
telling us . . . They’re touching their wallets in their pocket and 
they’re saying, it makes us very angry to know that we’re 
paying  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1040 
 

for those TV ads through our taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And it simply isn’t fair that a government 
would use the taxpayers’ money in this way when it’s been 
proven overwhelmingly by the petitions presented here in the 
House today, by the polls that have been conducted in this 
province on the issue of SaskEnergy, that all the millions you 
have already spent and wasted of taxpayers’ money on TV ads 
and radio ads, that you would continue on down the road paying 
off one, the company that you use to do up the ads, friends of 
the Conservative party that you will use in the next election 
campaign. 
 
That’s one thing the people are really concerned about, but, 
more importantly, the simple fact of you arrogantly telling the 
people of the province that they don’t know what to think on 
SaskPower, whether they want it privatized or not. They already 
know all the arguments. They know that SaskPower has done a 
great job in terms of distributing the gas in this province for 
many years, before you were even on the scene. And it’s 
insulting to them to know that you don’t accept their opinion, 
and more than that that you’ll take their tax dollars and spend it 
on TV, saying that the people of the province, in your words, by 
your action, are too ignorant to know what they think of 
SaskPower. I find that disgusting. 
 
And I say many of the back-benchers must agree with that. 
Many of them must talk to their supporters in their 
constituencies and know that. The member from Morse must 
realize that in many of his towns his own members are arguing 
against that fact. The polls indicate that 30 per cent of the 
Conservative supporters are not with you on this one. Those 30 
per cent do not like paying taxes to be convinced that 
privatizing SaskPower is a good idea. They already know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to say to the minister that 
others will probably get into this debate on whether or not this 
wasting of taxpayers’ money to the tune of millions of dollars at 
a time when we’re so broke, so broke that we borrowed billions 
of dollars on the international market at high interest rates to 
take care of your waste and mismanagement, that even today 
you’re not willing to admit your mistakes and continue on down 
that same path. 
 
I want to say in the area of debt, Mr. Chairman, the debt has 
gone up in this province by 8, 9, $10 billion since this minister 
has been part of the Devine government, of the Conservative 
government. Now I want to say to you that the Premier says that 
he is going to not be borrowing money like other premiers have 
in the past. 
 
Now he knows that the total debt in the province when he took 
over was about $3 billion. That was the debt of all the Finance 
ministers — Conservative, Liberal, CCF, NDP. The total debt 
was about $3 billion. And the Premier has said continuously 
he’s not going to go and borrow money on the world market. 
But the only thing is that he has borrowed 9 billion extra, 9 
billion more than  

the debt was when he took over. Where do you suppose he got 
the money from? Where did you borrow the money? Did you 
borrow it from the people of Saskatchewan? Well of course not. 
You borrowed it on the international market at very high 
interest rates, and this is why we’re in the trouble we are today, 
selling off the assets like SaskPower in order to stay ahead of 
the taxman in terms of the bond market and people trying to 
collect that money back, because you need to sell off your 
assets to pay them back for the money you borrowed and the 
bad decisions you made. 
 
This is yet one bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan, 
spending millions of dollars advertising privatization. It’s just 
an example of the waste and mismanagement, and now the 
incredible arrogance of a government that has spent itself into 
such a hole it has to sell off its assets, and still the arrogance 
that it would spend their money, the taxpayers money, 
advertising that fact. I find it hard to believe. 
 
Not only here. At the federal level too, Mr. Chairman, we see 
the federal government advertising how big the debt is. Can you 
imagine such stupidity and arrogance of Conservative 
governments. It’s driving people to distraction listening to the 
ads on the TV that they’re paying for about privatization; ads on 
the radio about the deficit that the federal government has built 
up; and wasting millions of taxpayers’ dollars on advertising 
problems that these Conservative governments have brought on 
themselves. 
 
And I say to you that the people are going to reject that concept 
when they see these ads on TV over and over and over again. 
And every time they see one of those ads, they call us; they tell 
their neighbours how ridiculous it is, that they don’t want to pay 
any more taxes. 
 
My colleague from Prince Albert just held up a tax form that 
shows all the new taxes that have been implemented by this 
government — not for new programs, not in order to take care 
of the elderly or hospitals, but for nonsense like advertising 
privatization of SaskPower. And I’ll tell you it’s going to be 
rejected. I mean, you can hide from this and not answer the 
questions — that’s your prerogative — but I’ll tell you it’s 
going to defeat you in the end because it’s deceitful, it’s 
arrogant, and it proves you’re out of touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if you’re so confident of that 
statement then I would think you would want us to advertise. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member that certainly we borrowed well 
over half a billion dollars through SaskPower and SaskTel from 
the people of this province, and nobody had to buy a SaskPower 
bond, and nobody in the province had to buy a SaskTel bond. 
And of the people that bought the SaskTel bonds, nearly 25,000 
of them had never bought a share or a bond through public 
participation before. So there are already nearly 80,000 
Saskatchewan people that have participated in SaskPower 
bonds, SaskTel bonds, either WESTBRIDGE privatization, the 
Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan. And I haven’t counted  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1041 
 

things like venture capital corporations. And I suggest to you 
that the public does want to participate. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now we can agree to disagree on the manner in which the 
government does it, but I suggest to the hon. member that if you 
believe in your heart, as you have just indicated, that the public 
does not want to participate, that the public does not want 
SaskPower bonds, SaskTel bonds, that they don’t want . . . that 
they want you to take over Weyerhaeuser again and make it 
government owned, or if they want to take back the computer 
corporation — if you think that’s the case, then obviously 
you’re entitled to your views. 
 
I agree with the hon. member that the public will decide — and 
quite appropriately. And they will decide on how they view, not 
only the issue; they will judge not only our position on the 
issue, they will judge your position on the issue. And that’s the 
way it should be. 
 
We have a difference of opinion. We have a different view as to 
how the province should develop. We have different visions as 
to the direction that the province should go. That’s the political 
process; that’s fair comment. But I think it’s healthy that there 
is that difference. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I want to remind 
you of what this process is all about. You’re here before this 
legislature, you’re asking for a sum of money. You have a 
responsibility that justifies it, and justifies your use of it. Mr. 
Minister, you have a responsibility to tell us what you’re going 
to do with the money. 
 
It’s easy to understand why the public are so angry with this 
government. Mr. Minister, you were critical of the member 
from Riversdale because of the events of the last two weeks. 
Let me just compare his process compared with the behaviour 
of the member from Estevan. 
 
The member from Riversdale said he didn’t like it; walked out. 
He travelled the streets, the highways, the byways of this 
province, talked to people by the thousands. They agreed with 
him and the consultation process didn’t cost him 10 cents. 
 
Contrasted to that, the member from Estevan stayed in his 
office, which for these purposes really serves as a fortress, 
stayed in his office, hasn’t personally met or talked to anyone. 
Instead he wants to do his communicating not the hard way, the 
way it was done by the members of this . . . He wants to do it 
the easy way with taxpayers’ money. 
 
It is easy to understand why the taxpayers are so angry with 
you. They have said over the last two weeks they don’t want it. 
You say, you just don’t understand it, and you’re going to spend 
their money telling them what they don’t understand. They 
understand it perfectly well, and they know that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’ll grant you that your 
administration has set a high-water mark when it comes  

to irresponsibility and incompetence. But surely even this 
administration has some sort of budget for something of this 
magnitude. This is no nickel-and-dime dog and pony show. You 
are going to be spending, at a minimum, millions on your effort 
to dig yourself out of this canyon that you’ve got yourself into 
with respect to privatization. There is, as was asked by the 
member from Elphinstone, the per diem allowance for the 
members of the commission; there is the staff; there is the 
consultants who will assist in trying to make a reasonable 
presentation out of this; but most important, there’s the 
advertising. 
 
I just don’t believe even with a government such as yours, 
whose name has become almost synonymous with 
incompetence and inefficiency, even you, Mr. Minister, I 
believe that you have an estimated figure as to what this is 
going to cost you. One of the ancient and basic rights of a 
legislature is to know what the money’s going to be spent for 
before it’s voted. You have a responsibility to tell us that which 
you know, and you can’t tell me that you don’t know how much 
you’re going to spend, and you can’t tell that to very many 
members of the public. So, Mr. Minister, you can obfuscate if 
you want, but you’re going to get lots of practice because you 
have a responsibility to tell us. 
 
Now I asked . . . And I’m going to start this process all over 
again, Mr. Minister. I’m going to ask you what the per diem is, 
and if you don’t know the per diem of the chairman, will you 
undertake to bring the information to this Assembly tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already indicated to the hon. member 
that I would undertake to get the information as to what the per 
diem is and supply it to the Assembly. Now maybe you weren’t 
paying attention; that’s not my fault. 
 
And I think that it’s not unfair for the commission to be able to 
get together, assess its needs, decide number of hearings, assess 
the logistical needs of the commission, and develop its own 
budget when it’s had the chance to do that. I think it’s not unfair 
for you to give them the time to do that. Do I have that 
information? No. 
 
You stand up and you make statements saying that the Premier, 
the member from Estevan, was in a fortress. If I recall, it was 
somewhere around 1,200 people at Prince Albert for the 
opening of the new paper mill at Prince Albert, Weyerhaeuser 
— a name now familiar to most people in the province — from 
a privatized P.A. pulp mill. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Oh no, we know you oppose it. The people in P.A. know 
you oppose it. Now the members from Prince Albert say, oh no, 
we don’t oppose the paper mill; we just oppose the deal. The 
fact is, they oppose the deal, they oppose the paper mill. They 
said it would never be built. You said it would never be built, if 
I recall, in the House more than once. You said it would never 
be built. 
 
So we can have our political debates on our difference on the 
privatization — fair enough. I don’t think it improper  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1042 
 

or unfair to give the commission time to assess its needs and 
assess its personnel needs, assess its logistical needs as to the 
number of meetings, number of halls it’s going to have to rent, 
travelling costs, etc. I think they should have the time to do that. 
I don’t think that’s unfair and, no, we don’t have that 
information until they do that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’re doing a magnificent 
job of convincing . . . of trying to convince people you don’t 
know the difference between actual expenditures and budget 
expenditures. But I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that you do 
know the difference. Not even you and the member from 
Estevan are that incompetent. 
 
Surely you know what we’re asking. We are not asking you for 
the actual money that was spent. Of course you don’t know; it 
hasn’t been spent yet. What we’re asking you for is not what 
did they actually spend but what you estimate they’re going to 
spend. And you must have it, Mr. Minister. Nobody can believe 
you’re that incompetent. The public of Saskatchewan which . . . 
The public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, which aren’t very 
generous when they estimate your competence, still aren’t 
going to believe that. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, will you . . . You’re surrounded by a 
number of people who look to me to be both competent and 
healthy. I expect that they’re healthy enough to walk out to the 
phone and competent enough to get the information. 
 
Will you, Mr. Minister, send one of your officials out to get the 
information for us because this is at the heart of what politics is 
about in Saskatchewan at the moment. Will you go and get it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated now, I think, seven times 
on this debate that I think it quite fair and proper for the 
commission that was appointed today, I believe, to have an 
opportunity to get together to assess their needs, to determine 
the personnel that they need, the expertise that they need, if any, 
the number of hearings that they want to hold so that the public 
will have a good opportunity to present their views to the 
commission; and when they’ve had that opportunity to get 
together and make their assessment, to then determine a budget. 
I don’t think that that’s unfair to give them the chance to do 
that. Do we have that information? No, and I’ve indicated that 
now, I think, on seven times. 
 
So either I’m not being very clear when I say that the 
commission should have the opportunity to get together — they 
were appointed today — to determine how many hearings they 
think it appropriate so that the public has every opportunity, 
every convenient opportunity, to meet with the commission and 
to give their views on SaskEnergy. And the only assurance I 
can give the hon. member is that the committee will be 
unfettered in its ability to go out and listen to the people of this 
province, and there will be no constraints by the government on 
the number of meetings that it wants to hold, whether the 
adequacy of the personnel . . . All of those things are within the 
mandate of the committee. 
 

And the committee was appointed today. When the committee 
has had time to sit down, I would expect, as any other 
commission or committee does, they will draw up a draft 
budget and we will respond to it at that time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I do believe one thing 
you said. One thing you said is that they’ll be unfettered. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s understand that the function of this 
committee is to sell privatization on your behalf, and you have 
no difficulty convincing me that money will be no object when 
that commission sets out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The taxpayers want to know that there will 
be some limits on your irresponsibility. Mr. Minister, 
everything in the hands of this government balloons out of sight 
in terms of its cost. And I grew up on a farm, and we used to get 
whitewash. We used it because it was cheap, but apparently a 
pail of whitewash in your hands becomes a very expensive 
item. We want to know what a pail of whitewash costs these 
days when you people purchase it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said you’d give us the per diem. Will you 
bring that . . . If these people are apparently not able, for 
whatever reason, to leave the Assembly and get it for us, will 
you undertake to bring that back tomorrow? I say tomorrow, 
Mr. Minister. Will you undertake to bring that information back 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well what I will do is indicate to the 
appropriate minister, responsible for the commission, that I 
have undertaken to supply that information. I don’t have any 
difficulty with the information being obtained and forthcoming. 
 
As to the per diem costs of the commissioners, I’ve indicated I 
will tell the appropriate minister that I’ve made that 
commitment to the House, give them that opportunity to bring 
that information forward to the committee. I have indicated on 
the other side that the total cost, the estimated cost, we do not 
have that, but the per diem, I don’t see any difficulty with that. I 
will ask the appropriate minister to bring it forward as soon as 
possible, and that I have made the commitment to this 
Assembly that that information will be brought forward. I think 
the hon. member recognizes that that’s the best that I can do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, the appropriate 
minister just waddled in and waddled out again. But that 
particular minister isn’t asking this Assembly for any money; 
you are. It’s therefore your responsibility to provide the 
information. 
 
Mr. Minister, whatever the per diem is, however exorbitant it 
may be in terms of an individual, it pales in comparison with 
the cost of the advertising. And I do want to spend some time 
on the advertising. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe for a moment you don’t know 
what the advertising is going to cost you, because I saw  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1043 
 

them in here last week doing the ads — preparing some of the 
ads and getting background footage for it. I saw the Toronto 
airport stickers on the side of camera . . . of cases which are 
designed to carry cameras, and I think it’s a fair assumption 
therefore, Mr. Minister, that the ad agencies were in here 
getting some background footage last week. 
 
If they indeed are in here preparing the ads, Mr. Minister, then 
you must know what the advertisements are going to cost you. 
You simply can’t convince me or anyone else that you don’t 
know what that advertising budget is. I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
to tell us what the advertising budget is. 
 
We’ll tell you what it cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for 
our activities over the last two weeks. Zero. Now we want you 
tell us, we want you to tell the taxpayer what it cost the 
taxpayers for your activities over the next couple of weeks or 
couple of months. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, having failed to convince the public in a 
direct discussion of the matter with the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley, have then turned and said, well if he can’t do it 
we’ll spend taxpayers’ money on advertising — trying to sell 
them something which they decisively said they don’t want. 
Your arrogance, Mr. Minister, just knows no limits. After 
having been told they don’t want it, you’re going to spend their 
money convincing them that they don’t know what they’re 
talking about. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, you must at least give us the cost of the 
advertising. You’d know it and you have a responsibility to give 
it to us. You say you don’t know how many meetings there’s 
going to be. I say that’s absolute nonsense! 
 
(1945) 
 
I see they’re counting heads again. I wonder if the member from 
Wascana has learned to count to 15. If he hasn’t, we’ll give him 
some help, Mr. Chairman, if he can’t count to 15. 
 
Mr. Minister, sorry to have been distracted by the member from 
Wascana’s lessons in arithmetic, trying to teach himself to learn 
to count to 15. Mr. Minister, I want to know what that 
advertising is going to cost us. The taxpayers want to know. It’s 
an outrage that you’re using the money in the way you are. The 
least you have the responsibility to do is tell them how much 
money you’re spending. Give it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, again, I’ve said it now four times this 
evening that you would get that information from the 
appropriate Crown corporation in the usual manner, Crown 
Corporations Committee, or you can ask it in the usual position 
in the estimates. 
 
I think the hon. member will want to correct the record when he 
says that he didn’t pay anything for advertising, his party didn’t 
pay anything for advertising over the last couple of weeks . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come on, don’t put words in his  

mouth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, he said it didn’t cost them anything . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, he said it didn’t cost him 
anything is precisely what he said; that’s precisely what he said 
— it didn’t cost him anything. Maybe he wants to indicate the 
source of the funds. 
 
And I’m just saying to the hon. member that we have indicated 
to you now on four occasions that that information from the 
various Crown corporations we don’t have and that there is a 
procedure for obtaining that. 
 
Just to indicate, so that the hon. member knows there is a 
procedure, I believe that the public accounts were tabled in this 
Assembly. The opposition member from Regina Victoria made 
some calculation as to the advertising, so it was there for public 
discussion and public comment by the opposition. So having 
said all of that, I don’t think we can get away from the very fact 
that the government has its policies that it will be taking to the 
people and is taking to the people. 
 
To say that 87,000 people have bought SaskPower bonds; that 
32,700 have bought SaskTel bonds; that over 2,000 bought 
Saskoil bonds — now certainly those are total numbers and that 
people have bought more than one. But when we look at all of 
the individuals involved, we’re getting nearly 80,000 people in 
this province have chosen to participate. I don’t think they’re all 
wrong; I think that they’re right. And certainly we’ve promoted 
it. 
 
You were critical of the SaskTel ads. You didn’t like the ads on 
the SaskTel bonds. You said it was an abject failure and a total 
failure — $106 million, nearly 33,000 people. Nearly 25,000 of 
those had not bought a bond or a share before in the public 
participation initiatives. So yes, we did promote that, and yes, 
we did advertise that. And many people that are prepared to 
spend $106 million investing and lending money to SaskTel, I 
happen to think it’s good. You disagree with it — fair comment. 
 
That the number of people in this province over years have 
invested nearly 700 million — now that I’ve been given the 
update — $700 million by Saskatchewan people in SaskPower. 
And yes, they borrowed from the people of this province. And 
yes, the interest is coming back to the people of this province. 
And you say it’s an expensive way of borrowing money. We 
don’t agree with that. We have a difference of opinion. 
 
And yes, we did advertise the SaskPower bonds and the 
SaskTel bonds and the Saskoil initiatives, and we think it 
appropriate. And we think it fair that the people be given the 
opportunity to participate, and the people be given the 
opportunity to make a contribution to the economic 
development of this province. And we will continue on that. We 
have a difference of opinion. You say we shouldn’t do it; we 
say we should; and ultimately the people will decide. But I’ve 
said on a couple of occasions tonight, we do have a difference 
of opinion. And we want to encourage people, and we will 
advertise to encourage people to participate. We will advertise 
to encourage as many people in this province to make a 
contribution to the economic development of this province. We 
believe it’s right; you disagree. That’s your choice; that’s our  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1044 
 

choice. And ultimately the people will decide, but we think that 
the people do want to participate and, again, they will decide. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I know that you would dearly 
like to sidetrack the issue into the question of SaskTel bonds. 
It’s not what we’re talking about. I may say with respect to 
SaskTel bonds and SaskPower bonds, provided they’re fairly 
priced, and provided you don’t waste vast sums of money 
advertising something that should sell itself, we have no 
objection in principle to the concept of those sort of bonds. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get back, though, to the question of . . . I 
want to get back to the question of the advertising budget. You 
asked, Mr. Minister, will you disclose where your money came 
from? I’ll tell you I’m darn proud to tell you that our money 
came from the 70 per cent of Saskatchewan people who 
supported it. They voluntarily gave their money because they 
didn’t want to see this thing go ahead. I’m darn proud of the 
fact that that’s where our money comes from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, how much money 
you think you’d get from the Saskatchewan public if they had to 
finance your advertising program voluntarily. If you permitted 
people to say . . . if you permitted people to say, now your taxes 
are due and owing; you’ve got to pay them, except the 
advertising portion of it — if you don’t agree with that you 
don’t have to pay it. I wonder how much you’d get. You’ll get 
nothing at all. 
 
Our money was obtained from people who voluntarily 
contributed because they believe that you’re making a mistake. 
They made up 70 per cent of the Saskatchewan public. I’m 
proud about those facts. I’m a lot less proud, Mr. Minister, of 
your behaviour in this Assembly. You have a responsibility to 
this Assembly to account for your actions, to account for the 
money you’re spending. And you’re clearly standing here 
stonewalling and obfuscating, and it is not good enough. 
 
Now I want to know, Mr. Minister, what you’re spending on 
advertising. The public have the right to know. 
 
Mr. Minister you said . . . I don’t believe it for a moment, but 
you said you’re not ashamed of the fact that you’re spending 
taxpayers’ dollars on advertising. I don’t believe that, but let’s 
assume for the purpose of this argument it’s true. If you’re not 
ashamed of it, you shouldn’t be ashamed of the figure either. So 
if you’re not ashamed to be using taxpayers’ dollars to sell 
something they’ve said decisively that they don’t want, after a 
very thorough discussion, then you shouldn’t be ashamed to tell 
us how much money you’re not ashamed of. So would you give 
us the figure that you’re not ashamed of, because we want to 
know how much money you’re not ashamed of spending on this 
principle that you’re not ashamed of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated to the hon. member on 
numerous occasions this evening — and I think we’re up to 
what, six? — you can get that information in the normal course, 
and that it is made public at the end of the  

fiscal year, as was recently evidenced by the public accounts. 
 
And for those watching tonight, the NDP did have the 
information; were highly critical of the government for its 
expenditures. So the information is public. But let me tell you 
how much we did raise. 
 
And you ask where the money is coming from: $15 million 
came from the people of this province to Saskoil; $700.6 
million came from the people of this province to SaskPower; 
$106 million from the people of this province to SaskTel. 
 
The amount raised in Saskoil in an equity issue in the province 
is $145.5 million. The amount raised from the people of this 
province for the WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, $13.5 
million. The amount raised for convertible Power bonds was 
$125 million. Do you want to know what that totals? That totals 
over $1 billion — $1 billion . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — One billion and six million dollars — over 
$1,000 for every man, woman, and child, the equivalent, given 
by the people of this province; loaned by the people of this 
province to Saskoil, SaskPower, SaskTel, and WESTBRIDGE. 
Over a billion dollars. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that there’s no one in this Assembly 
would have thought four or five years ago that the people of this 
province were prepared to put up over a billion dollars to 
participate and invest in their own Crown corporations in the 
privatized activities, and in the economic development of this 
province. A billion dollars. 
 
I mean, we should all take some pride in the fact that the people 
of this province were prepared to put up that kind of money. 
And there is a message in all of that, and I think it’s one that 
certainly we have taken to heart. And we believe — and we do 
have a difference of opinion — that people do want to 
participate. 
 
And the hon. member says that now they’re in favour of the 
SaskTel bonds and the SaskPower bonds. The public knows 
that they didn’t favour those when they were announced; that 
the public knows that they voted against them; that the public 
knows they rang the bells and thought that this was a poor way 
to raise money. So you can say now you’re in favour. 
 
And you sat here and you criticized us as a credibility problem. 
People don’t believe that you would have bonds. People don’t 
believe that you would give them a chance to participate in the 
economic development of this province. So that’s the total to 
date. And I believe, I believe that when they’ve got more 
opportunities and more vehicles . . . And I haven’t included . . . 
Understand that I haven’t included, in over that billion dollars 
already, I haven’t included Saskatchewan people’s participation 
in venture capital — okay? — in the venture capital 
corporations’ building projects around this province, average 
people putting up money for an investment. And I haven’t 
talked about some of the other  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1045 
 

activities like Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan, of people 
participating, Saskatchewan people. 
 
So we’re well over a billion dollars. We’re probably close to a 
billion and a quarter; $1.250 billion from a population of a 
million people investing in their own province. I don’t think 
there’s anyone in this province that would ever have thought 
four years back that the people were prepared to do that. But 
they are. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, the central question posed 
by the minister’s thesis is, who believes in whom in 
Saskatchewan? And I think the minister doesn’t understand the 
most recent polls about who believes in whom in 
Saskatchewan. We definitely know who the people do not 
believe in. 
 
And I spent some time, Mr. Minister, out in Saskatchewan, in 
urban and rural Saskatchewan, talking to people over the last 
couple of weeks. And you would be surprised, Mr. Minister, 
how many people said to me, I just cannot believe the 
avalanche of advertising that’s being dumped on us by 
Participation — Public Participation, and SaskEnergy — just 
millions of dollars of advertising. 
 
The people out there, Mr. Minister, are concerned about the 
millions of dollars you’re wasting on advertising in 
Saskatchewan, at the same time you’re telling the hard-pressed 
Saskatchewan taxpayers that, you’ve got to pay more taxes; 
you’ve got to pay more taxes because I’ve got to spend more 
money. That’s what the Minister of Finance is saying and the 
people out there are concerned about it. 
 
Are they justified in their concern? Well I think they most 
certainly are. And I’ll give the member for Saltcoats a chance to 
get up later. Just about anybody can get into this debate, and 
I’m sure he’ll want to get his two cents’ worth in. And if it will 
help to reduce the deficit of this province that this minister’s run 
up, I’d sit down right away and let you up. 
 
(2000) 
 
Information that came in the Assembly earlier this year in 
returns no. 204, no. 13, no. 203, and no. 12 shows the amount 
of advertising this government spent in a four-year period, 
ending in 1988 — in advertising, the amount of money they 
gave to two advertising firms in Saskatchewan to do advertising 
for them — they gave these two advertising firms, for 
SaskPower, SaskPower alone, $3.3 million in four years, 3.3 
million in four years. 
 
They gave SGI $5.1 million in four years, and they gave 
SaskTel $6.1 million in four years. This doesn’t include the 
extravaganza such as TeleBonds advertising, which I suspect is 
in the 2.5 to $3 million bracket of advertising. It’s not even in 
these figures because it started after this point. 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Chairman, whether this minister is serious 
about curbing the expenditures of his government, but I’ll take 
him at his word for the moment, because he was speaking to the 
Investment Dealers Association of Canada, and it’s reported in 
the  

Leader-Post on May 4, this year. And at the investment dealers 
he is quoted as saying: 
 

And the one mistake the government has made was we 
didn’t consult adequately with Saskatchewan people. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, you admitted that you didn’t consult 
adequately with Saskatchewan people, and you spent millions 
of dollars consulting inadequately with Saskatchewan people. 
The question I want to put to you, Mr. Minister, is this. Here’s a 
way you can save the Saskatchewan taxpayers a bundle of 
money — save them a bundle of money. Will you agree, Mr. 
Minister, right here and now, to suspend all advertisement about 
SaskEnergy privatization, or about privatization generally, on 
radio, newspaper, TV, billboards, literature, until such times as 
your panel reports on this very important issue? 
 
Now I suspect that you’re going to spend a lot of money 
advertising SaskEnergy in the interim, while we’re waiting for 
the report of that panel of yours, that special panel of yours. 
 
What will be the purpose of the advertising? Well I suspect that 
it’ll be one of two purposes. One, it will try to reverse the 
position that the people of Saskatchewan have taken. They’ve 
taken the principled position that you should not sell 
SaskEnergy which is part of SaskPower Corporation. You will 
try to reverse that. And you will try to aid and assist your pet 
commission, or panel, or whatever you want to call it, with 
advertising that will be supportive of the idea of privatization, 
when already the people have told you adequately by petitions, 
by polls, any way you measure it, that they don’t want your 
privatization of SaskEnergy. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, will you give us your word, here and now, 
that you will suspend all advertising for SaskEnergy, except 
that related to public safety — public safety or applications for 
jobs, that’s fine — but all other advertising for SaskEnergy and 
all advertising on public participation for the duration of the 
time that your panel is sitting. I want to hear your answer to 
that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The government believes, and you 
disagree, that public participation is the right thing to do. The 
government believes most strongly that the more Saskatchewan 
people we can get to participate in their own economy, the 
stronger the Saskatchewan economy will be. The government 
believes that the more vehicles and more opportunities that the 
people have to invest in their own province, the stronger 
Saskatchewan will be. And I suggest to the hon. member that if 
we had not have advertised SaskPower bonds, many people 
wouldn’t have been aware of them. I believe that if we had not 
advertised the SaskTel bonds, many people would not have 
been aware of them. So there is a legitimate need for 
advertising. 
 
You can take your position against the advertising, and you can 
use the polls as your argument. And if I recall a Gallup poll in 
1976, some seven months after you nationalized the potash 
industry, 52 per cent of the people — and this was after six 
months of your  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1046 
 

advertising a family of Crown corporations — 52 per cent were 
still opposed to you taking over the potash industry. And only 
— what, 30 per cent? — less than 30 per cent were in favour. 
That was six months after the fact. 
 
So you can take your polls for what they’re worth today. And 
you and I both know the ultimate one. So I suggest to the hon. 
member that we do — and I’ve said it before — we have a 
difference of opinion. Your party does not support the public 
participation; our government believes it’s the right thing to do. 
You have your strongly held views, and we have a fundamental 
difference of opinion as to how the Saskatchewan economy 
should develop and who should be players. We have our 
disagreement on that. 
 
Again, as I’ve said before, that’s what parliament is all about, is 
to have that type of disagreement. The public gets their 
opportunity to vote on that. And I think we both have accepted 
over the years the public ultimate decision, and we will again. 
Again we have a fundamental difference as to how things 
should unfold. We want to encourage the public to participate. 
 
And I think if you wanted to take a poll in Prince Albert right 
now whether the government should take over Weyerhaeuser 
and return it to government ownership, the vast majority of 
people in Prince Albert would say no, that they like it the way it 
is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. member from 
Saskatoon at the back says not so sure. I await to hear her views 
as to whether the government, an NDP government, would take 
back over Weyerhaeuser. 
 
So having said that, certainly the government recognizes that 
public participation is new; it is complex; it’s difficult. But the 
people of this province, the people of this province have not 
had, for nearly 40 years, a broad-based opportunity to 
participate. And they participated in the last four years to well 
over a billion dollars of their own money back into the 
Saskatchewan economy. We believe — you disagree — we 
believe most strongly that the people should have that 
opportunity. You disagree. We’re going to carry our message 
and, again, the public will decide. But the public should have 
the opportunity to take advantage of the vehicles and the 
institutions this government is creating so that all of the people 
in this province will have an opportunity to make a contribution 
to further economic development. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well what the minister has said is that he 
ignores the facts that I’ve put before him that his government, 
in four-year period ending in 1988, spent $46.6 million of 
advertising with two advertising firms in Regina, both very 
good friends of the Conservative party, Mr. Chairman. The 
minister ignores that. He says, so that’s the way we do business; 
we do a lot of advertising. 
 
Well there’s been references made earlier today about the 
federal government spending millions of dollars telling us that 
they’re in financial trouble in Ottawa. My God, everyone in 
Canada knows that except the Tories in Ottawa and the Tories 
in Regina. They don’t need to spend millions of dollars 
advertising, running a big coin across the television screen to 
tell you that they’re in trouble. It’s easy; everybody understands 
that. They  

understood it long before those ads came on. 
 
Now what the minister has said is that yes, we made some 
mistakes, we didn’t handle this situation right, and we spent a 
lot of money doing it. But we’re going to go on, continue to 
advertise. We’re going to continue to advertise all the time this 
pet commission of ours is sitting — this commission which is 
predominated by people who will give them the kind of report 
they want. 
 
The minister has avoided answering the question. I want to 
know how much money would be saved, and will the minister 
save it by saying that he will not advertise during the period that 
that commission is out, before it brings in its report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve indicated that the advertising for 
SaskEnergy, that the questions would be appropriately 
addressed to the minister responsible for SaskEnergy, the 
Crown corporation, and the hon. member . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, that’s not right. And the hon. member 
knows full well that there is a procedure through the Crown 
Corporations Committee to ask that information. 
 
And the hon. member from Saskatoon says that’s not the case. I 
think that the hon. member who has just asked the question has 
had a great deal more experience of the other member from 
Saskatoon and knows how the system operates and how the 
House procedures operate, so that that information can be asked 
of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
I’ve indicated that the costs of the commission, that I think it 
fair, and I think, whether one agrees or disagrees with the 
commission on SaskEnergy, that they should have the time to 
meet and draw up their plans and see what their needs are and a 
chance to draw up a budget, and I’m prepared to give them that 
chance. 
 
So I do find it difficult to accept, on the one hand, the criticism 
that we shouldn’t advertise the SaskTel bonds or the SaskPower 
bonds, the Saskoil bonds, the WESTBRIDGE equity issue, the 
Saskoil equity issue, the convertible Power bonds, which the 
hon. member will admit were opposed, and quite aggressively, 
by the New Democratic Party, to now say that well, we don’t 
mind the bonds, but you shouldn’t advertise them. I think that is 
a little unwise, to say the least. 
 
And the fact that the people of this province have chosen, 
voluntarily, to put a billion, over a billion dollars of their own 
money into the economy of Saskatchewan, and when we 
eliminate the people that have invested in more than one bond 
or equity issue, that we’re in the range of 80 to 85,000 people, 
not counting venture capital, not counting Saskatchewan Stock 
Savings Plan. I believe that the government does have an 
obligation to make sure that everybody in the province has the 
opportunity to participate. And we have to get the message out 
to them so that they do have that opportunity, that they are in 
fact aware of it. 
 
And you were critical of the SaskTel bonds, but it’s interesting 
about the SaskTel bonds because 25,000 people, of the people 
that bought SaskTel bonds, hadn’t bought a Saskoil bond or a 
SaskPower bond or a  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1047 
 

WESTBRIDGE issue or a convertible Power bonds before. 
These are new people, Saskatchewan people, that are putting up 
their money, loaning money to SaskTel. Not only does the 
interest stay back here with Saskatchewan people, they’re 
investing in their own province. 
 
(2015) 
 
And you say it’s too expensive and we shouldn’t do it. I agree 
that it’s more costly, at least in the first issue, to set up the 
system to get Saskatchewan people involved, but those costs 
drop each time you do a bond and people become more and 
more aware of them. The fundamental difference we have . . . 
and we can agree to disagree that this government believes that 
the right thing to do is to get as many Saskatchewan people, 
individuals, investing back in their own province to add to the 
growth of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
We believe that it’s the right thing to do. You say it’s too 
expensive and that we shouldn’t advertise to give them that 
opportunity. That’s your choice, that’s your position. As I said 
earlier to the hon. member, people are going to judge us at the 
next election; they will judge you at the next election; they will 
judge all politicians. It’s not just a one-way street and we all 
know that. And they will make their choice. 
 
But in the meantime, we are going to try to get as many 
Saskatchewan people investing in their own province and 
contributing to their own province’s economic development. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I listened earlier this 
evening to your convoluted logic, and it was this: that if we’re 
upset about the amount of money that’s been spent advertising 
and it’s harming you, then we shouldn’t worry about spending 
more money because that would seal your demise. Well that’s 
not the question under consideration here. The question is 
interim supply and your wanting to spend some more of 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
We know at this point that you spent enough money in 
advertising and you’ve been arrogant enough to alienate a good 
percentage of the taxpayers that were your friends before and 
are not going to support you again. So we don’t want you to 
waste any more taxpayers’ money between now and whenever 
you call the election because you’ve done the job already. From 
now on, any money we can save on advertising is money in the 
taxpayer’s pocket, and that’s what we want to do. 
 
You’ve betrayed the people on this Crown corporation, on the 
privatization of this Crown corporation. They’re hopping mad 
about your advertising costs, and they’re upset about your 
arrogance in dealing with the whole thing. The reason I’m 
appealing to you, Mr. Minister, you appear to be the only one in 
that front bench of people with minds like concrete — all stirred 
up and set, really mixed up. You’re the only one that’s made an 
admission of some kind that yes, you’ve made a mistake. 
 
I’m appealing to you, Mr. Minister, because maybe you’re the 
only one on that front bench that I can get through to, because I 
know I can’t get through to the Souris-Cannington dreadnought. 
He’s not going to listen  

to anything. He’s got George Hill behind him and he doesn’t 
have to listen to anybody else, because George Hill’s running 
the show. It’s as simple as that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to know how many provincial bond 
issues are you going to market to Saskatchewan people between 
now and October? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I don’t have that information, but 
certainly the process . . . I can’t tell you whether SaskPower’s 
going to do another bond issue, for example. They’ve 
traditionally done one in June. I can’t tell you whether a 
decision’s been made to go with another one. We’ve got the 
ongoing debate before this Assembly as to potash, for example, 
as an equity issue. 
 
You can rest assured that the initiatives will be taken to make 
sure that in all cases of such actions that everyone in the 
province will have a chance to participate. They will have a 
chance to make the contribution. And again, we can debate this 
for some time. We have two fundamental differences. We think 
it’s the right thing to get people involved. We think it’s the right 
thing so that Saskatchewan people can both make a contribution 
and an investment in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And they’ve chosen to do it. They’ve chosen to do it to the tune, 
if I took the total number of participants of about 134,000 . . . 
and I recognize that many of those people have bought more 
than one either bond or share, or convertible bonds, or 
whatever. But the fact that, as I say, 85,000 people have chosen 
to both participate and make a contribution is not something 
that should be sneezed at and not something taken lightly. 
 
And we have to, and we believe that what we’re doing is the 
right thing for the province. We believe that the more 
information that Saskatchewan people have as to their 
opportunities to invest in their own province, the better 
Saskatchewan is. And we’ll give them that opportunity. I think 
the worst thing that could happen is to do an issue or to do a 
bond and have somebody in this province stand up and say, I 
didn’t get a chance, you didn’t tell me about it. You’re far better 
off to have people say, well I had my chance, I chose not to take 
it, or I chose to take it. 
 
But we’re giving them the opportunity. You disagree with us 
giving them that opportunity; that’s your position. We happen 
to think our position’s the right one. You think that yours, of 
not having that, of using other instruments and not having the 
people do it personally, that’s your choice. And that’s what the 
debate, and I think we all recognize that, that’s what the debate 
will be both up to and during the next election. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, you spent $46 
million in four years on advertising, a lot of it on privatization. 
The minister seems to say to us that look, we may want to float 
a bond issue. Well I say to the minister: if you have any strictly 
bond issues to float, that’s fine. I don’t have a problem with 
bond issues. What I have a problem with is your privatization 
and your sale of equity in SaskPower, SaskEnergy, while this 
commission is having its hearings. 
 
Mr. Minister, if we leave out the bond issues, if you come  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1048 
 

with a straight bond issue, fine, I don’t have any problem with 
you advertising it. But any other advertising relating to 
SaskEnergy or privatization, which is related to equity, will 
you, Mr. Minister, cease to have those ads run? You’ll save 
yourself millions of dollars and you won’t embarrass yourselves 
any more than you are now, which is pretty serious. You’ll stop 
embarrassing yourselves publicly, and you’ll save the taxpayers 
a lot of money, and in the long run they’ll thank you for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think that’s a proposition that you could 
accept. If there’s a straight bond issue that you want to market, 
no problem. But if you’re talking about equity in SaskEnergy or 
privatization generally, then I ask you to cease your advertising, 
cease this wild waste of taxpayers’ dollars on privatization that 
you’ve already spent millions on, at least until this pet 
commission of yours reports back to the government. I ask you 
in conclusion, Mr. Minister, will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m a little surprised at the hon. member’s 
statement because several members of the New Democratic 
Party were very, very critical of the SaskTel advertising 
program — some publicly. And I know that the press and others 
are very much aware of the criticism. And some were very, very 
critical of the SaskPower bond advertising. And now to say that 
it’s all right, I think is perhaps a see change in attitude from the 
opposition. 
 
Maybe they are increasingly coming around to the public’s 
view that having to public participate in Saskatchewan as 
individuals is a good thing to do. I’m perhaps being overly 
optimistic when I say that. But I have indicated to the hon. 
member that the appropriate question for a Crown corporation 
as to what its plans are, the Crown Corporations Committee or 
to the appropriate minister, and the expenditures of the Crown 
in their operations has not been the purview of the Committee 
of Finance for interim supply before, and that there is an 
appropriate procedure to express your concerns, opposition, or 
support to what SaskEnergy is going to do. 
 
And I’m not interpreting what the hon. member says as 
meaning that the commission shouldn’t advertise meetings. And 
perhaps for personnel, whatever they’re going to do, I think that 
that would be a fair amount of advertising that you would 
accept. And you’ve already indicated that public safety, 
SaskEnergy would be acceptable, and I’m sure we can agree on 
other activities that would be acceptable. But the appropriate 
procedure and the appropriate process to ask under Crown 
corporations is in the normal procedure of either Crown 
Corporations Committee or the minister. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — We finished with the SaskTel Bond 
advertising, but could you give me the number exactly, how 
much did it cost us? Is $3 million correct, SaskTel Bond 
advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have that information. There is the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, but the appropriate is Crown 
Corporations Committee. And we’ve given the information, I 
believe, in the past, and the normal procedure would apply. 
 

And I know you are opposed to the advertising, and I believe 
SaskTel . . . I don’t know if the hon. member who just asked the 
question was one that was publicly critical of the SaskTel 
Bonds and the advertising. And I don’t know if the hon. 
member was the one that called it — what? — an abysmal 
failure, I believe, the SaskTel Bonds. So the proper procedure is 
through Crown Corporations Committee, and as in the past, 
you’ll get your full information. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well the minister won’t come up with the 
exact figure. At least he won’t confirm it. So let’s assume, Mr. 
Speaker, right for this moment, that it was a $3 million bill that 
was used to advertise SaskTel Bonds. 
 
And I want to clarify to the minister about the SaskTel Bonds. 
It’s the advertising that we’re talking about here, Mr. Minister, 
not the sale of bonds. If you had set up these bonds and put 
them on the brokerage and made them compete with anybody 
else, nobody would have said a word about it. But no, you 
decided that you had to spend $3 million of the taxpayers’ 
money — of the taxpayers’ money — to try to convince them 
that this business of selling bonds is something to do with 
privatization because privatization was going down the well for 
you. And that’s the problem. That’s the problem we have 
because what you’re really doing is you’re advertising your 
political agenda. 
 
You’re not advertising the sale of bonds, you’re advertising 
your political agenda, and you’d better get off of that because 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan don’t like it, and that’s what this 
was all about. The last two weeks should have told you that, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now you see, so you spent $3 million 
advertising SaskTel bonds. Now you got yourself into another 
pile of trouble with this business of SaskPower. And what 
happens? The minister, the Deputy Premier, the minister in 
charge says, well we’re going to have to advertise to convince 
the people. 
 
Well think of the immensity of the problem, Mr. Speaker, think 
of the immensity of the problem. If it took $3 million to 
convince people to buy bonds, something they already believed 
in, what it is going to cost to advertise this? Are you going to 
advertise for a year, two years, three years? Is it going to be 10 
times the value or 100 times, and when are you going to quit? 
When are you going to quit this advertising? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it could be taken to ludicrous proportions. 
You see, what we have as situation is the minister has taken 
taxpayers’ money to convince taxpayers that they are wrong 
and that this government is right. They got to get off of that. 
They got to get off of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2030) 
 
You see, this government for some reason has it in its mind, has 
it in its mind that they can convince anybody about anything if 
they use a sufficient amount of advertising. And they don’t 
believe in the basic honesty of  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1049 
 

people of Saskatchewan and their basic reaction to how we’ve 
run things in this province. They think that they can use the 
wizardry of advertising, that it’s like selling soap. 
 
Well that’s not the way it is in Saskatchewan, my friend. That’s 
not the way it is in Saskatchewan. We don’t need that kind of 
thing. And besides, you can find out what people are thinking, 
and if you can’t convince them on a face-to-face basis, and I 
challenge you to do that. 
 
I challenge you to go out to all of the districts in the province, 
and face to face try to tell them that SaskPower should be sold, 
should be privatized; that we should have a sell-off. Try to do 
that. Do that. Just get out and walk down the street. Don’t hide 
behind the walls of this fortress here. Get out there and walk out 
and ask the people and see what they say. See what they tell 
you, and then maybe just try to convince them yourself. Try to 
convince them yourself that it’s really good for you to buy 
something that you already own. And I’ll tell you what they tell 
you — they’ll tell you that privatization is a bad deal for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — They’ll tell you over and over again that it’s 
a bad deal. They told us that; they told you that with 
SaskPower; they’re going to tell you that about potash — it’s a 
bad deal for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why is it a bad deal? Look, there’s all kinds of evidence, Mr. 
Speaker, all kinds of evidence. We’ve seen four, five years of 
privatization in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And it’s good. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — We’ve seen it. And the member from 
Wilkie says it’s good. Let’s see how good it is. Let’s see how 
good it is. Let’s take a look at this performance of the 
privatization in the province of Saskatchewan. Just what has it 
done? Let’s see what it’s done. 
 
What has it done to the budgetary position of the province of 
Saskatchewan? You know, if you ran your household the way 
you run this province, you’d have been bankrupt four, five, six 
years ago — absolutely would have. You took over with $139 
million surplus, Mr. Speaker — $139 million surplus. You start 
privatizing — what happens? Two hundred twenty-seven 
million dollar deficit. That’s in 1982-83. Just a little switch 
here, from a surplus to a deficit. Add it every year from then on 
we had a deficit — we had a deficit every year since then. 
 
We are now down to what, $3.9 billion — $3.9 billion of deficit 
of privatization, and you want to give us more. Boy, what do 
you think we are here? You want to give us more. You want to 
advertise to convince us that this is a good thing. Well, look at 
the figures. I now owe $3,900 because of your privatization, 
because of your obsession with privatization. And you want to 
convince me that $3,900 owing for me, my wife, my two 
daughters, and oh, yes, and for every kid that’s born here, 
$3,900 that we have to pay in taxes that you have spent for in 
your privatization sweep instead of having some common sense 
approach. That’s what’s happened. 
 

That’s what’s happening. That’s why the people of 
Saskatchewan are upset with you, because privatization has 
been a bad deal for me. It’s just been a bad, bad deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, privatization, what has it done 
to my income tax? What has it done? What has it done to your 
income tax, Mr. Speaker, or all of the people here? What has it 
done? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you take a look at the revenue that this province 
has collected in the last four years in income tax — in income 
tax and in sales tax. Let me deal with the sales tax first, Mr. 
Speaker, because that’s what I’ve got here in front of me, this 
chart, sales tax revenue. Let’s switch to that for a moment; I’ll 
bring up the other chart later. 
 
Sales tax revenue . . . privatization which now is being 
advertised, and that’s what this is all about. We asked the 
minister, we asked the minister to come clean on how much 
he’s going to spend on advertising this package of SaskPower 
privatization. That was the basis of the request. He wouldn’t 
come up with it. So what we’re trying to do here is estimate 
how much more it’s going to cost, Mr. Speaker. How much is it 
going to cost. 
 
Well, we’ve got at one figure . . . the bond, the bond issues are 
about $3 million. The cost of the advertising for the bond issue 
is about $3 million, and that was an easy one. We already 
agreed with that. People of Saskatchewan agreed with the bond 
issue, but they spent $3 million on it. 
 
Now he’s going to advertise to sell the SaskTel bonds — 
pardon me, the SaskPower bonds. He’s going to advertise those. 
Why? Because he says privatization is good for you. How good 
was it to all of us in Saskatchewan, with a declining population, 
or as a result of their population, when it comes to sales tax? 
Are we paying less sales tax to the province because of 
privatization? 
 
Well let’s take a look at the numbers. Let’s look at them. Here 
we are: 1984-1985, sales tax revenue, 372 million. Now what 
would you expect with good privatization? Should the sales tax 
revenue go up or should it go down? I guess I would expect that 
if the story was true it should be good for me. We should be 
paying less sales tax. But what are the figures? In 1985 the 
province collected more sales tax revenue — went up to $383 
million; in 1986-87 they collected more yet, 386 million; 
1987-88, more yet, 467 million. And last year, 1988-89, way up 
again, 476 million. Is privatization good for us, Mr. Speaker, or 
is it a bad deal, I ask you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a bad deal. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — My colleague from Saskatoon says it’s a 
bad deal, and she’s right. It’s a bad deal, Mr. Speaker. 
Privatization of SaskPower is a bad deal. Advertising the 
privatization to try to convince the people of Saskatchewan is a 
bad deal. How much is it going to cost? The minister won’t 
come clean with the figures. We ask him the numbers; the 
closest we can come to is that if we use the example that’s 
before us already, the example  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

 

1050 
 

before us already, the example of SaskTel bonds — $3 million, 
$3 million — so what’s it going to cost to advertise this and 
convince the people of Saskatchewan that we should buy this 
concept of privatizing SaskPower? Is it going to be five times as 
much, is it going to be five times as hard? Is it going to be ten 
times as much as $3 million, or what? 
 
He says that there’s no limit. Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s got to 
be a limit; he’s got be accountable to this House. There’s got to 
be some limit to this thing here, because this privatization 
concept is just gone too far. There’s a limit to how much we can 
just allow to happen. There’s got to be a limit. 
 
You see, our sales tax revenue went up . . . or the sales tax 
revenue of the province went up, went up, so that means we’re 
paying more. Our deficit went up. I now owe $3,900 for every 
member of my family, and so do all of you. That’s gone up. 
 
Privatization, what has it done, and who’s it good for? Well 
let’s see, let’s look at another thing here. The province also 
collects income tax from corporations. Do they charge them the 
same kind of money? Are they collecting the same kind of 
increases from them? Well I look at it, the figures, right from 
the budget estimates; it’s right in the books. All you got to do is 
get five of them and compile them: 1984-85, $156 million. 
What happened the year after that? It went down to 145, not 
like sales tax revenue, not like income tax revenue. It went 
down. Last year it was down to 134 million. Well now things 
come a little clearer; who was privatization good for? Who was 
privatization good for? Well I guess the corporations wouldn’t 
mind too much. These are the people who get to write off their 
expenses. They’re not people who have kids that are born with 
the $3,900 debt, you see. 
 
What happened to corporations? Well not too bad a deal; their 
tax rates have gone down. In fact this year, effective January 1, 
the corporate rate went down from 17 per cent to 15 per cent. 
Whose tax went up? Who else’s tax went down? Did your tax 
go down this year? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. Mine never went down. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I invite the minister: did his income tax go 
down? I invite you to answer that question. Mr. Minister, you 
understand . . . and I want you to get a grasp of why it is that the 
people of Saskatchewan have a problem with you spending 
advertising money — have a problem with you spending 
advertising money — on advertising SaskPower privatization, 
because they’ve had a bad experience from privatization so far. 
We don’t want any more of it, and don’t try to convince us of it 
by spending our money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as I’ve indicated to the hon. member 
several times tonight, that I know that there was some strong 
criticisms on the SaskTel ads by the hon. members opposite, but 
I believe that the opportunity for Saskatchewan people to buy 
SaskTel bonds could even have gone further. I think that if we 
had have kept the sale of bonds out longer, that more and more 
people would  

have participated. Having said that, again the point that we had 
debated earlier in the budget as a percentage of our revenues 
from the corporate tax side, the percentage is higher as of our 
revenues today then it was back when NDP were in office in 
1981. 
 
Now I’ve indicated to the members of the opposition that I had 
a commitment at 9 o’clock tonight, and I’ve asked for leave to 
adjourn that debate. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If I may, just before you take the vote on 
that, I don’t think the members opposite will object. I just have 
one comment. We’ve asked you for some information tonight, 
Mr. Minister. We would appreciate you coming back with the 
information tomorrow or whenever you pick up this adjourned 
debate. I think there’s perhaps some modest excuse tonight, 
there’s perhaps some modest excuse tonight for not having it. 
But when we come back tomorrow, as we assume we are, to 
deal with interim supply, there should be no excuse for not 
having this information. And we’d ask you, Mr. Minister, to 
bring it back with you tomorrow when this resumes. 
 
(2045) 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:46 p.m. 
 
 


