


















































March 16, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 16, 1989 
 

167 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure today to introduce to you, and to other members of 
the Assembly, a group of 23 students in your gallery, grade 7 
and 8 students from the Caroline Robins School in Saskatoon in 
that great constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. They are 
accompanied today by Doug Gilmore and Jane Best. I sincerely 
hope that you’ll enjoy your visit to the legislature today. I can’t 
guarantee that the members are going to be on their best 
behaviour, but you’ll have to judge that for yourselves. I look 
forward to meeting with you at 2:30 for pictures and also later 
on for refreshments. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of 
the legislature to join with me in welcoming this group to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and the Assembly, on behalf of my seat mate, 
the Hon. Graham Taylor, some 20 grade 11 and 12 students 
from Windthorst, from the Windthorst School. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Greg Fritzke and Mark Pfeifer, 
chaperons Kathy Biesenthal and Kathy Edwards. I would like 
all hon. members to join with me in welcoming the students. I 
look forward to meeting with them after question period for 
refreshments and questions. I would ask all hon. members to 
join with me in welcoming them in the usual manner. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some guests seated in your gallery. They 
are Miss Susan Bates, the president of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation; Mr. Fred Herron, general secretary of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; Mr. Berny Wiens, 
president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association; 
Mr. Jake Volk, executive director of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association; and Mr. Erv Boehme, who is past 
president of the League of Educational Administrators and 
Directors in Saskatchewan (LEADS), Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are here to mark a historic day in Saskatchewan’s 
educational history. They joined me in a press conference early 
this morning with the release of and our joint response to 
evaluation in education — the report on evaluation and 
education. And I would ask them to stand and be acknowledged 
and for all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
them here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the 
minister in welcoming our guests from the STF  

(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) and the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and LEADS 
organization. They are today’s leaders in the K to 12 field. I 
hope you have a good press conference, and I also wish you the 
best in your deliberations with the minister opposite. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rise in Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, and it has to do with the 
announcement today by the Bank of Canada of yet another 
jump in the interest rates to, I think it’s 12.18 per cent, which as 
the Premier I’m sure will agree presents another serious body 
blow to small-business people, farmers and to Saskatchewan 
families — 12.18 per cent. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: in view of the fact that 
it looks as though the Prime Minister, Mr. Mulroney, and the 
Bank of Canada Governor, Mr. Crow, are not listening to you 
and to the Finance minister about how serious this continued 
increase in the interest rate problem is for the people in the 
West, and in Saskatchewan in particular, I wonder whether you 
would agree today to passage in this legislature, unanimously if 
at all possible — and I think it would be unanimously — of a 
resolution, a copy of which I have forwarded to you just a few 
moments ago, which calls on the federal government to halt 
further interest rate increases and to work toward a reduction of 
the situation? 
 
I won’t take the time to read the resolution at this point, but you 
have a copy; that’s the thrust of it. Would you agree to this 
motion, right after question period, so we can send the 
unanimous consent of the legislature of this Assembly to 
Ottawa to stand up for small-business people and farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I thank the hon. member for the question. 
We both have had some experience in dealing with the interest 
rate issues. The hon. member, as deputy premier of the province 
of Saskatchewan prior to 1982, when interest rates were 20 per 
cent, sat there, Mr. Speaker, and did absolutely nothing. So 
what we’re seeing is a deathbed repentance. 
 
We’ll take a look at the resolution, Mr. Speaker. I note that the 
resolution does not include a recognition and an urging across 
Canada of some of the interest rate programs to help farmers, 
small business, and the home owners of Saskatchewan, as 
implemented by the province of Saskatchewan and the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased for example, Mr. Speaker, to note that over 40,000 
Saskatchewan home owners are getting mortgage interest 
protection from this government, Mr. Speaker, mortgage 
interest protection that was rejected by the then deputy premier 
of this province, rejected when interest  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

168 
 

rates were 20 and 22 per cent. So for the hon. member to stand 
in this House when interest rates are 13 and 14 and urge action, 
when he refused to do anything when they were 20 and 21 per 
cent, is the height of hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I would direct it to the Minister of Finance, but clearly I’m 
disappointed, as I think anybody who is watching the 
proceedings of this House, at the overly partisan nature of the 
response by the Minister of Finance and his preoccupation with 
activities of seven years ago while farmers and small-business 
people are facing difficulties today. 
 
So I direct this new question to the Premier directly. The 
Toronto Dominion Bank says that its mortgage rate for one year 
jumps to thirteen and a quarter per cent. That’s a five-year high. 
If you’re not going to agree to the resolution which I have 
forwarded to you, Mr. Premier, will you tell the House today 
whether or not in the forthcoming budget there is a program of 
relief for small businesses and for farmers and for our families 
against this continual rise in interest rates that we’ve seen the 
last several months, the last couple of years, as the result of the 
actions of Ottawa. Can we announce such a program today, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m pleased that the hon. member is having, 
I believe, a sort of deathbed repentance on his errors about 
refusing to help Saskatchewan people. He’s trying to be more 
helpful when he can’t do anything about it than when he could, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to indicate that, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan home 
owners, if interest rates are 14 per cent, our government is there 
to help. If interest rates are 15 per cent, our government is there 
to help. If interest rates are 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25 per cent, the 
interest rates for Saskatchewan home owners, Mr. Speaker, will 
be nine and three-quarters per cent, no matter what the rates are, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s action. For small business, I can 
give a list of the small business interest programs. I can talk 
about the 6 per cent interest programs for students and student 
loans, Mr. Speaker. I can talk about production loans at 6 per 
cent for farmers. I can talk about livestock cash advances and 
interest-free loans, Mr. Speaker. Capital facilities programs, Mr. 
Speaker, with 8 per cent interest. And I am prepared to continue 
with a rather lengthy list, Mr. Speaker, of what this government 
is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I direct this question once 
again to the Premier, who I really wish would take the  

leadership and answer it, as opposed to the political responses 
by the Minister of Finance who, by the way, says that the 
production loan interest rate is at 6 per cent when we know full 
well that your government increased it to nine and 
three-quarters per cent several months back. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this. We have a crisis for 
small-business people; we have a crisis for farming people. 
Let’s just take the small-business people for the moment. 
Interest rates are on the rise. What I hear the Minister of 
Finance saying is it’s more of the same, and more of the same 
means more small businesses facing bankruptcy and going 
belly-up because of the crisis that exists in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Will the Premier get up and tell this House now that he is 
prepared to announce a special program with respect to — just 
say the small businesses — the small businesses in the province 
of Saskatchewan to help them through this period of escalating 
high interest rates? How about that? Let’s forget about the 
political speeches. How about that as a concrete course of 
action today for the people of this province? Okay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I appreciate the minister wanting me 
not to give a political speech while he gives one. The hon. 
member . . . I’m going to advise the hon. member that we do 
have capital facilities loan programs which many people in this 
province have taken advantage of at 8 per cent interest, and I 
have . . . As the appropriate minister has indicated, there will be 
major modifications to the role of SEDCO which will be of 
significant help to small business. 
 
I might advise as well, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about 
small business, one of the highest tax rates on small business is 
the NDP government in the city of Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
is this government, this government, Mr. Speaker, that is 
bringing in a rebate program on the business taxes of the small 
business for this province, Mr. Speaker, that try and give $10 
million back to the small-business community which will be of 
help for them — help that was refused them in the past, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Debt in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, your lack of support for 
Saskatchewan farmers by falling in line with Brian Mulroney 
and his bungling of his drought aid program has left farm 
families in Saskatchewan strapped for cash. On top of that, 
you’re letting Mulroney run roughshod over them with interest 
rates — high interest rates. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: will you end your stupid, 
counter-productive policy of charging farmers who fall into 
arrears with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) prime plus 2 per cent on their outstanding debt. 
Will you halt that? 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

169 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the 
point of providing assistance to people in agriculture. I could 
point out to the hon. member that there are a long list of interest 
rate reductions and programs for people in the livestock 
industry as well as the grain industry. We’ve got the livestock 
cash advance, Mr. Speaker, which, for the first time in 
Saskatchewan history, provides money to people in the 
livestock business without any interest charges at all. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Zero. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Zero interest. And the livestock people 
tell me across Canada that they envy Saskatchewan’s livestock 
industry because we’ve got cash advances at zero per cent 
interest rates. The livestock industry doesn’t have to go to the 
bank or their credit union or any place else, international 
people; they get cash advances at zero per cent interest rate, as 
the grain people had for years through the Canadian Wheat 
Board. Mr. Speaker, we introduced that. Now that’s at zero per 
cent interest rates. 
 
We have got The Farm Land Security Act to protect home 
owners, Mr. Speaker; we’ve got farm input price surveys to 
allow them to get information on prices right across 
Saskatchewan and the rest of the country. We’ve got a 
production loan program, Mr. Speaker, that is at 6 per cent 
money on $1.2 billion for the first three years and at nine and 
three-quarters for the next seven years, Mr. Speaker. Now 
nobody in Canada has ever delivered a program at locked-in 
fixed interest rates at 6 per cent in excess of a billion dollars in 
Canadian history. Now we put that out for people, and in 
addition to the three years to pay it back, Mr. Speaker, at the 
request of farmers, municipal councillors, we’ve said you can 
extend it over 10 years, and they get full advantage of the 6 per 
cent that was there initially. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have got the Agriculture Credit Corporation, 
which will provide low-interest loans to people . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are there any more programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, the hon. member asked me if there 
are any more programs. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have just heard, I believe, the Minister of Agriculture in this 
province telling the farmers and the rest of the people in this 
province that he is not going to do any more to help the farmers 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Said he’s done enough. My question: your 
policy of doing nothing, Mr. Minister, but foreclosing on 
Saskatchewan farmers is actually criminal. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, on behalf of all farmers, if you will now immediately 
halt foreclosure actions on farmers until the farm economy in 
this province recovers? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I notice the hon. member 
now changed his question. I started to list the programs we have 
for farmers, and they didn’t even let me get through it. 
 
We’ve just had a Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, that 
will lay out, and has laid out, new initiatives that we’re going to 
take for farmers, including having new programs for them. And 
now he changes the question and said, are we going to have any 
more programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just point out to the hon. member, when it comes to 
standing up for farmers in the past we’ve put an awful lot of 
money into their hands, and we’ve initiated new programs, rural 
natural gas, for example, that saved them hundreds of thousands 
of dollars even per operation. And right now we see, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of that, not just 56 per cent of the feeder 
cattle, pardon me, 12 per cent of the feeder cattle fed here, but 
indeed 56 per cent of the feeder cattle now being fed here in 
Saskatchewan as a result of feeder finish programs, low interest 
loans, rural natural gas, and a combination of things that would 
allow us to get that done. 
 
Then he stands up and he says, well let’s change that. I liked 
your programs; they’re all right. What about foreclosing on 
farmers? And he kind of looks cross ways over at his leader, 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time he did that. 
 
We’ve been through it. Everybody in Saskatchewan and, 
frankly, Canada knows there’s only one leader in Canada who 
worked, and has his company work, on behalf of the bank to 
foreclose on farmers, and it’s the NDP leader that’s sitting in 
the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
That’s his legacy, Mr. Speaker, when interest rates were 20 per 
cent he never lifted a finger, and after that, Mr. Speaker, when 
he’s defeated, he went and made money on the backs of the 
farmers working for the financial institutions. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he’ll live to regret that one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m back into the question 
period, prompted by the Premier’s answer with respect to the 
foreclosures and particularly about the foreclosures of his 
government and, more particularly, the actions of him as the 
Premier and the leader of the province of Saskatchewan and 
Minister of Agriculture in foreclosing. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: I have in front of 
me here documentation involving an order nisi of a judicial sale 
involving a couple called Rod Stirling McPherson and Joyce 
McPherson, public records of the Outlook area, where 
according to this document a judicial sale of farm property, sir, 
is going to take place March 21, 1989. And guess who the 
plaintiff is? The plaintiff is you, sir, the leader of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

170 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Guess who the leader and the activator of 
this lawsuit is? The Minister of Agriculture, the first time in the 
history of Saskatchewan that that has taken place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I want to ask you this, Mr. Minister: how 
many more of these are there in the province of Saskatchewan 
that you have personally launched against the farmers of 
Saskatchewan today? Tell us the numbers right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, you notice . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The Premier was asked a 
question. I believe he deserves the right to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say to the hon. member, 
the NDP members and NDP lawyers have been caught 
foreclosing on farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to now 
say that it’s okay if they can find anybody else that’s ever been 
involved. Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, these are the people 
who say they’re against multinationals and they’re against 
banks and they’re against high interest rates. And the very same 
people in the front row there, who say that they would defend 
the farmers, have been caught, Mr. Speaker, foreclosing on the 
farmer, working for the bank. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say, we’ve put over a billion dollars 
out to help farmers, keep them in business, help them start. 
They got caught, Mr. Speaker, not in government — they got 
caught, not in government but working for the banks, Mr. 
Speaker. And we know that all over this country everybody’s 
saying, well is that true, that a socialist leader now got — 
bought and sold, and sold and sold, Mr. Speaker, to work for 
the bank to take away farmers’ land and their machinery. Mr. 
Speaker, let me say to the hon. member, he can’t get out from 
under it; he knows that he’s in trouble on it and, Mr. Speaker, 
we will continue to defend farmers on this issue and any other 
issue against the NDP hypocrisy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Agriculture, and I have here, Mr. Speaker . . . really 
what I’m laughing at, Mr. Speaker, is the answer by the 
Premier, but not the gravity of the situation. 
 
I have here, which I shall be tabling for the attention of the 
House and the public in a short few minutes, just exactly how 
the leader of this province, the Minister of Agriculture, the 
defender of farmers — how he protects farmers, how he puts 
out contracts on farmers by hiring lawyers to conduct these 
foreclosures. I will be tabling the ones that we have, just by way 
of a sample. But my question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: 
because this is a serious crisis, it’s a serious crisis which goes 
beyond members of this House, it affects the farming families 
of this province of Saskatchewan, I want you to tell us now how 
many legal actions you have instituted personally  

against the family farms of Saskatchewan, right now as of this 
moment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me make it very clear to 
the public and to the hon. members. On behalf of taxpayers, on 
behalf of taxpayers, a Government of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition 
doesn’t want to hear the response. Okay, well maybe you could 
ask your members to co-operate in the legislature. Let me say 
this, Mr. Speaker, some people in this legislature have 
personally foreclosed on farmers for profit, for profit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just want the opportunity to make this 
point, make this point. Some people have foreclosed on farmers 
for profit; some do it on the basis of protecting the taxpayers’ 
money. The Government of Saskatchewan has the 
responsibility for taxpayers’ money that is lent all across the 
province of Saskatchewan. We defend the taxpayers. 
 
The member opposite, Mr. Speaker, foreclosed on farmers for 
profit for himself. That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. He made 
a personal decision to foreclose on farmers to put money in his 
pocket. We defend the taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker, and we 
always will, but we’re not going to personally get involved, as 
he did, working for the bank to put profit in his money on the 
backs of farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, that 
you recognize me rather than the Minister of Health who’s 
going to try to bail the Premier out. 
 
The legislature, the Premier, and the press will be able to 
examine these documents. I have them here: agricultural credit 
corporation versus the Cairns family; the corporation versus the 
Boehler family. We go down the line on this. 
 
I want to ask the Hon. Premier. The Premier says that his living 
isn’t made by attacking farmers. The Premier of this province of 
Saskatchewan makes a hundred thousand dollars a year, and his 
job is to defend family farmers. How do you justify instructing 
the contracts to destroy these family farmers? Why aren’t you 
living up and doing your job? Why are you foreclosing on 
them? Where’s your money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, again he can’t get out from 
under it this way, Mr. Speaker. He made a personal decision to 
foreclose on farmers on behalf of the bank for profit for his 
firm, profit for his firm, and we just ask, Mr. Speaker, how 
many tens of thousands . . . 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

171 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d like to 
. . . Order, order. Order. Order. We have a standing rule in the 
House that unparliamentary language cannot be used by those 
speaking or by those seated. I must now ask the hon. member 
for Regina Elphinstone to withdraw that unparliamentary 
remark he just made. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would withdraw the 
remark that I made to the Premier about his lying — I would. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think that it hasn’t been a clear 
unequivocal withdrawal. It had an inference to it, and I ask the 
hon. member to simply rise and to apologize, withdraw the 
remark, and we’ll get on with question period. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I had, but I do 
withdraw the remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me just make the point 
again. On behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, any 
government will make sure that they monitor the use of 
taxpayers’ money. We’ve got over a billion dollars out to 
helping farmers, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it’s less than 1 per 
cent of all those that are out have any particular difficulty with 
respect to a legal action. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member, and I’m sure that he 
would agree, to protect the taxpayers’ money is one thing; to 
have personally profited by foreclosing on a farmer — 
personally making the decision with a law firm, Mr. Speaker — 
is a significant difference. You’ve made the decision in your 
career to work for the bank and foreclose on farmers for a 
profit. The Premier of the province and any administrator has to 
protect taxpayers’ money, and we make no apologies for doing 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, 
who knows the facts full well, except in some areas where very 
selectively he does not know the facts. You made a decision 
too, Mr. Premier. You made a decision when you took the oath 
as Minister of Agriculture to defend and protect farmers for 
which you are taking $100,000 profit from them and you are 
foreclosing on them. 
 
And I want to read to you, particularly, from the McPherson 
case that I alluded to, this following clause, and ask you how 
you justify this. In this settlement which you offered the 
McPherson family — you, the biggest forecloser in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan, you — you, in this settlement 
. . . here’s the settlement that you offered the McPhersons: “The 
(farmers) understand and agree . . .” This is what you gave the 
McPherson family and the tens of others I have here. 
 

The borrowers understand and agree that they will not in 
the future be entitled to receive and shall not apply for any 
grant, loan, cash advance, guaranteed loan, financial 
assistance or benefit whatsoever provided by ACS or its 
successor  

corporations under any Act of the legislature of 
Saskatchewan or the regulations thereunder. 
 

That is the so-called offer of settlement that you, as Minister of 
Agriculture in defence of the farmers, have given to the farmers 
who have run into difficulty about this. Not only do you drive 
the farmers off the land, you are going to guarantee that they 
never get back onto the land. How do you justify that and your 
salary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can’t 
weasel out of it that easy. He says, Mr. Speaker, that my salary 
is profit, Mr. Speaker. Well then he says everybody’s salary in 
this legislature is profit. The Leader of the Opposition makes 
almost as much as a cabinet minister or something similar. Is 
that profit, Mr. Speaker, is that profit? Of course it isn’t profit. 
It’s a salary for administration and for being a member of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this: the law firm that works — 
and evidently I can’t use their name, is that right? — it’s the 
law firm that is associated with the name of the member from 
Riversdale. Mr. Speaker, that law firm works for the Bank of 
Nova Scotia, foreclosing on farmers for profit — for profit, Mr. 
Speaker, not protecting the taxpayers’ money, but for profit — 
at the same time he stands in his place and he says he’s against 
multinational banks; he’s against any institution that would 
work against farmers. And he’s pocketing, in his pocket, 
money, profit taken for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. We can’t hear the 
Premier. We can’t hear the Premier. We can’t hear the Premier, 
and quite frankly the noise was so loud I really couldn’t tell 
whether he was quite finished his answer, so if he wasn’t quite 
finished, he has the opportunity. Other than that, time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Question period is over; there’ll be another one tomorrow. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
inform the House that earlier today I released Evaluation in 
Education, the final report of the advisory committee on 
evaluation and monitoring. 
 
This report outlines a comprehensive strategy for evaluation, 
monitoring, and accountability in Saskatchewan schools. It 
reflects a desire on the part of all the major shareholders in 
education to improve the overall quality of programming and 
student performance, and also to communicate that to parents 
and the public in the most effective and professional manner 
possible. 
 
The advisory committee was established in 1987 to examine all 
aspects of evaluation in education. 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

172 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d 
ask the hon. members to settle down so that members in the 
House can hear the ministerial statement that the Minister of 
Education is making, and I would like to hear it myself. 
 
Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I don’t think hon. 
members should have to be asked two or three or four times. 
And for the last time, let’s allow the Minister of Education to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
advisory committee was established in 1987 to examine all 
aspects of evaluation in education and recommend 
improvements. All the major players in Saskatchewan’s school 
system were represented on the committee, and I introduced 
those people here today earlier to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The report was prepared in consultation with teachers, school 
officials, parents, university faculty — all those with a stake in 
our school system, Mr. Speaker. Extensive consultation will 
continue during implementation of the report’s 
recommendations. I am pleased to announce that because this 
undertaking was pursued in a co-operative, collaborative, and 
consultative fashion, Mr. Speaker, the final report has been 
endorsed by all — teachers, trustees, administrators, directors, 
and so on. 
 
This report will help us to gauge the effectiveness of our 
schools more accurately. It will also help us to assess how our 
core curriculum is working, and provide direction for how we 
evaluate students, staff, and course content. It also reflects this 
government’s commitment to keeping everyone fully involved 
in what goes on in the school system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate and thank the 
members of the committee for a job well done. It was some 15 
months, Mr. Speaker, this committee was active. There was a 
lot of work by a 17-member committee, which we have some of 
the guests here today. Many officials for all the organizations 
worked long and hard hours. 
 
I know at times there was lots of debate, but it was that 
commitment to again keep Saskatchewan in first place across 
North America, Mr. Speaker, that led to this fine report, 
because it’s that kind of determination and drive that 
Saskatchewan education is all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m happy to bring this information to the legislature, and I 
know that all of their efforts will bear fruits for our children all 
across our Saskatchewan schools over the next decade and 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. On behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Nutana who is our 
education critic, I’m pleased to respond to the  

ministerial announcement. 
 
I want to respond in this fashion, Mr. Speaker. The statement 
which we have with us here today, I believe, would be 
something that we were going to have to look at very carefully. 
 
And I’m saying, when I say “we,” I mean we in the opposition; 
I mean we the public of Saskatchewan, and we the teachers of 
Saskatchewan. I do so because I fear that, underneath the 
language the minister has mentioned, we could have a repeat of 
things that we’ve had before, that this could really represent a 
wolf in sheep’s clothing. 
 
What happens in education, Mr. Minister, is you cannot steer 
education with an outside whip if you want it to succeed. You 
cannot steer it by imposing evaluations and evaluation system. 
The minister mentions he’s done so in collaboration. I’ll take 
his word for it, and then we’ll watch to see what happens. 
 
But I warn that we’ve seen this kind of thing happen before, and 
I want to make sure that it does not lead to something like 
external examinations, that it does not lead to external 
standards, and it does not lead to setting up systems of getting 
rid of teachers. For that, we’ll be looking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effect of Higher Interest Rates 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents 
continue obviously to be affected by rising interest rates which 
have gone up almost weekly over the past several weeks. The 
government of the province of Saskatchewan has expressed a 
strong concern to the Government of Canada. As recently as 
yesterday a major Canadian bank raised its mortgage rates by 
one-quarter to one-half of a percentage point, and as usual other 
lending institutions can be expected to follow suit. 
 
Many Saskatchewan home owners have been calling the 
Department of Finance, asking what effect these developments 
will have on the government’s mortgage protection plan. I am 
pleased to state that the mortgage protection plan, which we 
started on September 1, 1986, which will be in effect until 
August 31, 1996, will continue to provide nine and 
three-quarters per cent protection on the first $50,000 mortgage 
amount on new and renewed mortgages. 
 
Since the program was implemented . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just glanced quickly 
through this, but I don’t think there’s anything new that the 
government is doing. It’s talking about an old program, and I 
wondered whether or not in fact it is a new program. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The point of order of course is a 
valid one. As we all know, ministerial statements should be new 
information that is conveyed to  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

173 
 

the House. And the Minister of Finance I assume is doing that, 
and perhaps he could reassure the House that he is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will give you that 
assurance. Since the program was implemented, some 40,712 
Saskatchewan home owners have received 8.3 million in 
benefits, and approximately 1.7 million more will be added to 
the total by the end of this month to bring the overall amount to 
$10 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 3,691 new applications on hand, and they 
are receiving in the last two weeks about 1,600 transactions per 
week. Mr. Speaker, the turn-around time is approximately six to 
seven weeks. 
 
We want to give the assurance to the people of Saskatchewan 
that although there will be some delay because of the 
turn-around time and the increase in the number of applications, 
all payments, Mr. Speaker, are retroactive to the date of 
application, and the people of this province should have that 
assurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date, over the life of the two mortgage 
protection programs, some 44,000 Saskatchewan home owners 
have received assistance totalling nearly $75 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
is precisely what we have been complaining about, and that is 
that this government hasn’t had a new idea in four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in case it’s escaped your 
attention, interest rates have gone up by three percentage points 
in the last year. That’s almost by 25 per cent. On the balance 
sheets of many small businesses, Mr. Speaker, interest is the 
largest single expense. And this increase is enough to send 
some of them under. 
 
What does the government do, and what does the minister do? 
He talks about a program that was introduced four years ago 
and had very little effect on things. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister of Finance, if you can’t do something more 
imaginative than to read statistics about a four-year old 
program, then you ought to resign and you ought to let someone 
else take over who will bring some real relief to farmers and 
business men in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Wills Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 
of a Bill, An Act to amend The Wills Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Federal Government’s High Interest Rate Policy 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly, I would request that the following motion be 
introduced: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan hereby 
expresses its grave concern that the federal government’s 
continuing high interest rate policy is causing increasing 
economic and financial hardship on Saskatchewan 
families, farmers, and small businesses, and that this 
Assembly today urges the Prime Minister of Canada to 
reverse the federal government’s high interest policy. 
 

As I mentioned in the question period, Mr. Speaker, I’ve given 
a copy of this to the Premier and the Minister of Finance, 
unfortunately both of whom are not here now. I would ask the 
Deputy Premier to indicate his acceptance, so that we could 
debate and pass this motion and give a message to Ottawa about 
the devastating impact of high interest rates, by leave. 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — For your information, I left the seconder 
vacant in the hopes that the government would second it. I’m 
prepared to second it, if they’re prepared to introduce it. That’s 
why the leave is being asked. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, okay, fine. That provides the 
explanation. So we have a motion before us then, moved by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The member then is in effect asking for leave under rule 39. If 
leave is not granted, then the proposed motion simply dies. So 
is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the orders 
of the day, I’d like to table a photocopy of Court of Queen’s 
Bench Action No. 2340, the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan versus Roderick Stirling . . . — I won’t name the 
defendants for obvious reasons. 
 
Agriculture credit corporation versus additional defendants. 
Agriculture credit corporation versus additional defendants. 
Court of Appeal of an appellant against the Minister of 
Agriculture and the lands branch with respect to land. 
 
Agriculture credit corporation versus another defendant. Here’s 
one involving the Minister of Rural Development against 
another farm defendant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on, but in the interest of time — this is 
just a tip of the iceberg; there’ll be more — I would like to 
simply table these in consequence of the question period that I 
had today. 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

174 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe and the amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Trew. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, I intend on entering . . . continuing this debate on the 
throne speech. I want to talk about education and the Tory 
record. I want to talk about health and the Tory record. I want to 
talk about taxation and the Tory record. And then I want to talk 
about the stacked deck, and I’m going to talk about that first, 
about the constituency boundary gerrymander which violates 
the principles of representation by population. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment once 
again to just bring to your attention how much I have 
appreciated and enjoyed working with the Leader of the 
Opposition over the last two years and especially on a day like 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, 
the member from Riversdale, future premier of this province, 
has been out meeting with people, listening to people, assessing 
people’s problems, and responding to people. And everywhere 
he’s been, in rural Saskatchewan, in small towns, in villages, 
and in the cities, people are responding to him because they 
know that he’s got the ability to lead in economic management 
of this province. They trust him with health and social services 
and education, and they know he’s got a proven track record in 
intergovernmental affairs. And when it comes to debating with 
the government members opposite, there’s no one there that can 
hold a candle. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know we’re going to have a very tough 
time in this province when we get into government, to put it 
back on its feet again. But we are showing, and people are 
responding to the confidence that we have in our leader, in the 
member from Riversdale. And I too feel very confident that 
even though it’s going to be difficult to put things back into 
place again in this province because of the massive debt, 
because we have the highest taxation ever in this province, and 
because we have people moving out of this province in droves, 
we’re going to have to do it. 
 
Yes, Saskatchewan will lead again, Mr. Speaker. We will lead 
again in economic management. We will lead again in health 
and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk now about the Tory manipulation of 
the electoral boundaries in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week, after the throne speech was read, we had  

tabled on our desks the final report of the boundaries 
commission that was placed on the table here. And it showed 
the new boundaries, and it showed how the Premier of this 
province is now trying to manipulate the rules in a sort of a Ben 
Johnson attempt to win at all costs, and abuse — at the same 
time abuse the concept of representation by population. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is wrong. It is wrong. It is 
dead wrong. And I think the Tories opposite should pay 
attention to this because they should take it back to their caucus 
because they ought to understand that what they are really 
doing is undoing the fundamental principle on which our 
democratic system is based, and that is representation by 
population. It is not only jeopardizing the electoral system here 
in the short run, but it will also jeopardize the ability of their 
children in the future to elect a government on that basis. 
 
Why do I say so, Mr. Speaker? You know, over the principle of 
representation by population, wars have been fought. They’ve 
been fought in America; they’ve been fought in Europe; they’ve 
been fought in Great Britain; all parts of Europe. The concept of 
representation by population is fundamental to democracy, and 
here we have a government that is going to violate it. 
 
Representation by population is very simple, yet it’s very 
profound. It means that your vote, Mr. Speaker, is equal to my 
vote. It means your colleague’s vote is equal to my colleague’s 
vote. There is no such thing as weighted voting; each vote 
would count the same. 
 
You want to consider for a minute, Mr. Speaker, a committee 
made up of four people, where a decision has to be made, where 
each one of the four people has an equal vote. Two vote one 
way and two vote the other way; then we have a tie. You have 
to have a three to one to break it. 
 
But if one of those votes is weighted so that it’s only worth say, 
point six or point eight of a vote, then two people can run a 
majority. That’s weighted voting, and that’s exactly what is 
happening with this scheme that is being perpetrated by the 
Premier opposite. And I’m speaking to this, Mr. Speaker, 
because it’s important not only for partisan reasons, it’s 
important whether you’re a Conservative or a Liberal or a New 
Democrat. Any prospective voter would understand that. 
 
Why do we need that system, Mr. Speaker? You see, Canada is 
based on a capitalist system; we have a capitalist tradition like 
the rest of the free world in Europe, in the United States of 
America, Great Britain in particular. And I contrast that with 
the system of communism or with the system of Fascism. 
 
Now raw capitalism, which we don’t have here but from which 
it evolved is . . . the unbridled fashion of raw capitalism is a 
system which is governed and which is run by the powerful 
which depends either on dollars or on bullets or on guns or on 
bombs. That’s what unbridled capitalism is. Unbridled 
capitalism means that person with the most dollars has the most 
votes; or that person with the most bullets or the most guns has 
the most votes, or the most power; or that person with the most 
bombs  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

175 
 

has the most votes. That’s what unbridled capitalism is. 
 
So what we have evolved in this country through the centuries 
borrowed from Great Britain is a balance to that, a balance of 
representation by population, a balance which we give the name 
democracy. And in that situation, that is where one person 
equals one vote. And using that system we are able to 
counteract the bad effects of raw unbridled capitalism. 
 
Now every one of us here, Mr. Speaker, you included, maybe a 
little more than me, but every one of us here has a capitalist 
background. We are born into it. Every one of us adheres to 
some forms of capitalism. I defy you to find me a person 
probably in this room that doesn’t. Everybody believes in 
ownership of a home; everybody would like to be able to own a 
car. That’s what capitalism is based on — ownership. 
 
But if it’s let to go too far that ownership tends to accumulate as 
it did in 18th century Europe. In this case, if it was let to go too 
far the capitalism would accumulate and we would have 
monopolies again. That’s why my ancestors came to this 
country — to get away from that kind of a feudal system. So we 
need a balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want us to take a look briefly, Mr. Speaker, at what is 
happening as a result of this commission report. What has this 
government done? The purpose of the commission, if it was to 
support this concept of democracy, the balance, the delicate 
balance we need of one person, one vote, would have been set 
up so that it could equalize the voting structure across the 
country, across this province. 
 
But what has it really done? I will give you two examples. What 
it’s really done is weighted the vote. And the two examples I’m 
going to use are Morse, the constituency of Morse, and the 
constituency of Regina Lake Centre. And what’s happened after 
the redistribution? Morse constituency had 7,757 voters before 
the redistribution; now it’s got 7,475 voters, Mr. Speaker. The 
number of voters have decreased there. 
 
At the same time, in the city of Regina, Regina Lake Centre, 
which had 11,744 voters to begin with, that has now increased, 
has been increased as a result of this gerrymander, to 12,254. So 
what happens is instead of evening out the voting powers this 
gerrymander has increased the voting power of people in one 
constituency and decreased them in another. 
 
Morse, where the population is decreasing, has gone down by 
282 votes; Regina Lakeview has gone up by 510 votes. The 
spread is increasing. In other words, somebody living in the 
constituency of Regina Lakeview has only got point six of a 
vote for every vote given in the Morse constituency. Now 
somehow that does not smack to me of democracy. It’s a 
violation of this very basic principle of which I have talked. 
 
So I ask, I ask the members opposite to go back, take a look at 
all of these ridings, take a look at all of them, and work the 
system so that it’s working towards democracy. I know that 
you’re losing the political battle, that you’ve  

got problems in health and that you’ve got problems in 
education. But face up to those things, then come out and ask 
for a real election where every one person counts, a system 
where every one person counts and we don’t go into a weighted 
system. 
 
(1500) 
 
Don’t put us in the situation please, don’t put us into a situation 
that Ben Johnson put the country in, of winning at all costs, 
because if you do, you will not only disgrace yourself, you’ll 
disgrace the entire nation, as he did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was preparing myself for this reply to the 
throne speech, I noticed that this being March, I was reminded 
of a poem that I learned as a young lad. And before I get into 
the portion on education, I want to put this poem into the record 
because it sort of gives a background of some of the thinking of 
a lot of the immigrants from the Slavic countries, particularly 
Ukraine, that came to this province, people who worked to 
build this province up. 
 
It’s a poem that was written by Taras Shevchenko who was 
born March 9, 1814 and died March 10 in 1861. Shevchenko 
was to Ukrainians as Burns is to the Scots, as Shakespeare is to 
the British. And the poem goes like this, and I will read into the 
record eight lines of poem in Ukrainian. Then I want to give 
you my translation of it, Mr. Speaker. And the poem goes like 
this: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian. See end of 
Hansard) 
 
A translation, Mr. Speaker, goes something like this. It says: 
 

Study and educate yourselves, my brethren; 
Think and read widely, and learn from other people. 
Always remember your responsibility to your mother 
country, 
For those who neglect their own people will be punished 
by God, 
And foreigners will not accept you, nor will they allow you 
into their domains. 
 

That poem, Mr. Speaker, was almost a compulsory item for any 
young lad living in a community like I lived in when I was a 
young fellow, whose parents were of Ukrainian ancestry. It was 
taught because in it, it brings out the value of education, and 
more than that, it was taught to all the youngsters because it 
taught them that they were their brothers’ keepers, and that you 
had to look after your own household first before you went out 
and tried to make a hero of yourself elsewhere. Because if you 
try to do it another way, you’d be scorned when you were 
abroad. 
 
And I mentioned it here today, Mr. Speaker, because I think 
that the lessons of Shevchenko are equally valid at this time, 
about how we should be stressing education in this province 
and about how we should be concerning ourselves being our 
brothers’ keeper. 
 
I turn now to the subject of education here in the province  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

176 
 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, throughout the ’70s and through 
the ’60s and back in the ’50s, when I started university and 
went through it, those of us that graduated went out of the 
University of Saskatchewan with a feeling of pride and with a 
feeling of confidence. We had at that time the feeling that . . . 
and we knew that our university had a reputation which could 
compare with any across North America and even into Europe. 
But what has happened, Mr. Speaker? If you go down to the 
university now, and you ask some students who are there, and 
even ask the professors, do they still feel that same confidence, 
they will tell you, no. They will tell you in fact that what has 
happened is that the quality of the education at the University of 
Saskatchewan has, in some cases, deteriorated, and they feel 
more is coming. 
 
And they’ve gone on a long search. They’ve searched as to why 
has this happened. They wondered, were their internal priorities 
wrong; were some of their methods lacking? Was the problem 
because the students were not coming in of the calibre that 
perhaps they would have liked? And the resounding answer in 
all of those cases was no, Mr. Speaker. No. They’re coming up 
with the reason. They’re finding that what has really happened 
is that there has been a gross neglect and underfunding on the 
part of the government. That’s what the real problem is in 
education. 
 
The signals are very clear, Mr. Speaker. The signals at the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon are very clear. Last 
year we had a faculty strike. Last year we had an administrative 
press release which asked for more funding. This year, another 
press release which specified that they were desperately in need 
of $11 million operating money, plus another 90 million — 90 
million to meet the objectives of what they should be doing. 
And it was backed up by another signal, a signal by those who 
govern the institution, the senate and the board of governors, 
when they had to implement this year once again, Mr. Speaker, 
a quota on arts and science, repeated, something that they did 
not want to have to do. 
 
The University of Regina has also found itself in difficulty. 
They had a 5 million debt two years ago and they set up a plan 
of action. They said, all right, we will try to eliminate this debt. 
They had a plan that they would eliminate the debt over a series 
of a few years, but due to government underfunding they were 
unable to do that. At this stage now, they find themselves $7 
million in debt. I guess maybe, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the 
reasons that the people at the university are looking more and 
more to our leader, the member from Riversdale, to right the 
problems that they have. 
 
When we built these universities, Mr. Speaker, one of the key 
concepts was the concept of accessibility. Accessibility meant 
that any student who had the background, the academic 
background, the ability and the desire to go to university should 
be able to do so. And for all of the course of the years in the life 
of the University of Saskatchewan they were able to do so, until 
two years ago when, as a result of underfunding by this 
government, they finally put on quotas on education. 
 
And the quotas applied not only to those colleges which had . . . 
to which there was limited enrolment, such as the  

College of Medicine or veterinary science, but applied in this 
case to the College of Arts & Science, which is the starting 
point for many others. 
 
When my leader was in government and Allan Blakeney was 
the premier, we accomplished the access to university three 
ways. We made sure that there were no quotas on students 
going to the university. At the University of Regina there was a 
university entrance program for which adult students could 
come and go to the university even though they didn’t meet the 
grade 12 standard. They could take it while they were there and 
meet the standard. And the government of Premier Blakeney, of 
which our member from Riversdale, our present leader, was 
also a member, also initiated off-campus class delivery to 
various points across the province, including my city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Now what’s happened? Under the present leader, under the 
present Premier, the universities have been so starved that 
they’re faced with a question of what do they do. Do they lock 
the doors to the students, or do they let the quality of education 
deteriorate to a state which would be completely unacceptable. 
They have been forced to make a choice, Mr. Speaker, between 
quality and accessibility, and that’s a choice they should never 
have had to make. As a result of that choice, we now find 400 
students per year who are unable to attend the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, and that’s people from all over the 
province. 
 
As people in the various parts of the province hear of this, and 
when they find that their grandchildren or their relatives are not 
able to attend, they are highly offended because every one of 
them pays taxes. And they’re willing to pay taxes for education, 
but they are not willing to accept this concept of their 
youngster, their grandchild or their child not being able to 
attend a university. It’s put right into our value system and we 
see it disappearing. 
 
What are we getting under this government? Not only do we 
have the financial restriction that the government has placed by 
reducing the bursary program, not only do we have the 
academic restriction by a person who has to get a certain 
percentage, we also now have a quota system on education, as if 
we should be educating only a certain number of our students. 
 
And I question the wisdom of that, Mr. Speaker. I question the 
wisdom of that because at this time in the life of Canada, at a 
time when Japan is targeting to educate 50 per cent of their 
youngsters in post-secondary education, we haven’t even 
reached 20 per cent. We should be targeting at least 30 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is other evidence that we shouldn’t have quotas. The 
university itself has done studies of those students who are in 
that range between 65 per cent and 73 per cent averages. 
They’ve done studies . . . these are the people that are going to 
be excluded, and they’ve found that they fare just as well in 
their first year as the students with the 73 and above; that there 
really is not a basis on those marks on which to exclude the 
students. 
 
We know that the well-being of a nation, Mr. Speaker, depends 
on its education system. It’s not difficult to see,  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

177 
 

but you can compare Europe, U.S., or Japan to any third-world 
country. In most third-world countries they’re just struggling to 
develop teacher training institutions, and they’re struggling to 
expand their literacy levels. We should be mindful of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let’s take a look at what’s happening at SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), Mr. Speaker. As 
a result of the bungling of the government, we find that the 
workers, the instructional staff at SIAST is on the verge of a 
strike. They’ve taken a strike vote. They are four years without 
a contract, Mr. Speaker. The staff is demoralized. They’re 
demoralized for two reasons: because you’ve had a series of 
top-down decisions being made; and too many staff who have 
been there for a long time have been made to feel that they 
don’t count. 
 
Now the minister will reply and say, well it’s at arm’s length, 
it’s a corporation now. I wish it were at arm’s length, Mr. 
Speaker, but the minister still has his fingers in there, and the 
minister and his deputy still has his fingers in there. And as long 
as the minister and his deputy still have his fingers in there, the 
Premier has his fingers in there. 
 
We need, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at what happened in 
SIAST with respect to the community colleges. The community 
colleges were one of the success stories, along with the 
community schools of the . . . one of the success stories of the 
’70s. Now what’s happened with the community colleges is that 
they had their mandate restricted, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, 
we found that people were told, well they can’t . . . there are 
certain things that you can’t teach in a community college. 
 
Community colleges were set up so that they could be 
community based, and the programs that they put up in them 
and that they developed in them and produced in them would be 
based on the needs and the wants and the desires in the 
community. This government didn’t want that. They thought 
that those things should be run privately. And as a result, there 
are things that were done in the past that are no longer able to 
be done. For example, passing on the culture of the community 
— particularly valuable to new citizens of Canada, particularly 
valuable to them. Those things are gone. 
 
(1515) 
 
And what’s happened in K to 12 education, Mr. Speaker? When 
we had Allan Blakeney as a premier, and our member from 
Riversdale was deputy premier of that time, we raised the 
quality of teaching by raising the qualifications of teaching 
from a compulsory two years to a compulsory four-year 
program. School busing was made universal, and thus schools 
were made much more easily accessible for all students. I 
mentioned earlier, community schools were built. 
 
And you know, at that time, one of the things that we tried to do 
at the local level to institute and to ensure that schools would 
survive, we tried to set up a tax system so that the property 
taxpayer would not be bearing an increasing proportion of the 
taxes to pay the schools. 
 

Clearly right now what’s happened is the exact opposite — it’s 
exact opposite. There was one time, there was one time when 
the taxes were borne about equally, and the province was 
paying up to about 60 per cent. That’s now slipped, and it’s 
slipping slowly so that the school boards are having to cough up 
a larger and larger share of the tax dollar. 
 
There’s a good reason for doing that, for going in the direction 
of making sure that the tax burden for schools on the local 
taxpayer does not get too high. One of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, 
is because of the changing population demographics. That is, 
there are fewer and fewer people in this province now with 
children going to school, which means that there isn’t as much 
self-interest in people getting their taxes up to . . . and lobbying 
for local taxes to pay for the schools, yet we know that we have 
to have our schools. 
 
Of course the other reason is just to maintain equal opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker; make sure that children in your constituency have 
just as good a school as children in somebody else’s 
constituency. 
 
Now the first term, I must admit, in the first term, and to her 
credit, the minister, the former minister of Education, funded 
education — K to 12 education — quite generously, and that 
was accepted. But since then something has happened. They’ve 
sort of gone berserk over there and education is completely 
short-changed. 
 
And you ask any school board now — and ask, perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, the school board in which you reside — if their 
schools are not going into disrepair at this time. And you ask, 
and if the school board has not used up any surpluses that it has 
already had; you ask them if their buses are not getting old; you 
ask them if they haven’t had to curtail or cut some of the special 
programs. 
 
So at a time, and at a time when our community school 
concepts should be expanded so that more and more children 
would have adequate snacks and not come to school hungry, all 
of these things are being curtailed. We’re going in the wrong 
direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to turn very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to mention and to 
contrast what is happening in the health field. We’ve heard a 
lot, Mr. Speaker, about what new initiatives this government is 
saying they’re going to take. But the words that they speak 
simply do not bear up with the actions. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the budget speech they said that health 
was going to become a priority. And I want to contrast, Mr. 
Speaker, what the health scheme was like before these people 
took power with what it’s like now. When Allan Blakeney was 
the premier, and when our member from Riversdale, our present 
leader, was the deputy premier, we had no waiting lists of 
10,000 people. We had no people who died because they were 
on a waiting list. We had initiated a school-based dental plan, 
Mr. Speaker. We had no deterrent fees on prescription drugs. 
What do you got now? What do you got now? Well you got 
waiting lists up to 10,000 in hospitals and the cancer clinic. We 
have a scuttled school-based dental plan. We have deterrent fees 
on prescription drugs, and we have understaffed hospitals, 
nursing homes, and  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

178 
 

public health care programs. 
 
Now the government knows it’s in trouble on this, Mr. Speaker, 
so they moved a few paragraphs in their throne speech and they 
put it up on top in their throne speech. 
 
We know they were in trouble also because they tried 
something else. They tried to recoup their losses by 
administering . . . by setting up what they call the plastic cards 
— a little administrative move, plastic cards. I say plastic cards 
represent plastic policies of a plastic government. 
 
They tried something else to divert the pressure. They set up a 
task force with credible people on it. And do you know what’s 
happened? They thought it was going to take off the heat, but 
the task force has heard up to 500 briefs, Mr. Speaker. Now 
that’s heat; that’s heat. That would never have happened, Mr. 
Speaker, if they hadn’t have got into the cut-backs in health like 
they did with the cut-backs in education in the first place. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, people in the province have identified two 
areas, two major areas of problems in health and education. 
And the government, I think, has identified those areas as 
problems as well, and now they’re trying to rediscover some 
solutions. 
 
But the public is very dismayed, Mr. Speaker, because they 
wonder, what’s happened? He says: our taxes haven’t really 
been going down; our services have been going down; the taxes 
have been going up. Everybody that’s filled out their income 
tax knows that their taxes have been going up. Services have 
been going down. And at the same time they know that we have 
a massive, massive debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only does a person know, individually, when 
he’s filling out his income tax right now, that his taxes have 
gone down . . . have gone up, but if you take a look at the 
statistics of what has happened over the last three years, it bears 
that out. Has the province — the question here that has been 
asked of me — has the province really gone into that kind of a 
financial tail-spin that they don’t have any money coming in? 
 
The individual income tax has gone from $612 million in 
1982-83 to $831 million. That is, the province has collected that 
much more in those years — it’s gone from 612 to 709 to 714, 
up to 752 and then to 831. There were one or two years there 
where it went down briefly. This is the record of the province’s 
own statistics. The revenue collected from individuals in this 
province has always been rising. 
 
What about sales tax? Remember, these are the people that 
promised that they were going to decrease the sales tax — by 
10 per cent, I believe. Now what’s happened? Well look at how 
much revenue have they collected: 1982-83, 330 million. What 
about the year after that? Up to 359. What about the year after 
that? Up to 372. What about the year after that? 383, then 386, 
then 467, and then the last year, 476 — 476 million. That’s an 
average of $476 per person here in this province. 
 
Well in total between the two of those, from the years  

’82-83 when they took over government until the last year, 
they’ve increased our personal and our sales tax from every 
individual by $402 per person — $402 per person. That’s at the 
same time that we have pressure on health and on education. 
 
And you might wonder, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened to the 
property taxes in that time. Have the property taxes gone up or 
down or stayed constant? You take any home, take an average 
three-bedroom bungalow home in the town, say, of Yorkton. 
Property taxes in the year 1981, on the average, were $858. By 
1987 they’ve gone up to $1,158. That’s an increase of 250 — 
pardon me, that’s an increase of $550 after you add the loss of 
the property improvement grant of $250. So we have evidence 
— hard, cold facts — on top of our gut response and our gut 
feelings that taxes have gone up, while services have gone 
down and debt has been massively accumulating. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there has been no relief in this Speech from 
the Throne. There’s been no relief promised in the Speech from 
the Throne. What we have is problems, problems, problems 
without solutions. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as I close, I want to mention that if 
you go out into the rural part of the province, or if you go to any 
city in Saskatchewan and you ask people what they want — you 
know, what their aspirations are, you’ll find that it’s not that 
difficult to assess; it’s fairly simple. What they tell you is they 
want nutritious food on the table and a solid roof over their 
head. They want quality education, health services for all. They 
want a clean environment for the future. They want to live in a 
country where there’s freedom of expression, of association, 
and the right to practise a religion of one’s choice. They want a 
country where people are motivated by the desire to live in 
peace and in harmony. And they want a stable economy where 
all people can work to earn a decent living and end up with a 
dollar in their pocket. 
 
And that’s what motivates me, Mr. Speaker, is when I hear 
those kind of comments coming from the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. And that’s what motivates me to represent my 
constituency and the people across the province, to work hard 
and to elect the member of Riversdale as the next premier for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank 
you for the opportunity to rise to speak in this throne speech 
debate. 
 
I would, first of all, like to congratulate the new Lieutenant 
Governor for her speech to the throne. And I believe that she 
did an admirable job of presenting that speech. I want to also 
congratulate our Lieutenant Governor on the way that she has 
gone out to meet schoolchildren around our province and the 
warm manner in which she meets and discusses issues with 
young people. She’s doing a tremendous job. I want to 
congratulate her for that. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the mover of the Speech from 
the Throne, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Now 
this is our newest member  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

179 
 

of the legislature, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and 
I want to congratulate him on the fine method in which he 
handled himself in the House and the content of the speech 
reply that he gave. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the member from Yorkton for 
his seconding motion. 
 
Before I go into my main comments, I want to respond just a 
little to the electoral boundaries issue that was raised by the 
member for Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, the member there is 
trying to raise the idea that to not have exactly the same number 
of people in each constituency is something new. And I want to 
assure him that that’s a fairly old tradition in this province that 
rural ridings have for a long time had somewhat less in numbers 
than the city ridings. 
 
Just to give you an example of the numbers that I’m speaking 
of, in my particular riding I have approximately 8,800 voters. 
But if you were to go to the riding of the member for Saskatoon 
Mayfair, you would find that he had almost double that number. 
 
(1530) 
 
So I think the idea of a weighted system for rural versus urban 
has been in existence for a long period of time. 
 
The report from the Electoral Boundaries Commission is just 
tabled before this House, and I’m sure that we will have many 
opportunities to talk about it in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to touch very briefly on some of the 
environmental issues that I see happening throughout our 
province. People throughout Saskatchewan and Canada are 
placing more emphasis on the environment, and recent polls 
show that almost one in four Canadians now feel that 
environment is the most pressing issue facing the country. 
That’s up dramatically from 1987 when only 3 per cent 
believed environment was the most serious concern. 
 
It’s interesting to note that members opposite are finally 
beginning to recognize that there are environmental issues in 
our province. This is in marked contrast to their so-called 
concern, or lack of it, when they were government. Their lack 
of environmental consideration . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, point of order. I sit 
right behind the member for Rosetown and I can’t hear for the 
noise opposite. Could you . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. Order. We had a little 
fun, but I think maybe it’s time to settle down. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, it’s not fun, what you were doing. 
That’s not fun. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Well, all right. We will have a little 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Before I was interrupted I was  

speaking about the lack of concern that the members opposite 
had for environment at the time that they were in . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the members opposite to 
show a little decorum, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was remarking to 
the members opposite that during the time when they were in 
government they showed very little environmental concern for 
the things that were happening in our province. The lack of that 
consideration, I think, showed very clearly when in 1976 the 
federal Pioneer had a very major spill of PCB contaminated oil 
on a site here in Regina. Those members, as a government, 
covered that spill up and told no one until it was released or 
found out by the media in 1978. 
 
The spill in 1976 involved some 21,000 litres of PCB 
contaminated oil. In our day and age, as we find PCB 
contaminated spills, we clean them up. At that time, what did 
they do? And let me read to you a report that was listed in the 
Leader-Post at that time. It says: 
 

 More than two years passed before civic officials were 
informed of a potentially dangerous chemical spill within the 
Regina city limits, Mayor Henry Baker confirmed yesterday. 
Baker, a member of the Emergency Measures Organization, 
which would have been responsible for action had there been 
immediate injury or danger, said civic officials, including 
himself, police, and fire department officials only heard of the 
incident at the beginning of this week, and only then through 
the media. He described the situation as an unfortunate affair. 
 

Let’s remind the people of Saskatchewan that Henry Baker was 
an NDP MLA at that time. And in the fall of 1978, there was 
widespread public concern over the possible contamination by 
PCBs of ground water in Regina from that particular spill. And 
what was the response from the former NDP government? They 
covered it up, and they made the cover-up permanent when they 
paved the surface of the contaminated area with asphalt. That 
was the former administration’s response, but our government’s 
commitment to the environment is clear: it is protection, and we 
back up our words with actions. 
 
Our government not only talks about protecting the 
environment but also puts action to our words. PCBs were 
covered up by the former government, but this administration, 
under the leadership of our Premier, has begun to process PCBs 
(polychlorinated biphenyl) by running them through a process 
here in Regina that takes the PCBs out of the oil and has 
actually put those products back into service, saving a 
considerable number of dollars for SaskPower corporation and 
also taking away the contaminated product. Some 2 million 
litres have been processed since 1985. 
 
As well, our government has structured a new site for the 
collection of all PCBs in this province. That site was built near 
the Boundary dam station, and at this point in time,  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

180 
 

SaskPower is busily moving those PCB-contaminated materials 
and storing them in a very safe site in our province. 
 
Flammable or easily ignitable products will not be accepted for 
storage. However, high level material such as Askarel 
transformers and capacitors and PCB lamp ballasts can be 
stored there. 
 
Industries will not be able to simply show up at the gate without 
notice. All transportation to the site must be co-ordinated, 
scheduled, and on registered carriers, and must follow 
transportation of dangerous goods guide-lines. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that places this province out in front 
of any province in Canada for a capable method of handling 
PCB-contaminated materials. We hope that in the very near 
future we will have a chemical process that can be used to 
decontaminate all of the materials that we’re putting into 
storage. 
 
Another example of the way that the former administration 
handled environmental matters — NEWCOR, a mine that 
mined gold in the area near Douglas Lake and the community 
of Creighton. In the late 1950s and early ’60s, this gold refining 
operation existed on the shores of Douglas Lake near 
Creighton. This process resulted in the production of a waste 
containing arsenic trioxide. Approximately 20 tons of arsenic 
trioxide was produced and then stored on the site in a concrete 
vault, which was only some 150 feet from the shores of 
Douglas Lake. Now this is fairly important information, 
because Douglas Lake is the source of drinking water for the 
town of Creighton, and I’m sure that the community of 
Creighton was facing significant concern over the storage of 
that product. And yet over about a 30-year period, in which the 
members opposite were government for a good portion of that 
time, not one thing was done. 
 
The mines safety branch of the Department of Environment 
realized the seriousness of this situation. In the summer of 1987 
I visited the site, and after seeing the condition of the vault that 
the product was stored in, and having had the water tested in the 
lake shore very near to that site, we found that the 
contamination was serious, so we ordered the site cleaned up. 
Now that product was in a concrete vault that was cracking, and 
in barrels that had almost decomposed, and indeed some of the 
barrels had been buried in the ground and were not even in the 
vault, and we found buried contamination within 40 feet of the 
edge of that lake. 
 
I mention this point to show that this government does take 
concern over environmental matters and takes action. This site 
was cleaned up, and today the community of Creighton has 
clean water for their use. I believe that that move is a good 
move by our government, and one that shows concern for the 
people and for the environment in the area. 
 
Another area that our department has been involved in that had 
been neglected by the former administration, we had a number 
of abandoned mines in the province and these abandoned mines 
were let go; nothing was done.  

Many of them were very hazardous to the people living in the 
areas. As most of you realize, a number of these mines were in 
southern Saskatchewan in the coal mining area. Many of them 
have been there for probably 70 or 80 years. Loss of life near 
Estevan sparked considerable interest in what the future should 
be for abandoned mines. Our government has established a 
program and put in place people, and we have identified, over 
the past summer, approximately 500 mines that have been 
abandoned, and six very serious tailings deposits in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The status of many of these mines is still being assessed, but the 
most dangerous of the sites have been assessed, and refilling of 
many of these abandoned mines has already occurred. Last 
summer we completed the filling of 22 mine sites, and nine 
local contractors were used for the work. We have gone on to 
identify a number of the other mines, and refilling of mines and 
making these areas safe for people to live in is occurring, and 
will continue to occur over the next few months. 
 
We’ve worked very close with local governments and people in 
the wildlife federation who have been involved in hunting and 
walking through much of that part of the country. Each of those 
groups have provided valuable input to the the department, and 
that input has enabled us to identify the most serious sites and 
to proceed to clean them up. 
 
There are many pressing issues that face environment in our 
province today and will continue to in the future. Many 
industries and many individuals are concerned about the future 
environmental needs of our province. Some of the concerns that 
they raise are: depletion of the ozone layer, the greenhouse 
effect, and other problems of air pollution. 
 
As elected representatives we need to continue to address these 
issues so that our environment remains clean and the economy 
of our province is strong. We need to ensure that the 
environment is protected, that we have good quality water for 
our people, that our land remains productive, that development 
and consumption of our natural resources continues in a way 
that minimizes the impact on our environment. Integrating the 
environment and economical development will be a bigger 
challenge for governments and for industry. 
 
The environment is something that we should not fear. Our 
challenge is clear: to be leaders in meshing development with a 
clean environment. Consequently, I support the goals of 
sustainable economic development defined in the report of the 
National Task Force on Environment and Economy as 
development which ensures that the utilization of resources and 
environment today does not damage prospects for their use by 
future generations. 
 
How has our government responded to protecting 
Saskatchewan’s environment? Let me give you some examples. 
This year our government has put in place regulations that deal 
with hazardous substances. The focus of the new regulations is 
prevention. These preventative measures include the 
registration of storage facilities, new standards for new 
facilities, the upgrading  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

181 
 

of existing facilities within five years, inventory control, and the 
preparation of an environmental emergency response plan. We 
also intend to initiate programs to address the management of 
all hazardous substances at the various types of storage 
facilities, including underground as well as above ground tank 
systems. 
 
(1545) 
 
In the near future we will be developing appropriate standards 
for the construction, operation, maintenance, and 
decommissioning of these facilities. Our government takes 
serious our responsibility to deal with toxic chemicals and 
hazardous wastes, and we will continue to work at providing a 
good quality of life through environmental protection. 
 
Last year we passed The Clean Air Act, which is an item of 
interest to the members of this Assembly, and I would like to 
take a few minutes to briefly outline some of the highlights of 
the new Act to show the substantial improvements in the 
protection of air quality in Saskatchewan from the former 
administration to the present government. 
 
All industrial sources, incinerators, and fuel-burning equipment 
will require a permit under The Clean Air Act. Unless a specific 
exemption has been granted, this is the major change contained 
in the new legislation. No longer will sources that were 
operational prior to 1975 be automatically exempted. The new 
Act contains a listing of the typical conditions which must be 
included in any permit. We expect that this will end the 
confusion and disagreements over permit conditions which have 
occurred in the past. 
 
The normal permit term will be five years as opposed to the 
one-year term that is used at present. This change came about at 
the request of our clients who felt that one-year terms did not 
provide the assurance and security necessary to allow them to 
enter into long-term sales contracts. Details of emergency 
situations must be provided within seven days, and applications 
for any permit amendments must be submitted within 14 days. 
 
The spill control regulations and the clean air regulations 
contain additional reporting requirements with respect to 
emergency or accidental releases. If an air pollution problem 
occurs, the director of the air and land protection branch may 
issue an order requiring the source to limit the discharge, install 
additional control equipment, measure or monitor the air 
contaminant, investigate the effects, and provide reports to the 
director. This is the other major change in the new Act. The 
penalties for violation of the new Act or regulations have been 
increased to a maximum of $50,000 for corporations and $1,000 
for individuals. 
 
Through legislation such as this, the new Clean Air Act, our 
government intends to better control air emissions from 
industrial plants in the province and to protect against pollutants 
which contribute to acid rain. 
 
We have also come out in support of the federal government’s 
initiative to protect the earth’s ozone layer, and we support the 
elimination of chlorofluorocarbons,  

that is CFCs, within the next 10 years. 
 
Recently the Government of Ontario made a major 
announcement that they were going to rule out the use of CFCs 
prior to that 10-year period, and I hope that that process will be 
successful for the Ontario government. However, I think each 
one of us must be aware that in order to rule out 
chlorofluorocarbons, we also have to have a product to take 
their place. Most of us realize that industry cannot respond 
instant, but can respond if given a responsible time frame, and I 
think 10 years is that responsible time frame. 
 
In 1986 the Canadian Council of Resource and Environment 
Ministers appointed a task force to follow up the work of the 
World Commission on Environment and Development. This 
National Task Force on Environment and the Economy 
presented its report to the council at our 1987 fall council 
meeting. This report, which subsequently was presented by 
Canada to the United Nations General Assembly, has been very 
well received, nationally and internationally. 
 
Environmental protection is everyone’s business. The National 
Task Force on Environment and the Economy directed 
recommendations to government, industry, business, educators, 
and the public. The task force recommended that each 
jurisdiction in Canada form a round table to bring together 
government, industry, and non-government leaders. The 
purpose of this group is to candidly discuss environment- and 
economy-related issues and to make recommendations. Our 
government is committed to forming a round table, and the 
names of the individual members will be announced very soon. 
 
The task force also recommended that each province and 
territory should have a conservation strategy in place by 1992. 
The purpose of such plan is to ensure that our renewable 
resource base is sustained for future use to ensure we preserve 
genetic diversity and maintain essential ecological processes 
and life support systems. 
 
Many organizations, businesses and governments have 
programs currently aimed at conservation. The conservation 
strategy will co-ordinate these programs and provide a 
longer-term goal. One program which provides an excellent 
beginning to a conservation strategy is the Prairies 
Conservation Action Plan. This plan was recently endorsed by 
the three prairie provinces. Saskatchewan, Manitoba and 
Alberta have all made commitments to work with the World 
Wildlife Fund and other conservation organizations to conserve 
and improve prairie habitat. 
 
Another recommendation of the task force was that the minister 
must ensure that they are responsible and accountable for the 
environmental and economic consequences of their policies, 
legislation and programs. To this end, our government recently 
formed a cabinet committee on environment. This committee is 
directed with the task of developing and integrating 
environmental strategy. Our intent is to ensure that government 
programs do not work at cross purposes and to ensure that the 
environment is considered in planning and development 
actions. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

182 
 

Now I would like to switch hats and speak a little about the 
Sask Water role that I carry. And as minister responsible for 
Sask Water Corporation, over the past two and a half years I 
have seen some very dry conditions around the province. Last 
year’s drought not only serious affected my farm, but also the 
crops of many farmers in my constituency. It not only covered 
the Rosetown-Elrose area but devastated most of southern and 
central Saskatchewan. 
 
Our government responded to the plight of farmers, ranchers 
and communities by introducing an enhanced drought relief 
program last year. In 1988 we provided assistance of nearly $10 
million to help drought-proof the province, and Saskatchewan 
people were pleased with this helping hand. This year we 
expect to provide similar levels of assistance, which will make 
the total close to $20 million over a two-year period. Last year 
Sask Water provided grants for 1,246 test holes, 2,855 
individual wells, 29 community wells, and 4,169 dug-outs and 
small storage reservoirs. 
 
Through rental of government and private equipment, farmers 
pumped a record 1,981 dug-outs. In addition, nearly 150 
drought-related applications were also handled under the 
municipal water assistance program. 
 
Earlier this year our government extended the enhanced drought 
assistance program. The deadline for applications is March 31. 
After that date, Sask Water’s drought assistance programs will 
return to their previous levels. I should point out that once 
applicants receive written approval to proceed, they’ll have 
until October 1, 1989, to complete the work and submit 
receipts. This program extension will mean that many more 
people and communities will benefit from our enhanced 
assistance. 
 
I am also encouraged to see that many communities are 
undertaking public education programs on wise water use and 
conservation. Water is one of our most valuable natural 
resources, and such programs help people realize the important 
role that they can play in water management and conservation. 
 
Our government is committed to the concept of water 
management, whether it be in the form of long-term water 
storage projects, such as Gardiner dam and Lake Diefenbaker 
dam, or through the $100 million Canada-Saskatchewan 
irrigation agreement. 
 
The first project centred in the Luck Lake area will be pumping 
water for the first time this spring. A similar state of the 
irrigation project at Riverhurst is under construction and will be 
serving farmers in that region in May of 1990. Investigations 
around Lake Diefenbaker have identified five more projects. If 
these seven projects were all developed, the total number of 
acres under irrigation in that area would be about 200,000. 
 
To date, Sask Water has signed commitment letters from 
farmers for 71,000 acres. The interest in irrigation is very high 
indeed. I believe the Premier must be commended for his vision 
and drive in making this significant irrigation agreement a 
reality. 
 
Our government is also very concerned about soil and  

water conservation. Careful consideration of soil conditions and 
water use efficiency should result in economically and 
environmentally sustainable irrigation projects. 
 
One of the reasons that our government has been promoting 
irrigation development is for agricultural and economic 
diversification. We’ve already seen a number of companies 
begin to expand or, as a result of this agreement, to indeed build 
new facilities. For example, a group of investors in Delisle are 
working to develop a $1.6 million salad processing plant. The 
Delsa foods limited of Delisle will use potatoes and other 
vegetables from irrigated farm production to develop and 
prepare salads for the western Canada market. Within five years 
it is estimated that the plant will require the production of 500 
acres of vegetables to meet its quota. 
 
Our irrigation program has helped two Lake Diefenbaker area 
firms expand to process irrigation crops. Elbow cubes and feed 
limited have purchased portable alfalfa cubing equipment in 
order to produce alfalfa cubes for both the local and export 
markets. Keg Farms of Outlook has increased the capacity of its 
seed cleaning and will encourage the production of speciality 
crops such as dry beans. These two locally owned companies 
will process production from approximately 2,500 irrigated 
acres each year. 
 
Saskatoon Fresh Pack Potatoes Ltd. are working towards $2.4 
million expansion of their facility and equipment to increase 
production of their current product lines, as well as adding new 
product items. This expansion will result in the company 
requiring an estimated 5,000 additional acres of potatoes and 
other vegetables by the year 1992. As a result of these plans, the 
company can now complete far more trade and extend their 
product export into the United States market. 
 
Another Saskatoon company, Intercontinental Packers, has 
begun construction of an $8 million modernization of its beef 
processing facilities. The modernization will double the plant’s 
kill and chill capacity to 5,200 cattle per week. 
 
Meanwhile, Canada Packers is expanding its Moose Jaw beef 
processing plant. The $1.3 million expansion will also increase 
its capacity to 5,000 cattle per week. Canada Packers is 
expanding its facilities to handle the increased number of 
slaughtered cattle produced by the use of irrigation forage 
products. The increased capacity of the two packing plants will 
lend to more production, forage crops, and other low cost, 
irrigation-grown cattle feed. 
 
(1600) 
 
As part of our irrigation initiative, Canron Inc. has decided to 
build a hyprescon pipe plant near Saskatoon. The Canadian 
prairies market for this kind of pipe is expected to grow 
substantially over the next few years as demand for irrigated 
land increases. The plant, which will produce a locally 
manufactured product, is now under construction and will begin 
operating later this spring. 
 
I would be remiss if I did not spend a few minutes talking  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

183 
 

about the constituency that I represent, and I would like to take 
this opportunity of thanking the Rosetown-Elrose electorate for 
electing me for the third time to this legislature. 
 
The constituency has seen a number of new things happening in 
the past year, and I think that I would like to recognize some of 
those. Health care has always been extremely important in my 
constituency and indeed across the province. This has been 
reflected in the many ways that our government has responded 
to the needs in my constituency in the past few years. 
 
This past year we had a sod turning for a new Golden Years 
Lodge in Elrose. This is about a $2.1 million project. It will 
provide 28 replacement beds and two new beds, for a total of 30 
beds in Elrose special care home. 
 
I’m also very proud of the $3 million Kyle-White Bear 
integrated facility that is just being completed and will soon be 
ready for opening. It has nine acute care beds and twelve 
long-term beds. Renovations are also taking place at the Milden 
Union Hospital. Just very recently, I opened a small addition 
and upgrading to the Rosetown nursing home facility. Each one 
of these changes provide essential health care for the seniors in 
my constituency, and I’m very pleased for that. 
 
A new and rich housing complex that provides six senior citizen 
units in the town of Beechy was opened late in the fall. This 
also is providing accommodation that allows seniors to stay in 
their home community and to enjoy the opportunity to be close 
to their family and their friends. 
 
Education is also a very important part of that constituency, and 
I would like to just identify a few things that have happened in 
education in our constituency. This year Rosetown opened a 
new central high school that will accommodate both divisions 
three and four. This new school is a state of the art school. I 
would say that it’s a leader in its time. And I was very pleased 
to be at the opening of that facility, along with Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. And Her Honour did a fine job for us that 
particular day, and the school very much appreciated having her 
in their midst. 
 
We also had very extensive renovations to the Kyle Composite 
High School last year. That school was getting older; many of 
the facilities were quite aged and needed replacing. So the 
school has been upgraded to today’s standards and is providing 
good service in that community. 
 
In conclusion, I am very pleased that our government has, over 
the past few years, had a good record in many areas of 
government, particularly in the health care field, the agriculture 
field, education, environment, water management, drought 
relief, rural development, and the overall trends of our 
government to develop a strong economic base in our province. 
 
It’s interesting that this past year is the first time in the history 
of this province that the industrial sector has surpassed the 
agricultural sector for generating jobs and for generating 
income. I think it’s something to say for the development that 
our government has taken as very  

serious for our province to bring us up into the 20th century 
level, as a province that doesn’t depend only on agriculture, but 
rather places industry and agriculture as two that can work very 
closely together. 
 
Once again I want to commend the Premier for putting together 
such a forward-looking and commonsense throne speech. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’ll be very pleased to vote against the 
amendment and to be voting in favour of the main motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to reply in the address from 
the throne speech. I welcome it for a number of reasons. First of 
all, it gives me an opportunity to explain to the people of this 
province something that I think most of them already know — 
is how this government operates. 
 
But before I do that, I would like to join with other members in 
welcoming the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I hope his 
short stay with us will be enjoyed by him. Kind of feel sorry for 
the member a little bit, because I think if he had any credibility 
before he got elected, it’s been just a few short weeks now, and 
I’m sure that credibility has already gone downhill, just because 
we have a government and a Premier of this province who does 
not tell the people the truth all the time, and they can’t trust 
him. And now the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is 
another member in the wolf pack. 
 
I would just say that he should enjoy his short stay here because 
I believe it will be a short stay, because I would be willing to 
bet that he won’t be back for a second time. 
 
And I say that for one reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I spent a 
little bit of time down in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and 
something that I was hearing down there really made me feel 
that there was something wrong with the whole process that 
we’re in. That was, I was on the doorsteps of people who were 
telling me, well I wouldn’t normally vote Tory, I wouldn’t 
normally vote Tory, but I’ve seen this government operate. I’ve 
seen how they display their patronage. I see how they reward 
people. I hear how they . . . in terms of the federal government 
saying, you know, if you don’t vote for us, you’re going to be 
left out. And this is what these people were saying. 
 
And I thought to myself, well, shouldn’t these people be saying, 
we’re going to select the best candidate who will do the best job 
to represent the farmers, the working people, the professional 
people in that community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s what they should have been making 
their decision on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But instead they were 
making a decision based on the message they were getting from 
this government, and that is the only way they were going to get 
anything was to vote Tory. 
 
I think that’s brought the democratic system to its lowest  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

184 
 

degree, when you’re not making a decision based on the quality 
of someone who can work, but making a decision based on a 
government who rewards people for doing something for them. 
That should not be a part of the democratic structure in this 
province or any other place in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So anyway, I would just . . . I do feel sorry for the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, because he didn’t know probably what 
he was getting into, but I’m sure he does now, and hopefully 
some day he’ll realize the ills of his ways. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also would like to talk for a minute about 
my own constituency of Humboldt. On behalf of my 
constituents, I would like to say a couple of words with respect 
to something like the enriched housing program in Bruno that 
was announced a week before the election in 1986, and ever 
since then we’ve been trying to get another commitment out of 
the government saying that the promise they made would be 
kept. But here we are in 1989 and we still see nothing 
happening. 
 
After repeated attempts by the people, by myself, to get the 
government to deliver on a promise, their word, they will not do 
it. So I will just hope that this throne speech leading up to a 
budget speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will . . . the government 
will in there find the heart, find the courage maybe, to keep 
their promises. 
 
Also I’d like just to mention briefly the situation in Humboldt 
where the SaskPower service crew was removed. In a town of 
5,000 people, 5,000 people, when this government removes the 
service crew that fixes accidents or power outages in Humboldt, 
now they have to come out of Saskatoon. And can you imagine 
this winter, when it’s 40 below, when there’s a wind and the 
snow blowing and there’s a power outage in the town of 
Humboldt in the middle of the night, can you imagine how long 
it will take them to notify that Saskatoon office to get somebody 
out there? 
 
That’s a real step to the future, simply because they can’t 
manage, simply because they do not keep in mind the needs of 
the people, simply because they cannot distribute the wealth of 
this province to benefit those ordinary working people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the leader of the party across the way, the 
Premier of this province, has a big job ahead of him. That job is 
to try to recapture the imagination of the people of this 
province, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he has lost it. And just 
for a moment I would just like to make a little comparison 
between the leader on the government side of the House and the 
leader on the opposition side of the House. 
 
On this side of the House we have a man, a leader who is 
devoted to trying to get this government to work towards 
keeping people healthy, keeping people educated, keeping 
people in their jobs and on their farms, keeping people in the 
province. 
 
He has travelled thousands of miles around this province, 
meeting with anybody that wanted to meet, meeting at every 
opportunity with clubs and business organizations  

and working people, in their kitchens, addressing the real 
issues, the real issues being how do we keep this economy . . . 
make this economy of Saskatchewan come back up to a level 
where we can operate and function without having to worry 
about the taxes going up, our neighbours leaving, our farms 
being foreclosed upon. That’s the leader we have at this side of 
the House. 
 
Compared to a Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who I get 
complaints about from people saying, look we can’t meet the 
Premier, we can’t get access to him. A Premier who is not 
listening to the people. If you don’t have access to them you’re 
not listening to them. A Premier who, when the crucial issues in 
this province come up, is usually off globe-trotting somewhere 
around the world. A leader on the government side who says, 
we are working for the people of the province, and when the 
serious issue comes up, he’s gone. That’s hypocrisy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And the ultimate bit of hypocrisy is what the 
leader of the government does when he gets in a jam. 
 
The leader of this side of the House tries to confront the issues. 
For example, the foreclosure issue. Major problem. Forecasting 
almost 2,000 farm foreclosures in Saskatchewan this year; 
3,000 in the two years previous. And we on this side of the 
House, we try to get the Premier of this province to say, whoa, 
we don’t want the people to leave the farms. We try to address 
the issue and give suggestions of stopping the foreclosures. 
 
We address the issue of getting income out to the farmers so 
that they won’t be foreclosed upon. We address the issue of a 
predictable program. We address the issue of debt and drought 
and wheat board and all other aspects of agriculture. 
 
But what’s the response? And the way this legislature should 
work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we try to encourage the 
government to make the best possible decision for the people of 
this province. And that’s what the leader on this side is trying to 
do with the rest of these members. 
 
But what’s the response? The Premier who says he’s working 
for the people of this province responds by character 
assassination; responds by not even attempting to address the 
issue, but goes off on a wild raid somewhere about the person. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there’s one reason for this. 
The Premier of this province will not address the issues as 
presented by this side of the House. Question period after 
question period, questions aren’t answered. But why is he doing 
this? Why is he not talking about the issue? He’s not talking 
about the issue, Mr. Speaker, as every member or nearly every 
member on that side of the House did not address the issues, 
especially in agriculture, in any one of their speeches. They go 
around the edge. 
 
But the Premier of this province is not addressing the issue 
because he has one purpose in mind. That’s to stop the Leader 
of the Opposition from becoming government. What a selfish 
motive for a Premier of the province to cast  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

185 
 

aside all the problems of this province, the problems of debt in 
agriculture, and working people leaving this province, to cast all 
that aside, not address it, for his own personal gain — for 
personal political gain. And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this attempt by this Premier and this government to slander the 
leader on this side of the House will not work, because the 
people understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The people understand what he’s trying to do 
— not address the issue; for trying to attack other people for his 
own political gain. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this throne speech I saw very 
little new. All the old worn out ideas, no economic strategy for 
recovery in this province, nobody addressing the issues. 
 
I come back to this just for one second. It amazes me that we 
have a number of rural members on that side of the House. Did 
they talk about the drought program? Did they explain to their 
constituents in this throne speech why the drought program was 
late? Did they explain to their constituents when they got up 
why they didn’t stand up for them when western grain 
stabilization was cut out from under them? 
 
Did they get up in their place and tell their constituents why 
they weren’t standing up and defending the Canadian Wheat 
Board when it’s being driven out of this country? Did they 
stand up in their place and give their economic plan for debt 
restructuring? Did they stand up in their place and give a speech 
about how they were going to stabilize the industry by having 
predictable programs to provide economic stability? Not a 
word, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And why won’t they do that? Why won’t they address the 
issues at hand? I say because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 
no ideas. They are absolutely void of ideas. 
 
Then there’s the opposite; maybe they do have an idea. Maybe 
they have all decided that the Premier of this province, who in 
days gone by had a plan to reduce the number of farmers in this 
province, thereby reducing the population of this province, they 
have fallen in line to that hypocritical plan. And I say that to the 
members opposite, that is not what their job is. Their job is to 
address the issues on behalf of their constituents, and very few 
did it. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, they are talking to fewer and fewer people 
all the time as we are on this side. The out-migration in this 
province has reached epidemic proportions. In an epidemic, in 
any epidemic you have to address the problem in very crucial 
manners with good ideas, to stop the epidemic. But there’s 
nothing happening from this government. 
 
We have young people leaving this province. We have urban 
families leaving this province; we have rural families leaving 
this province. And they’re all leaving behind friends and 
families — maybe, unless they’ve gone ahead of them. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those people who are  

leaving this province don’t believe the Premier of this province. 
They don’t believe him when he says he’s working for them; 
he’s working to create employment; he’s working to keep 
health care; he’s working to stop the foreclosure of farms. They 
don’t believe him. 
 
And as was said in this House earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
will predict many of those people will come back to this 
province when this Premier has the courage to call an election, 
and work their heart out to beat him. I know they’ll do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — It reminds me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was just 
thinking about the whole thing of people leaving the province in 
droves, the farmers losing their land, and foreclosure actions — 
farmers having to lose their land. And then I hear an 
announcement from the Premier saying that we’re going to 
exterminate or drive all the rats out of this province. And I 
would say, that program worked so well on the ordinary people 
and the farmers of this province — driving them out — that it’s 
just extending it to the rats, and it’ll probably work well there. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, don’t trust the word of the Premier. They don’t trust 
the word of the Premier. 
 
We have a situation where patronage is running rampant. 
Nearly every defeated Tory candidate is now working for the 
government. Can you feature it? People rejected them, but the 
Tory government took them back in. And we got all these 
people running around. 
 
This reminds me of a saying once, and that’s that the monkeys 
are in charge of the banana plantation. And that’s what we have 
here. You can’t get rid of them; they’re eating all the bananas 
themselves; and we got people leaving the province. Isn’t that a 
problem to have in a province like Saskatchewan where we 
have so many resources, whether that it be mineral or human; in 
the province of Saskatchewan where we built up an economy 
and a society that treats people well, that ensures they have 
good health care, that ensures they have good education. And 
the monkeys in charge of the banana patch are letting it go, 
because they’re keeping it all for themselves, and that’s the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to some of the issues, the 
serious issues that are facing the people of this province, 
especially as it relates to agriculture. 
 
The drought program. The drought program in Saskatchewan 
came to Saskatchewan late, as we know, because Manitoba and 
Alberta got it ahead of us. This Premier of this province says, in 
the by-election of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the green feed 
program participants would not be affected. And what do we 
see on the form when the drought forms come out? Green feed 
program participants, people who participate in the green feed 
program — the levels of money they get will be reduced. Now 
there’s a word for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know I can’t 
say it here. But here again, the people can’t trust the word of the 
Premier of this province. 
 
All the people are asking out there, they’re just saying to  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

186 
 

me when I talk to farmers, just tell me what I’m going to get. If 
I’m going to get nothing, then tell me I’m going to get nothing. 
If I’m going to get something, then tell me what I’m going to 
get because I have to budget. I have to operate and make my 
operation work. I have to tell my banker and my suppliers what 
I can pay them. But just tell me — and they’re begging out 
there — just tell me what I’m going to get, and then I know 
how to operate my farm. 
 
But no. Is that what the Premier of this province stands up and 
says in this House? That he’s putting pressure on Brian 
Mulroney to make sure that this drought program is a clear, 
concise, predictable program providing stability for the rural 
communities? No, he does not do that. In fact, the Premier, in 
1985 was saying that we’re going to have a drought program in 
place so that we’ll never be affected financially by another 
drought. And it was said in Ottawa. And did we see that? No. 
Because you can’t trust the word of the Premier of this 
province. 
 
The drought program where people were promised it in a 
federal election. That’s the Tory policy — how do we buy them 
this time? Promised it in the federal election of last year; said it 
was going to be out in early January. And believe it or not, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when I called down to Ottawa early in January 
to find out some of the details of the drought program, you 
could phone any one of a number of numbers and the poor 
people on the other end of that program had no idea what was 
going on. 
 
So they make an announcement during election, with no plan. 
Build up the expectations of the people saying that they can 
make plans, that there’s money coming and they can tell their 
banker there’s money coming, they can tell their suppliers 
there’s money coming and it’ll be coming in January. And then 
January rolls around and there’s no money and the banker’s 
knocking on the door saying, when’s your money coming? Well 
I don’t know. February rolls around and the suppliers are 
writing letters saying, when can I expect my money? Farmer 
says, I don’t know. March rolls around, and lo and behold, we 
get some forms. Four or five months after the promise was 
made — a promise that said people, you’re going to be getting 
something. 
 
And I say again, all the farmers of this province want to know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is give me the rules of the program. Give 
me the formula. I can work it out. Let me know what I should 
expect. 
 
But no, the Premier of this province doesn’t stand up for the 
farmers out in rural Saskatchewan. He doesn’t push Ottawa to 
have a good, concise, predictable stability program; doesn’t 
push Ottawa to restructure debt; doesn’t push Ottawa to stop the 
erosion of the Canadian Wheat Board. When the Canadian 
Wheat Board announcement was made, I believe the Premier 
was off on his Eastern business trip — his Eastern holiday on 
the Oriental Express. I would venture to guess, and it’s just a 
guess, but I would venture to guess that the Premier of this 
province knew the decision before he left, knew the decision 
before he left. 
 
I had the opportunity of attending some Canadian Wheat Board 
country meetings and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those country 
meetings were well attended because the people  

went there for a purpose. People went there because they could 
see what was happening. Did they have leadership from the 
Premier of this province? Did they have the Premier of this 
province standing up to Ottawa and say, don’t erode the wheat 
board? No, the Premier of this province was saying, it’s only 1 
per cent of the market; it’s insignificant. 
 
The Premier of this province was agreeing with the federal 
government saying it was okay to erode the Canadian Wheat 
Board, all the while saying, I’m a supporter of the Canadian 
Wheat Board, I’m a supporter of the Canadian Wheat Board — 
but we don’t trust the word of the Premier of this province. 
 
At those country meetings, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I have a list 
of them, I’d just like to read them off. In Meadow Lake, there 
was approximately 80 people. And at all these meetings, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, at all these meetings there was a motion to 
keep oats under the wheat board. And the motions varied: to 
keep oats under the wheat board; add canola to the wheat board. 
But the bottom line was, don’t erode the Canadian Wheat Board 
— keep it. We want it, we need it. That’s the message the 
Premier of this province should be telling Ottawa. But the 
people took over when the Premier fell down. 
 
Meadow Lake, 80 people. Six supported the Premier of this 
province and the Prime Minister of this country — six out of 
80. 
 
In Perdue, 180 people. And there in Perdue 12 people agreed 
with the Premier of this province. 
 
And in Kerrobert, 170 people were attending the meeting. The 
meeting had the same motions supporting the Canadian Wheat 
Board, and out of those 170, 10 people agreed with the Premier 
of this province that the wheat board should go. 
 
And in Porcupine Plain there were 120 people, and in Porcupine 
Plain five people agreed with the Premier of this province that 
the wheat board should be eroded and let go. 
 
In Melville, 170 people, and three people agreed with the 
Premier of this province and this government over here that the 
wheat board should go. 
 
Wadena, 120 people approximately, and two people agreed 
with the Premier of this province and this government opposite. 
 
Wapella, 130 people, and six people agreed with the Premier of 
this province and the government opposite that the wheat board 
should go. 
 
Weyburn, 180 people, and there 25 people agreed with the 
Premier of this province. 
 
Herbert, 110 people at the meeting; six people agreed with the 
Premier of this province. 
 
And in Wakaw there were 300 people out, 300 people fighting 
to save the wheat board, and 15 agreed with the Premier of this 
province that the wheat board should be  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

187 
 

let go and deteriorated. 
 
(1630) 
 
In all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you talk about a good poll. 
Approximately 1,560 people came out to wheat board meetings 
to express their concern about the deterioration of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. And out of those 1,560 people, approximately 60 
of them agreed with the Premier of this province that the wheat 
board should go. 
 
You talk about a poll, opinion poll, but whose side is the 
Premier of this province on? He’s on the side of the 
multinational grain company; he’s on the side of the U.S. 
government pushing free trade, trying to get rid of the wheat 
board, when the majority of the people at these meetings and, I 
say, the majority of the people of this province say: Mr. 
Premier, we don’t trust your word when we see how you act. 
 
And I think that message will come through loud and clear in 
the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can even go into 
Alberta and Manitoba. And this issue, this issue goes beyond 
political lines. It’s an issue at the heart of the people, because 
it’s an institution that has created a form of stability for the 
people of this province that they could rely on. 
 
They could predict that they were going to be marketing their 
grain in an orderly fashion. They could predict that, as shown 
last year with a study done in the comparison between the 
Canadian Wheat Board and the Minneapolis Grain Exchange, 
that oats itself consistently sold higher under the Canadian 
Wheat Board. And this Premier wants it to go, when taking oats 
out from under the control of the wheat board means that 
there’s going to be lower prices in the pockets of the farmers. 
And he wants it to go. What type of a Premier would want that 
when the people of this province are already in hard, tough 
economic times. 
 
But in Alberta and Manitoba it was overwhelming support for 
the Canadian Wheat Board — overwhelming support. And 
where’s the Premier of Saskatchewan? He’s tucked right in 
under the wing of Brian Mulroney and Charlie Mayer saying, 
okay guys, let’s go, let’s destroy this thing because then we can 
get our multinational grain traders in here, and they put funds 
into our campaigns, and that way we can make sure that we 
have enough money to advertise and get elected. That’s where 
the Premier of this province is — under the wing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another important issue — and I’m just 
touching on these briefly because there’s much more that could 
be said about this. Another important issue was the one of 
western grain stabilization. I’ll just speak for a moment on this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that all you can speak on it . . . 
 
Mr. Upshall: — No, I could speak on it for much longer than 
that, but in the time constraints, I’ll only speak for a moment. 
 
The issue here was the federal government set the rules, the 
federal government set the rules and legislation, then  

they changed the rules and legislation. They paid farmers at 
$12.12 for every dollar contributed, and right on the form — 
here’s the thing — right on the form it says: you will be paid 
proportionately to every dollar you contribute to the program. 
But the legislation changed in the middle of last year. They 
increased the percentage rate from one to four that the farmers 
contributed, but did they pay the farmers on that 4 per cent rate? 
Did the government opposite stand up, did the Premier of this 
province stand up to Ottawa and say, look, you said that you 
were going to be paid on every dollar contributed under this 
program and you were only paid on one-quarter of that? Is that 
the type of leader that we need in this province? No, I say it is 
not. 
 
And then when we ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I try to ask 
the Premier and try to ask the federal government, where is the 
— this is just before the last federal election — where is the 
final payment from the wheat board? There wasn’t a word said. 
You know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the Premier of 
this province knew there was going to be bills sent out; the 
Prime Minister of this country knew there was going to be bills 
sent out instead of cheques. So they were tight-lipped. How can 
anyone who now sits back and sees the process that we’ve gone 
through here ever trust the word of this Premier again? I don’t 
think they can. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the two most urgent problems we have in 
this province is income — lack of income — and uncontrollable 
debt. We need a program, and we have promoted a program that 
would provide income stability, income stability by 
predictability. As I said, the farmers have said, let us know. 
 
But the question I have to ask myself is, why won’t — why 
doesn’t the Premier of this province and the Prime Minister of 
this country — why won’t they come out with a program that is 
stable and predictable when everyone’s crying for it; not just 
the farmers, the small-business people in the small towns, the 
business people in the city who rely so much on them? And this 
has not just become a farm problem now, it’s become a society 
problem. 
 
The small-business people are suffering, the professional people 
are suffering, the farmers are suffering, all because the Premier 
of this province and the Prime Minister of this country will not 
give the people what they want. They want a predictable 
program, a program that provides income stability. They don’t 
want to get rich off the government. All they want to know is 
that there’s going to be a program in place so that they and their 
families can stay on their farms. Now they don’t know that. 
 
If you were in severe financial difficulty, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
every time that phone rings, let me tell you, you’d jump. It’s 
just like a time bomb ticking away, waiting to go off. And 
where’s the leadership, where’s the compassion, where’s the 
heart of this government and the government in Ottawa? They 
know they have to spend a certain amount of money, but they 
won’t tell us when it’s coming, how it’s coming. They won’t 
tell us the formula to use so that we can figure out what we’re 
going to get so that we can tell the small-business people that, 
look, as soon as I get my money, you’ll be getting some. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

188 
 

What’s happening right now is we’ve got a little money shuffle 
going on, from the federal government, through the pockets of 
the farmers, to the banking institutions and to the Government 
of Saskatchewan Agricultural Credit Corporation, because 
they’ve got farmers in a position where they cannot, where they 
cannot take the funds that they have to disburse and put them to 
work for them in such a manner that they can make themselves 
a decent living. 
 
On the other side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is debt. We are in a 
situation now where we’re almost a third world country. Third 
world countries’ biggest problem is they have unmanageable 
debt. The farmers of Saskatchewan and the small-business 
people of Saskatchewan’s biggest problem is they have 
unmanageable debt. 
 
And when we know that problem is there, why doesn’t the 
Premier of this province do something about it? Oh, he says, in 
his flowery speeches, we are working for the family farm and 
the society and the rural communities and the people, but he 
does nothing about it. That’s why the people don’t trust the 
word of this Premier. 
 
We have presented solutions. The Government of 
Saskatchewan and the federal government hold over half of the 
farm debt — hold over half of the six and a half billion dollar 
farm debt. They can purchase money for much less than a 
farmer can purchase money for. They can get loans far cheaper 
than the farmer can, and they can disburse that money equally 
amongst the farmers so that they can control their debt. But no, 
they won’t do that. Instead, farm credit corporation, instead of 
being the farmer’s bank, the prime lender, has the highest, or 
one of the highest rates going. 
 
All we need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers, all they need is 
to know that the debt is not going to kill them. And this 
government will not provide that solution. They won’t have a 
debt restructuring program that says you’re going to have a low, 
long-term, fixed interest rate on the amount of your debt, and if 
your debt is over a certain amount, then maybe we have to set 
part of that debt aside, turn the interest clock off on it so that 
you can see a light at the end of that tunnel. 
 
This government, this Premier, refuses to do that, and he refuses 
to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because he has a master plan, 
as I said earlier. And his master plan is to drive a number of 
people out of this province, drive the farmers off the land 
because that’s his theory, that’s his vision. He says we don’t 
need these many farmers out here. 
 
But that’s not my vision, and that’s not the vision of the 
members on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
province was built up on farms and small business, people in 
communities making a healthy life-style for themselves, 
entertaining themselves, working hard, getting ahead. But this 
Premier of this province has taken that opportunity away from 
them because he won’t provide any courage to stand up to 
Ottawa. He won’t provide any courage to tell Ottawa that there 
has to be a debt restructuring program that helps these people 
manage their debt, or to help these people have income 
stability. That’s what we have because he has a vision of  

reducing the number of people of this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on. There’s the issue of beef 
stabilization; the tripartite; the slow reaction on the drought; 
counting the cattle of farmers now through ACS on their 
livestock program; saying that every farmer’s guilty of abusing 
the programs, so we’re going to count their cows, and we’re 
going to make them pay for it, and you’re guilty until we prove 
you innocent. That’s the type of government we have. 
 
We have a government that gives Pocklington money to create 
a hog industry in Saskatchewan. Well I tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, giving Pocklington money does not create a hog 
industry in Saskatchewan. We have a Premier of this province 
who is spouting free trade, and free trade, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will take down every orderly marketing system we have in this 
country. 
 
Standing up for people, families, society — what hypocrisy! 
That’s why the people of this province don’t trust the word of 
this Premier. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have talked briefly about a number 
of issues that are real issues, not like the members opposite or 
their Premier who will not address the real issues because they 
have no ideas; because they can’t address them because . . . 
that’s not their vision. And in order to achieve their vision they 
won’t address these problems. 
 
I would just like to say now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I will be 
supporting this amendment, and there is no way in this world 
that I could support a motion by this government because of the 
hypocrisy, because of the mistrust, because of their blatant 
mismanagement, because of their patronage. I could not do that. 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a lot of support from 
the people of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, before I begin my remarks, I’d like to start by sending 
out my sincere congratulations to our new Lieutenant Governor 
here in the province of Saskatchewan and to say to all the 
people out there in our TV land that, whether they realize it or 
not, basically this is an historic event for Saskatchewan. It’s an 
historic event in the way that Her Honour is the first lady that’s 
ever held that position here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this appointment of Her Honour definitely 
has a full meaning to the province and particularly to the 
women in the province of Saskatchewan. Women have been 
recognized more so in the last ten years in this province than in 
its entire history, and I think it’s incumbent upon all of us to get 
behind the Lieutenant Governor and help her in any which way, 
shape or form we can to ensure that her role is a successful role 
and that she does accomplish the various attempts that she 
wishes to make and as she’s serving the public. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to take the opportunity now to 
also congratulate my colleague, the member from  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

189 
 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I want to say that he was a great 
enhancement to our caucus. He’s bringing a lot of ideas and 
fresh ideas in from the countryside, and I want to indicate that 
it’s just a thrill to be able to work with him, and I want to 
congratulate the people that elected the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I want to congratulate those people 
because they did send a quality, a very quality individual to this 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I listened to what the member from 
Humboldt was indicating here as far as this government’s 
commitment to agriculture is concerned, and that’s where I’ll 
begin my remarks. 
 
(1645) 
 
He’s probably the only individual that has even come close to 
being a farmer on the NDP side of the House. And I want to 
indicate, before I begin talking into the things that we’ve done 
for agriculture, that on this side of the House at least half or 
two-thirds of our caucus are made up of farmers, are made up of 
ranchers, are made up of individuals that all their lives have/had 
worked in the agricultural communities. And not only that but 
have sat on councils in R.M.s in towns and villages and have 
worked not only with the farmers but the small businesses in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at this government’s 
commitment to the agricultural community in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I want to say that’s probably one of the strongest 
commitments any government has ever made in its entirety 
right across this nation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the billions of 
dollars that this government had to itself bring forth or ask for 
from the federal government to come and help us in times of 
drought, in times of flood, in times of depressed prices, in times 
of high interest rates. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that 
when our Premier said he would go to the wall for agriculture, 
he had, and he is, and he will. His commitment . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Great Wall of China. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — The members opposite said he went to the 
wall of China. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree. He did go to 
the wall of China, and he’ll continue to go to the wall of China. 
He’s not only went to the wall for agriculture, but he’s 
continuing on the basis that he’s trying to do things that you 
have never done. He is trying to open up new markets for 
agriculture over in the Pacific rim. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate to you that our 
commitment is reflected by some of our programs, and that is 
reflected by our farm assistance and protection programs. We 
have aggressively pursued our own policies provincially and 
lobbied hard for national policies which will continue to 
strengthen the industry and protect our province’s family farms. 
 
The member from Riversdale should pay attention to this. We 
protect family farms, Mr. Speaker, because we care. We don’t 
nationalize them. Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale has 
spoken out on agriculture. Most of the members of the 
Assembly may have missed this earth  

shattering event, but let me read it aloud today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He stated in the Star-Phoenix — it was a Tuesday, December 
27, 1988 — he stated that one of the most difficult policy areas 
will be in the intergenerational transfer of farm lands. 
 
That’s the problem. Listen carefully now. Here comes the 
important part. The member from Riversdale, he stresses that 
whatever plans his party develops, they will not be along the 
lines of land bank. That is as specific as the member opposite 
has gotten in the area of agricultural policies and yet he has the 
audacity to accuse this government of not caring. I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that every one of the 
individuals that have spoken over the last while in this 
Assembly from the NDP opposition, there has not been once, 
there has not been once where through all their pretty, beautiful 
little words that they use in this Assembly to try and baffle the 
public out there as they’re watching this Assembly and 
watching their speeches and listening. 
 
If those people ever, ever take the time to try and draw out of 
any one of their speeches any kind of commitment that their 
party is making to agriculture, I would challenge anybody from 
the public to bring that forward, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there has not been one idea. There has not been one 
commitment to the public and to the farmers in this province. 
All they’ve done over there is ridicule all the programs that 
have helped to keep the families on the farms here in the 
province. 
 
What they’re upset about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that 
they themselves never acted when they were in government. 
Because I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they would have 
taken the opportunity to act when they were in government and 
when the Leader of the Opposition was deputy premier, I will 
say we would have had a hard time being in government. We 
would have had a hard time getting a vote from the people. The 
Progressive Conservative government would maybe not be here 
today. It might have been those guys across the way that would 
have been and maintained their government position. 
 
But no, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, they turn 
their backs on the family farms. They turn their backs on the 
families of the province of Saskatchewan. They did not listen. 
They were pleading with the NDP government of that day. 
They were asking for protection from high interest rates so that 
they could afford their mortgage payments. But no, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they drove people out of their homes. They drove 
them out of the province. There was no help. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate to you that they 
still profit. They profit on agriculture. The Leader of the 
Opposition and his law firm profits by taking action against 
farmers and driving them off, working for the banks and the big 
multinational corporation, the banks that they profess . . . they 
stand up in this room and profess that they’re so much against. 
 
They say that we’re in bed with them. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to indicate to you that the public ought to  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

190 
 

just take a good close look at who’s in bed with the 
multinational banks because they would see that it is the 
member from Riversdale and his organization, the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to a point, when it comes to 
a point of them arguing the fact that, well this government’s 
foreclosing on farm lands, you know, well I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that was just a . . . I almost couldn’t stand it. It 
was just that silly. 
 
It gets to a point where they just cannot come back with any 
other argument and other new ideas, and then they come in here 
with tabling some little documents of actions that are taken on 
some farms that haven’t paid back the agreement. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
probably we have about 50,000 farmers in Saskatchewan — 
50,000. And I want to indicate to you that there’s about 1 per 
cent of those farmers, maybe 1 per cent of those farmers, that 
have actually not been able to make those commitments 
because of the horrendous problems that they’ve got into. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about 1 per cent, you could take 
about 99 per cent of the individuals that entered into the 
program . . . government programs that it helped them back in, 
say, 1986 when we came out with the production loan program, 
I believe it was, and there was so many dollars per acre and 
there was a three-year commitment to pay it back. Well, we 
didn’t even hold the farmers at that. We lengthened it. We 
lengthened it. If they needed more time, we put it to 10 years. 
But 1 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we are responsible by 
law, responsible to collect the debt that an individual had 
borrowed. 
 
So what I’m saying to you is, by law, our government has got to 
take actions. But when the member opposite, acting as . . . is 
Leader of the Opposition and is in the law firm, he has a choice, 
an individual choice. He has an individual choice to say no to 
the bank. He has that individual choice to say, I’m not going to 
allow my law firm to take part of this because I don’t believe in 
it. I don’t believe that this should be happening. But he did. He 
profited, personally profited. And then the member from 
Humboldt has the audacity to say that they’re in favour of 
protecting the family farm. They’re the end-all to all the 
problems out there for the family farm. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll just give you 
an idea of about how the Leader of the Opposition and the 
whole . . . the NDP caucus have ideas and commitments and 
how they can make up their mind as to what they’re going to do 
for the problems in Saskatchewan here and . . . when they 
become government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition was questioned on the uranium 
issue and his answer in the paper . . . was questioned as to what 
he was going to do with uranium and stuff like this, and his 
answer was: 
 

Well I’m not sure that I have the luxury of expressing that 
point of view any more. I just don’t  

think a party leader’s choices in public discussions of this 
nature are very great. I think my job is to be the trustee of 
the party resolutions. 
 

Now that was in volume 16, no. 10, December 1987, in their 
own Briarpatch. I asked the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
in the Briarpatch. But I ask the members opposite, where 
they’re split on this themselves across the way in their caucus, 
as to where their ideas are in uranium mining in this province 
and in the job situation is. 
 
But here’s another, and this one was on abortion. And when 
Romanow was asked . . . oh, pardon me, I take that back; I 
understand. When the member from Riversdale was asked by a 
student whether he would extend human rights to the unborn, he 
answered: 
 

This may sound as though I’m trying not to give you 
answers on these particular questions, but I must stress that 
within the New Democratic Party, policy is written by the 
convention of the party. 
 

And where does the party lie? I asked everybody out in the TV 
land, where does the NDP stand on this? I know where I stand. I 
know where I stand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I believe in 
life. 
 
But here’s another one, here’s another question that was asked 
the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

Will you legislate to recover lost Crown corporations? 
 

And we’ve all heard they are, I guess, but here’s his answer as 
of December ’87, January ’88 in the Briarpatch: 
 

That decision’s going to have to be made if and when we 
assume office. 
 

If and when he assumes office, they’re going to make that 
decision. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate to you that our 
government has a vision. It has a vision of taking Saskatchewan 
forward. It has a vision of promoting Saskatchewan and 
keeping it in the world window. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
world window that I’m referring to is just exactly what those 
members opposite are opposed to. They’re opposed to our 
leader; they’re opposed to this government travelling around the 
world and promoting Saskatchewan agriculture and 
Saskatchewan business. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had inroads and we have proof. We 
have the proof and I’m going to bring the proof to your 
attention in a few minutes. 
 
But I want to indicate to you how that proof is beginning. That 
proof is beginning through public participation. I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that public participation is 
an answer to the demise of the province’s problems that we’ve 
been having . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Being near 5 o’clock, the House  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

191 
 

is recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 




