


















































April 20, 1989 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 20, 1989 
 
 

943 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill. No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, prior to the supper break I was 
able to bring a few of my introductory comments to this Bill to 
the debate. I have much, much more to say, but in order to 
facilitate the arrangement made earlier this day with the 
Government House Leader, I would now like to move 
adjournment of that debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you very much to my colleagues. During my remarks 
yesterday I explained why the debate on this legislation is so 
vital to the future of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I talked about 
how potash provides the people of this province with a unique 
economic development opportunity for the 1990s, and into the 
21st century, because it is a resource in which we here, in the 
province of Saskatchewan, dominate the world market. 
 
The legislation before us, Bill 20, as I explained, will determine 
how our province manages, develops, and sells this important 
non-renewable resource for years and years to come. Yesterday 
as well I explained what I believe to be the fundamental 
question in this debate. And that fundamental question, Mr. 
Speaker, is this: should we, the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, manage, develop, and sell our potash ourselves 
for our own benefit, or should we let others do it for us for their 
benefit? That’s the question. That’s really what this debate is all 
about. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the PC government to your right proposes to 
turn over control of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to 
foreign investors and to investors from central Canada. That’s 
what Bill 20 does. I said yesterday, and I repeat again, that there 
is nothing in this legislation — absolutely nothing — which 
requires a single share of the privatized PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) to be owned by a Saskatchewan 
resident. Let me repeat: nothing in this legislation requires that 
a single share of the privatized or soon-to-be-privatized PCS to 
be owned right here at home by one Saskatchewan resident. 
 
And we on this side of the House say that this is wrong, that this 
is the wrong way to go. We say that this represents a sell-out of 
Saskatchewan’s economic future. We say that’s turning the 
clock back to the 1960s and the 1970s when the foreign owned 
and controlled potash  

companies called all the shots in the Saskatchewan potash 
industry. We say that’s wrong, and we’re going to oppose this 
Bill with all the force that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday, without 
repeating my remarks again at length, that it’s wrong because it 
hasn’t worked. In the 1960s and 1970s I described him the 
consummate free enterpriser, Ross Thatcher — truly a political 
giant in this legislature, even though I disagreed with his 
philosophies and programs. That consummate free enterpriser 
did and worked under a regime because he believed in it, what 
Bill 20 wants us to do in the 1990s. 
 
Thatcher believed that through regulation and through taxation, 
he could control the resources of this renewable, unique 
resource, potash, for the benefit of all the people of 
Saskatchewan. And soon he found out, as I recounted 
yesterday, that for the trouble of all of his efforts he ended up 
being charged as an unindicted co-conspirator, actually an 
alleged felon under the American laws because the 
multinational corporations that controlled the potash industries 
balked at that effort, balked at the effort that we took over 
subsequent to 1971 because regulation and taxation proved to 
be ineffective. And in effect they called the shots of the potash 
industry; they held the people of the province to ransom. 
 
We, the people of this province, learned from that experience. 
That’s why PCS was set up. It was a pragmatic response based 
on the philosophy that the resources of this province belong to 
all the people of this province and not IMC (International 
Minerals and Chemical Corporation Ltd.), and the government 
opposite wants to turn the clock back and we’re not going to let 
them turn the clock back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You know, it’s funny how it is that we as 
Canadians permit in Quebec the Quebecois to talk about being 
maître chez nous in French — masters of their own house. And 
in 1971 when we took office, we in the province of 
Saskatchewan promised to be maître chez nous, masters of our 
own house in the light of that circumstance that I’ve described 
to you. 
 
And we created the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
because we said people in this province can prove the job, they 
can do it; that we can determine our destiny; that we can be 
masters in our own house; that we have no desire to give that 
up; that we want to build a future for our children and for their 
children. And we did. 
 
Now the PC government today under this Bill doesn’t believe 
that Saskatchewan people can be maître chez nous. They do not 
believe that we can be the masters of our own house. They 
don’t think that the Saskatchewan people, with PCS, can 
compete with the multinational potash companies in the world; 
compete and beat them at their own industry game in the world. 
That’s how little faith they have in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

944 
 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, that we did. We 
met them on the competitive playing field. We didn’t export our 
young men and women to Chicago or to Hong Kong or New 
York to do it. We met them on the international export because 
we’re masters of our own house. We met them right here in 
Saskatoon and Regina, and we beat them to the PCS and the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And what a record it was, as I explained 
yesterday, which I will not take the time of the House again to 
repeat in detail. But in the six years since we established potash, 
in 1976 to 1982, before we were defeated, and every year, Mr. 
Speaker, the government and potash corporation turned a 
handsome profit and returned taxes and royalties to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We paid off in that six short years, Mr. Speaker, our entire 
investment for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan which, 
by the way, wasn’t nationalized. That potash was set up through 
the free bargaining and negotiations between PCS and the 
corporations that were involved, and we paid it off on $400 
million investment within that six years. We paid it off. And 
more than that, Mr. Speaker, we returned royalties and revenues 
to the people of the province of Saskatchewan to provide 
hospital care and health care and education facilities and roads, 
unparalleled in the history of the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And then of course we did not plan . . . 
Nobody could foresee, of course, what happened in 1982 as my 
friends opposite assumed the office and took over the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And their record — unlike ours, six out of six with profits and 
returns — their record showed up to be a record, a dismal 
record of losses, very quickly, although they still managed to, in 
effect, rob the treasury of PCS to pay dividends to the Crown 
investments corporation and to themselves to try to balance 
their burgeoning deficit, as I explained yesterday. 
 
Not even they could totally botch it up, but the result is that four 
out of the six years they did not succeed. And today we just 
had, finally, Mr. Speaker, finally the 1988 annual return of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan tabled. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m a little bit proud about 
one small victory — it’s a small victory in this whole major 
debate that we’re involved in — but the victory that we got in 
the government tabling that 1988 potash report. They tabled it 
and they weren’t going to table it. Mr. Speaker, they tabled it 
only because we in the opposition demanded that we would not 
proceed further in this debate until they did so, and they did 
table that 1988 report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — A small victory to be sure, Mr. Speaker, but 
given the way this government acts, the way this government in 
effect tries to cover up; the way this government tells a bit of 
half-truths from time to time; the way it unveils policy on a 
piecemeal basis; the way it sort of comes back afterwards, after 
the debates are done; this indeed was a victory for democracy 
and for this opposition, and for the people who may be 
watching this very important debate. 
 
Now this 1988 report . . . This afternoon I’ve had a chance to 
study it and it’s been released. And it shows the PCS position 
for the 1988 year. And what it shows to me, Mr. Speaker, are a 
number of things. 
 
First of all it shows to me that, notwithstanding the 
mismanagement and the waste of the PC Party and the 
government opposite, even the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan couldn’t help it — they made a profit of $106 
million this year, notwithstanding the incompetence of the 
administration opposite. 
 
It shows me something else. It shows me that the potash 
industry is a cyclical business. Like any major resource 
industry, Mr. Speaker, there are periods of down time and there 
are periods when it goes up. There are periods when we are 
going to lose some money and there are periods when we’re 
going to make lots of money. But on balance the chart will 
always show that the chart is going up; all the time the returns 
are going up. And even here, in 1988, in spite of, I might add, 
the mismanagement of all of those people who now run PCS, 
and the government opposite in particular, they made a profit of 
$106 million. 
 
And this 1988 annual report itself talks about a corporation 
which is totally owned by the people of our province — right 
here, totally owned. We are the shareholders right now making 
a profit for our province, for our people. 
 
That report shows that there’s a relatively healthy PCS. It could 
have been much healthier if this government had really rolled 
up its sleeves and done the job that it was intended to do from 
1982. But nevertheless, even out of the PCs and the Premier of 
this province, it turned a profit of $106 million in 1988 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. 
 
Members of this Legislative Assembly — a profit of $106 
million. A profit for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, not for the people of Dallas, Texas and not for 
the people of Hong Kong. A profit of $106 million for the 
people of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What an investment. What an investment, 
Mr. Speaker. An investment which pays dividends on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
And this 1988 report also shows that the potash corporation had 
a successful year from production. In 1988 the PC mining 
production operations produced a record, they say — 5.1 
million metric tons, more than a half a million than the previous 
production period. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

945 
 

On page 7 it says the following in the annual report: 
 

In short, PCS mining produced record tonnes with record 
high efficiencies, record low costs, and outstanding safety 
figures. 
 

An efficient and productive corporation, Mr. Speaker, making a 
profit for the people of the province of Saskatchewan — $106 
million. And the question then has to be asked: why in the 
world are we debating Bill 20 which wants to give away that 
profit of $106 million to the people outside this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve gone too far in this 
privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They’ve gone too far. 
 
And what about sales? They turn a profit of 106 million, they 
turn a record production year. According to their annual report 
they had a strong year for sales as well. According to this record 
— for this report, Mr. Speaker, for a change — there was a 
significant increase in the level of off-shore sales over the levels 
of the past several years. And the total off-shore sales were 
more than 2.3 million metric tons. And the total sales, domestic 
and off-shore together, were more than 4.7 million metric tons. 
 
Once again I quote the annual report which I have in front of 
me: record production levels last year, record sales volumes last 
year; they say it’s a record year for sales. In short, Mr. Speaker, 
again, even under the PCs — even under all of the things that 
these people have tried to do to hobble this great corporation, 
even under them — we have here an efficient corporation which 
took advantage of the world market, that met the people of their 
competition on the world market, and this year at least, beat 
them; a profitable corporation of $106 million made for the 
people last year. 
 
And what about the future, according to this report? Well 
according to this report, Mr. Speaker, the future is laced with 
these kinds of descriptions. On page 8 they say, “Our outlook 
for 1989 is positive.” On page 9 they say, “. . . we are looking 
for increased sales into North America . . .” On page 9, we 
expect the off-shore market to remain strong. On page 5, we’re 
going to improve our position from 1988 and 1989. And on 
page 9 again in this annual report, Mr. Speaker, they say, “We 
look forward to the future, eager to take advantage of market 
growth as more and more countries provide better diets for a 
growing world population.” Get this from the annual report: 
“PCS is well positioned to respond to this anticipated increase 
in world demand for potash.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they say that PCS is well positioned. Well 
positioned now, not with the sell-offs, not with the give-aways, 
not with the privatization. They don’t need the extra capital; 
they’re well positioned now. What in  

the world are we doing selling it off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize the point 
— $106 million profit this year and they’re well positioned for 
1989. They didn’t say in that annual report they need extra 
capital or outside foreign investors. They’re ready and they’re 
positioned, according to Mr. Childers. They say they can do the 
job for all of us, and goodness knows, with the 4 billion 
dollars-plus deficit that these people have racked up, we could 
use the money to tackle that deficit, or at least to improve health 
care and education. 
 
They’re well positioned, and so the question has to be asked: 
why are they doing this? Why are they privatizing it? Their own 
advisers, their own managers are saying they don’t need this 
privatization. They say, we’ve done the job for you. They say, 
we’ve produced a profit notwithstanding the way that you’re 
standing in the way. The question that has to be asked and 
answered is why in the world are they doing this, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll tell you why they’re doing this, because they are so 
ideologically right wing, and out of touch, and old-fashioned, 
that they are determined to destroy PCS and Saskatchewan with 
it because of that ideology. That’s why they are doing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well the Hon. Minister of Urban Affairs 
sort of mocks that statement. I’ll invite him to get up in the 
debate and tell us why they’re doing it; why they’re doing it 
when the president of the corporation says they shouldn’t be 
doing it, when the results of the 1988 annual report says they 
shouldn’t do it. When you take a look at the continuum from 
1976 to 1988, from ’76 to ’88, that’s 12 years you can say even 
after all the losses, they ought not to be doing it. Why are they 
doing it? 
 
The member from Regina can be mocking my statement all the 
way, but no other rational conclusion can be made except that 
the Premier of this province is confused. In the last election 
campaign, he tried to run as Tommy Douglas; now he doesn’t 
know in the future campaign whether he’s going to try to run as 
Allan Blakeney or a Maggie Thatcher. That’s the answer — 
they’re confused. 
 
These people opposite, the only answer can be, their only 
motivation for doing this is because they are so old-fashioned, 
they are so right wing, they are so tied to the large, 
multinational corporations, they have lost so much touch with 
the grass roots. They came into office with some good ideas in 
1982, Mr. Speaker, and now they have lost that after seven long 
years in power. There can be no other explanation as to why 
they’ve done this, no other explanation. 
 
A hundred and six million dollars in 1988 alone even under 
their administration, Mr. Speaker. And that is profit, as I say, 
for this province, that’s profit for the starving children right 
here in this province. We have the second highest rate of 
poverty in all of Canada — shocking. We could be using that 
money to provide a hot lunch program for schoolchildren right 
here. But they’re going to sell it off and deny that profit to the 
people of  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

946 
 

Saskatchewan. 
 
A hundred and six million dollars for schools and for highways 
and for hospitals and for other important public services like the 
hungry children that I’ve talked about, but they’re going to sell 
it off. A hundred and six million dollars, that’s this year’s 
profit. And once they privatize it — and I’m going to say a 
word about as to how extensive this privatization can be in a 
moment — once they privatize it, that’s a once-in-a-lifetime 
benefit only, gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $106 million, this year only, this year only that 
would pay for the entire budget’s . . . Get this. And I draw this 
to the attention of the member from Regina, the minister of 
municipal affairs, that $106 million would pay for the entire 
budget costs of the following provincial government programs 
for a full year without a penny’s tax. 
 
The hearing aid plan — do we need it? The home care plan; the 
dental plan — do we need that in rural Saskatchewan? The 
school for the deaf, regional colleges, day care, family income 
plan, Opportunities ’89 student summer jobs program — do we 
need that, Mr. Speaker? Do we need that with 6,000 people 
leaving in February this province alone, and another 1,600 in 
the month of March? They could pay for the veterinary services 
program of the Department of Agriculture. They could pay for 
the entire provincial Department of Environment and Public 
Safety, and goodness knows, we need that money there for sure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is for this year, 
because this is only a one-year profit — $106 million. If you 
had that profit each and every year, just think how you could 
apply that profit in the variety of ways that could be applied to 
this province, how you could apply that for the benefit of 
working men and women and for farmers and for 
small-business people. And if they privatize it, if they give it 
away, if they sell it off, where is that money going to come 
from next year, and the following years, and the years after that, 
to pay those programs? 
 
Talk about, Mr. Speaker, a short-sighted party. Talk about a 
government that has lost a vision. Talk about government and a 
party that has lost the guts to govern for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Talk of a party that wants to take us back to 
the past of Ross Thatcher. That’s what this party wants to do. 
They want to take us back 20 years. This is the old party, the 
PC Party, I’m talking about. They want to turn back the hands 
of time. They want to go all the way back to the 1960s and the 
early 1970s. They want to go back and pretend that they’re 
Ross Thatcher, and I want to tell you, he couldn’t do it, and 
these people couldn’t carry Ross Thatcher’s shorts to the 
hockey game to do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Talk about, Mr. Speaker, a party that is out 
of touch. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the Premier and 
the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, for your short-sightedness, for your 
mismanagement, for your deliberate ideological approach to 
turning the clock back 20 or 30 years, back to the Bennett 
buggy days and perhaps as early as that, for all of your failings, 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, and to all of you members opposite, 
you are going to pay a political price come the next provincial 
election. Mark my words for it. The people will not let you 
forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But there’s another aspect of this which 
speaks now more to process. I want to just touch on this very 
briefly on process. Mr. Speaker, we have here a major Bill, 
obviously. Tomorrow, sadly, we’re going to have a 
privatization of yet another victim of PC privatization, 
SaskPower. They broke their solemn word when they said they 
would not privatize SaskPower. Tomorrow will be even perhaps 
a darker day than today’s debate on potash because they broke 
their word in a very basic public utility like power. 
 
And I raise power because I want to come back to the potash 
Bill about process. 
 
We are being asked and we are debating this Bill. The only 
thing that we have in front of us, of course, are the public 
clippings and the press statements of the minister at the time of 
the briefing that the minister had of the potash Bill, and some 
clippings from the Premier when he was on the orient express, 
although those confused everybody in Saskatchewan and were 
of no help whatsoever. 
 
We are debating, Mr. Speaker, a major piece of legislation 
which perhaps all of Canada is watching — I won’t say only 
potash, I will say power as well — as they dismantle this 
province brick by brick, mortar by mortar; as they do away with 
your heritage, sir, and my heritage and the future of our 
children. 
 
They are doing all of this, and they won’t even on this potash 
Bill give us any of the details of exactly what they intend to do 
and how they intend to do it — nothing. They won’t answer the 
questions as to what shares they’re going to retain and what 
amount they’re going to offer for sale. They don’t tell us which 
assets they’re going to retain and what amount they’re going to 
offer for sale. They don’t tell us any of the terms and the 
conditions of the share offering. 
 
We don’t know if there’s going to be such a sweetheart deal 
made, that yet we pay another premium — we, meaning those 
who can’t afford to buy the shares — a premium to those who 
can afford to buy the shares; if we’re going to be subsidizing 
the rich in that way. They don’t tell us the details. They don’t 
tell us who’s handling this. They don’t tell us who’s going to be 
making the profit in handling this deal. They don’t table any of 
the appraisal reports. I mean, we don’t even know what we’re 
selling here. 
 
The government’s own advisers say that the corporation  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

947 
 

is worth $2 billion. The government shillies and shallies and 
says, oh maybe it’s $1 billion, maybe it’s $1.2 billion. And we, 
the journalists in the province of Saskatchewan, are letting this 
government get away with that. 
 
Yes, the member from Regina municipal affairs is again 
laughing on this thing. It is outrageous in a democracy, Mr. 
Speaker, it is outrageous in a democracy. Maybe you can’t table 
every document; I realize some documents are sensitive and 
they can’t be tabled. I know that. We took that position. Every 
government needs to take that position — past, present and 
future. 
 
But it is outrageous, Mr. Speaker, that in a democracy at least 
the basic fundamental facts of exactly what is being proposed, 
and how it’s going to be achieved, are not being told to this 
democracy, to this democratically elected Legislative Chamber. 
I say that is an affront to democracy. I say that’s an affront to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s an outrage. It’s 
an attack on democracy and that is reason enough to defeat this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Where in the world has our sense of 
democratic commitment gone, Mr. Speaker? Do we simply 
believe . . . Does the government simply believe that it can 
hold, as it will tomorrow on the power Bill, a press conference 
with my colleagues in the journalistic press gallery at 8:30 and 
give them the technical briefing on how they’re going to sell off 
power, and then give them the 9:30 political briefing as to how 
they are going sell off power, as they did with potash? And 
that’s it. Get the big headlines and don’t worry about any of the 
details. Don’t worry, we’re not going to tell the opposition if we 
ask the questions. Just trust us. Just like they said in another 
area, trust us, we won’t do away with the drug plan. And of 
course they did away with the drug plan. 
 
(1930) 
 
I mean, where in the world is this province heading? What kind 
of ideals to democracy are we speaking to? What kind of vision 
of how this parliament and this legislature is all about are we’re 
talking about? Do these people think that we’re simply rubber 
stamps who are going lay over and accept their plans to destroy 
and dismantle the future of the province of Saskatchewan, to 
destroy the future of these young men and women that we’re all 
working for, without at least accountability? Yes, they have 
been elected to do this — maybe. But they weren’t elected to do 
it and do it in secret. They weren’t elected to do it by cabinet 
decree. They weren’t elected to do it by press release. 
 
And may I say, when I ask the question, were they elected, I 
don’t recall, in 1986, the Premier of this province running 
around the province of Saskatchewan saying, elect me and I’m 
going to privatize the power corporation. Do you recall him 
saying that? Do you recall him saying that? 
 
I don’t recall the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 
running around this province saying, elect me and I’m going to 
privatize the Potash Corporation of  

Saskatchewan. Do you remember that, sir? I don’t remember 
that. 
 
I’ll tell you, the only thing I remember the Premier, in 1986, 
running around and telling the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan — not telling them — begging Mr. Mulroney for 
a billion dollar bail-out that saved his hay, saved his bacon in 
that election. That’s the only thing that he talked about. 
 
He was not telling the people all the facts in that election. He 
was not coming clean. He has no mandate to do what he’s 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, he has no mandate to do this 
— absolutely no mandate. And I want to tell you something 
else. They were inconsistent, and they are inconsistent in their 
positions. 
 
The minister who introduces this Bill, the minister in charge of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, when he was a Liberal 
back in 1976 . . . 1975, in opposition to what we were doing 
with the potash corporation, as a pragmatic response . . . You 
know he had some other colleagues sitting to his left, and those 
were the Conservative members. And he got up, and he 
criticized the Conservatives about our legislation. He said, 
quote: “The Conservatives, obviously, Mr. Speaker, have not 
read the Bill.” He refers to his now colleagues. He goes on to 
say: “You know that the government is not accountable for 
what it’s doing.” 
 
He attacks us for not tabling the reports that we tabled and the 
documents that we presented. And then he goes on to bitterly 
attack the person who is now the Deputy Premier of the 
Conservative Party. That’s the Liberal member as he then was, 
the member from Qu’Appelle. 
 
Now of course he and the Deputy Premier are in league. Little 
did we know how history and how time works, that these two 
Liberals and Conservatives would come together now, and in 
1989 pull off this hijack of Saskatchewan’s interests — this 
heist of Saskatchewan’s interests. 
 
But they didn’t get a mandate, Mr. Speaker. I say to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan that the Premier and this 
government did not get a mandate to get on its privatization. I 
don’t only mean potash but I mean power. I say what he ought 
to do is resign and call an election on the entire issue of 
privatization. Let’s have this out right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, but they won’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 
They won’t do that, not until the polls show them something 
else, or if they can get these . . . if they can sell off all of our 
Crown corporations. They got power on the chopping block 
tomorrow. They got potash on the chopping block today. They 
got SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) on the 
chopping block the day after tomorrow. They got SaskTel on 
the chopping block. Once they get a nice little kitty of all kinds 
of returns, then  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

948 
 

of course they’ll get this money and then they’ll try to bribe the 
voters one more time to get in. That’s when they’ll call the 
election. That’s what the game plan is. Well I’ve got news for 
the Premier and the PCs opposite. We’re up to that trick right 
now, the people of this province are, because we don’t want fast 
buck, short-change artists who have no vision. The people of 
this province want a party and a premier that leads with 
conviction and determination to build for the future — and 
that’s this party right now, right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to move to 
another area before I take my place, and that is the legislation 
itself. And I invite, again, the members of the press gallery and 
others who are watching this debate on television tonight and 
those in the legislature . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got to be kidding. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well I . . . The minister of municipal affairs 
says I’ve got to be kidding because I’m suggesting anybody 
would be watching this debate. Well I tell you, the minister of 
municipal affairs says that I’ve got to be kidding, but I tell you, 
I think the minister of municipal affairs is hoping that nobody is 
watching this debate tonight. That’s what I’ve been . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But I invite you, sir, and I invite the 
Conservatives opposite and I invite the new member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I invite him, for example, to take a 
look at this Bill, Bill No. 20, the sell-off of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Read it, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. 
Member. I invite the member from . . . Who’s sitting beside 
him? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Melville. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The member from Melville, read the Bill. 
He’s in the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wrote it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — He wrote it. Now they wrote it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member from 
Melville wrote this Bill then we’re in deeper trouble than I think 
we are, Mr. Speaker. We’re in very deep trouble. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want now to review this 
legislation, because as I closed yesterday I said that I wanted to 
use this debate to put my detailed objections to the provisions of 
Bill 20 before the House. 
 
I’ve talked about the principles, the objects of this legislation in 
philosophical terms, and I want to make one point on 
philosophical terms. This is not a debate only of philosophy, 
although there are visions of Saskatchewan  

which are clashing here. This is a debate also because of history 
and learning and pragmatism. I’ve gone through that — the 
Thatcher period — I’ve talked about that. 
 
But now I want to review the legislation because I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that there are some things which concern me there 
very much. I direct your attention, sir, to sections 2, 3, 8, and 12 
of the legislation. I want to say a few words about each one of 
those sections. 
 
I want to begin by referring to section 2. And this section is 
important because it defines the terms used throughout Bill 20. 
Now there, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at section 2, 
subsection (1), you will see that there is a definition of resident 
and non-resident for the purposes of the Bill. 
 
And what’s clear from these definitions is that the shareholders 
of a privatized Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan are to be 
divided into two categories: residents of Canada and 
non-residents of Canada. Listen to this, Mr. Speaker: residents 
of Canada and non-residents of Canada. Non-residents of 
Canada: that is foreign governments, foreign corporations, or 
individual investors are to be allowed to buy up to 45 per cent 
of the privatized PCS. Residents of Canada are allowed to 
purchase the other 55 per cent. 
 
Note what I said earlier, Mr. Speaker. The Bill does not — note 
— the Bill does not require a certain percentage of the shares to 
be owned by Saskatchewan residents. It only says that they be 
residents of Canada. 
 
That is why I’ve said earlier in this debate, and continue to say, 
there’s nothing in this legislation to require even a single share 
of a privatized PCS to be owned by a single Saskatchewan 
resident. Under this Bill, 45 per cent of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan could be owned by foreign interests, and the 
remaining 55 per cent could be owned by investors from 
Ontario and Quebec. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask the hon. members opposite: how is that 
public participation in the potash corporation for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, get what I’m 
saying. If the objective is to give the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan the right, the power, a meaningful right to 
participate actually in the ownership of this corporation, how is 
it so, how is this objective achieved, if 45 per cent can end up in 
foreign hands, and 55 per cent in non-Saskatchewan Canadian 
hands, outside the province of Saskatchewan? How is that 
participation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, today every man, woman, and child in this 
province owns a piece of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan today. I don’t need a share. I know that I am an 
owner of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker. I 
sure as heck don’t need a share signed by the Hon. Premier, 
Grant Devine or the Premier of this province of Saskatchewan, 
to tell me that I’m a shareholder of this corporation either. 
Every man, woman, and child can benefit from the success of 
this resource corporation.  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

949 
 

There may be down times, but overall the success of the 
corporation, because that’s the history. Under this scheme, 
under this Bill, 100 per cent of the ownership of PCS could be 
outside this province. 
 
Now I want to move on to section 3 of the Bill which sets out 
the basic approach to the privatization. I want you, sir, and the 
members of the journalists’ gallery to follow me on my 
reasoning on this. 
 
Under section 3, this sets out the basic approach, that is that 
PCS and its various subsidiaries will transfer assets to a newly 
publicly traded corporation called the purchaser corporation. 
That’s what this Bill sets up. The language used in this section 
is very broad and very vague, and it gives the provincial cabinet 
very wide powers to dispose of the assets of the potash 
corporation — very wide powers — in any way that it wishes. 
 
I want to read section 3 into the record for your benefit, sir, and 
for the benefit of the public that may be listening and watching 
this debate tonight. Section 3 says in part as follows, quote: 
 

. . . subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council (that’s the cabinet): 
 
(a) PCS; 
(b) a PCS subsidiary; or 
(c) PCS acting jointly with a PCS subsidiary; 

 
may enter into transactions that provide, directly or 
indirectly, for the sale, assignment, transfer or other 
disposition of all or substantially all of the PCS assets and 
the assets of PCS subsidiaries to the purchaser corporation 
on any terms and conditions that the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council (that’s the cabinet again) may approve and for 
any consideration that may be approved by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council (that is the cabinet again). 
 

Note the words “all” or “substantially all” of the PCS holdings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this means that the PC cabinet is not 
required to transfer all of the assets of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to this newly publicly traded company, the 
purchaser corporation as it’s called. And why is this important? 
It’s important because the purchaser corporation, and only that 
corporation, which has on it any restrictions with respect to 
foreign ownership that I’ve talked about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, under clause 3 of this Bill, the PC cabinet 
could sell off any portion of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to anyone at any price before it transfers 
anything to this newly publicly traded company that it talks 
about — without any limitations at all of 45-55. For example, 
the PC cabinet could sell off the PC reserves at Esterhazy to 
IMC of the United States. 
 
Yesterday I said that this government had a scheme about to sell 
off PCS’s interests at Esterhazy to IMC. I invite the minister to 
rebut me when he closes the debate. Or it could sell the PCS 
Lanigan potash mine, or a portion of it,  

to communist China outside of this provision. Or it could sell it 
to India, or to any other foreign ownership matter because the 
foreign ownership restrictions of this legislation would not 
apply. They only apply to the purchaser corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in short, section 3 of this Bill gives the cabinet 
total freedom to sell any portion of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to foreign interests over and above the 45 per 
cent referred to in this Bill. 
 
What I am saying is this. You set up the purchaser corporation. 
They are limited to 45 per cent of what they get to sell, but what 
they don’t get to sell, they’re not limited to 45 per cent. You 
could sell 100 per cent of it to IMC if you want, or to 
communist China. That’s the way this Bill is worded. So it’s not 
true to say that foreigners are limited to 45 per cent. They are 
limited on the purchaser corporation, but the way the Bill is 
structured, this PCS is empowered to go beyond that, to 
virtually sell all of it off if this government in one of its whims 
decides to do that, and they’ve put that in this Bill purposefully 
to achieve that result. 
 
Now let’s move to section 8 of this Bill, which the government 
claims is supposed to give Saskatchewan people protection with 
respect to the privatized potash corporation. The Bill says that 
the newly publicly traded corporation shall have its head office 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. It seems to me from this 
vantage point that the hon. member is quoting from the Bill, and 
rule 734 in Beauchesne’s reads as follows: 
 

The second reading is the most important stage through 
which the bill is required to pass; for its whole principle is 
then at issue and is affirmed or denied by a vote of the 
House. It is not regular on this occasion, however, to 
discuss in detail the clauses of the bill. 
 

It is regular to discuss in detail the clause of the Bill in 
Committee of the Whole. And I know that the hon. member will 
be able to discuss the issues he wishes, without actual quotes 
from the Bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak to your ruling, 
may I speak to the point you just finished making, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — You may call a point of order, but it’s . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you can’t speak . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll call a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, fine. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, it is virtually impossible to 
deal with the principle of this Bill without dealing with the 
substance of it. 
 
The second reading is the point, as is the period during which 
we deal with the principle of the Bill. It is impossible to discuss 
that principle without discussing  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

950 
 

the Bill itself. The member from Riversdale was not discussing 
the clauses section by section, he was discussing some 
fundamental principles which underlie this privatization, this 
piratization. And in doing so, it is necessary at times to make 
reference to some of the sections. He went no further than that. 
The point of what he was making had to do with the principle; it 
was an ancillary reference to the sections. And I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that his comments were in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order and I have made a ruling. And I would just like once more 
to point out to the hon. members a long-standing practice of the 
House — it isn’t something that’s suddenly occurred — that in 
second reading, the individual may speak in general terms about 
the Bill, but in the past we have not allowed direct quotes. 
That’s the point I’m trying to make, direct quotes from the Bill. 
Without that the hon. member can speak as specifically as he 
wants. 
 
If the hon. member wishes to raise a point of order on the 
ruling, there is no allowance for debate on the point of order, on 
my ruling. So if he wishes to raise a different point of order, he 
is allowed to. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I am referring to 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, 
which you were referring to as well. And I want to draw your 
attention, Mr. Speaker, to page 220, rule . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. If the hon. member is 
raising a point of order on the ruling I have made, his point of 
order is not in order. And there is the point I’m bringing to his 
attention. 
 
The member from Battlefords is interfering in the proceedings 
of the House and I ask him to restrain himself. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I think you referred to a 
different section of Beauchesne’s than I did. If you will follow 
me closely for a moment, I perhaps can explain my position on 
the point of order. I am referring to page 220, rule 712, which 
deals with stages of a Bill. Perhaps, if I get your attention, Mr. 
Speaker, from the members opposite, I can read what it says 
under second reading. Seconding reading: 
 

The purpose of each stage is as . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order! Order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rule 712 says: 
 

The purpose of each stage is as follows: 
 

And then it lists first, second, and committee, report stage, and 
third reading, which don’t apply in this legislature. But second 
reading in almost its entirety applies in this legislature. 

 
The stage of second reading is primarily  

concerned with the principle of a measure (which we’re in 
agreement there, no problem). At this stage, debate is not 
strictly limited to the contents of a bill as other methods of 
attaining its proposed objective may be considered. 
 

And that’s all of the rule that applies to this Assembly. And I 
think the . . . What is happening here is the member cannot 
discuss an important principle unless he makes reference to the 
Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. There is no point of order and your 
comments are out of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have been around this 
Legislative Assembly for quite a number of years and I respect 
your ruling. I’ll try to abide by it. 
 
I want to say that my intention is, I think, to make some very 
important points about the principles of the Bill which the 
government advocates — not in debate, I might add, but in 
press releases — advocates about what this Bill does. I’m trying 
to rebut their contentions and I’m trying to validate my 
arguments by references to individual sections, not for the sake 
of debating those sections, but for the sake of my colleagues 
and for the journalists and other members of the public who 
might be watching, to know that what I’m saying is not a 
concoction, that it’s rooted in an analysis of the Bill, in 
principles. 
 
Now I understand your ruling, sir, and therefore I will 
endeavour to honour it. But I must say, sir, that I don’t know 
how I’m going to be able to make the point which I’m trying to 
make, that under, for example, section 3, the power is reserved 
unto the government to dispose of all of Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan without limitations of ownerships. 
 
I want to be able to say that in the clause. And I want to say if I 
can — I’ve made that point on section 3; moving on — that 
there are other principles which the corporation now is under 
which do not jibe with the government’s explanation of what it 
says and intends to do. 
 
In another section of the Bill, the government claims that 
Saskatchewan people are given protections with respect to this 
privatized corporation. Now I’ve read the Bill, and it says that 
the newly publicly traded purchaser corporation that I was 
referring to, before I was interrupted by yourself, sir, shall have 
its head office in Saskatchewan. But I say to you that in this 
legislation there is no definition of head office in the Bill. The 
new privatized PCS has no definition of head office, and it 
could comply with simply having a post office number in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I put this proposition to you, sir: if 45 per cent of the shares of 
this new potash company are owned by foreign countries, and 
the other 55 per cent are owned from central Canada, how long 
does any reasonable person think that it will take for the real 
PCS head office to be gone to Toronto or Montreal or 
elsewhere? You can have a post office but where will the 
decisions be made?  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

951 
 

Where will the advisers, where will the senior management and 
the senior bureaucrats be located? 
 
Another section of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, says that: 
“The majority of the directors of the purchaser corporation shall 
be resident Canadians.” Now I ask, sir, Saskatchewan people to 
consider whether that provision is really any protection for 
Saskatchewan jobs or investments. Were the majority of 
directors of Fleet Aerospace resident Canadians? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They were, as my colleague points out. And 
did that save the jobs at SED Systems in Saskatoon? Of course 
it didn’t. Were the majority of the residents and the directors of 
Technigen corporation residents of Canada? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And did that save any of the jobs and the 
public investment of Joytec Ltd. in Saskatoon? Far from it. In 
fact there’s story yet to be unfolding on Joytec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that so-called protection that the government says, 
that the minister referred to in his second reading speech, is no 
protection at all for Saskatchewan people. That’s the point I’m 
trying to make. 
 
And there’s another provision also in this Bill. It says 
purportedly that at least three directors, three directors of the 
new privatized PCS shall be residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan — three, Mr. Speaker. I ask: three out of how 
many? Three out of 10, three out of 20, three out of 30? The 
government hasn’t told us. 
 
This is the first time in a major debate on second reading — I 
spoke about process and democracy — where the mover of the 
Bill didn’t even tell us the basic details on that one little fact. 
Three are going to be Saskatchewan directors out of how many. 
They don’t tell us. It’s secret, much like everything else that the 
government plans about this operation is secrecy. 
 
Either way, I can assure you one thing, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan directors will be a small minority on the board of 
a new PC-style privatized PCS, that’s for sure. 
 
And let me review the one other section, without referring to it 
— this section of the Bill which purports to protect the interests 
of Saskatchewan people by limiting the total amount of shares 
in the privatized PCS which can be held by any one person or 
corporation, to 5 per cent. Now the government suggests that 
this 5 per cent ceiling will prevent any one corporation or major 
investor from taking control of PCS. But that argument ignores 
the fact that in a widely traded public corporation, as little as 10 
per cent of the shares can provide any one group with effective 
control of the company. It’s being done all the time in private 
business. 
 
For example, Conrad Black of Toronto could get two or three of 
the corporations of which he has interest in his vast business 
empire, as I read the Bill, to each purchase — each one of those 
corporations — 5 per cent of the PCS  

shares separately and take effective control of that corporation 
overnight, and this Bill does not prevent him from doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in this Bill to prevent that — 
nothing to prevent control of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan from going to a corporate group in Toronto or 
New York or even Hong Kong or Beijing or for some other 
operation, if I may put it that way, for some other profit, for 
some other purpose, that kind of control leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I think that is a serious threat to the independence and the 
ability to control our economy right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m not taken very often to quoting the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix in support of my arguments, but even 
the Star-Phoenix in one of its editorials on April 18, 1989, 
under the headline: “Vital to keep PCS in Saskatchewan” — 
vital to keep PCS in Saskatchewan, talks about the proposal and 
says this, the very point that I’m making about share structure, 
quote, it says in the editorial: 
 

There will be a heavy political price to pay if those who 
can afford shares (get those — if those who can afford 
shares) turn out to have made windfall profits on the 
purchase. 
 

“A heavy political price,” the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix says. I 
say, Mr. Speaker, there will be a heavy political price if that 
turns out to be the case. And that will turn out to be the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No controls, Mr. Speaker, as to 
shareholders; no control as to where the head office is to be 
located — the real head office is to be located; no control as to 
the 5 per cent being able to be actually monitored and policed. 
 
Other provisions in the legislation, the sections that I’ve 
identified, those give the PCS corporation and this government 
wide hand to, in effect, disperse of this corporation sooner or 
later, almost immediately. 
 
Oh they may not try it before the next provincial election, but 
mark my words, Mr. Speaker, and mark my words the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, if they get by the gate in this 
next provincial election, which I doubt that they will, but if they 
do, they will try this for sure, because their philosophy is to 
privatize this and to turn it over to the hands of the big, 
multinational corporations. That’s the danger in this legislation. 
And our heritage will be gone. 
 
Now those are my comments on the Bill. But there is one other 
aspect of this legislation which is also very critical and deserves 
study, Mr. Speaker, which I want to refer to, and that is the 
Canada-United States free trade deal and this Bill. 
 
Now this legislation, as I’ve said, purports to restrict the foreign 
ownership of the new privatized PCS to 45 per cent. But the 
free trade agreement signed by Prime Minister Mulroney and 
supported by the government  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

952 
 

opposite so enthusiastically, requires the following: national 
treatment for investors of the United States within Canada with 
respect to measures affecting the establishment of new business 
enterprises; acquisition; conduct operation; and sale of business 
enterprises located in Canada — national treatment. 
 
And referring to the free trade deal, Mr. Speaker, article 1602, 
subparagraph 2 of that free trade deal, further prevents Canada 
from imposing on any United States investor a requirement that 
a minimum level of equity be held by Canadians. The 
government, no doubt, argues that this is not a problem, because 
it says the free trade agreement provides an exemption, an 
exemption from the so-called national treatment obligations that 
I have talked about with respect to existing Crown corporations. 
But that’s only partly true. That only tells half the story, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There is one crucial limitation on these Crown corporation 
exemptions. That limitation is that the exemption can only be 
used once, Mr. Speaker. In other words, once this legislation 
has been passed, once this Saskatchewan legislature passes this 
Bill allowing up to 45 per cent foreign ownership of PCS, no 
future government could ever reduce that percentage, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask my colleagues to note that. Once this Bill passes, 
no future government could ever reduce that percentage of 45 
per cent foreign control, or even pass a law requiring that a 
certain percentage of the corporation be held by Saskatchewan 
residents, or even pass a law requiring that a certain percentage 
be held by Saskatchewan residents. 
 
(2000) 
 
In other words, under the free trade deal, the national treatment 
provisions of the free trade agreement then take over. And we 
can never again, never again in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 
put restrictions on American corporations or American 
investors which are not also put on Saskatchewan investors and 
Saskatchewan corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this House have given up our sovereignty in 
this area. That’s what we’ve done. Mr. Speaker, I say that’s a 
dastardly sell-out of our birthright by this legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve tied our hands. They 
supported the free trade deal with 1602(2) in there, with that 
provision. Now they’ve introduced Bill 20 with that provision. 
And once this Bill gets enacted and passed, they have tied my 
hands, they have tied our hands, they have tied their own hands, 
they have tied the hands of every young man and woman who 
should aspire to be an MLA. They have tied the hands of every 
political party and every politician who aspires to build a 
greater Saskatchewan, who sees it his or her responsibility to 
govern in the best interests of the people of this province right 
here from this Chamber. 
 
They have made this Chamber into a eunuch. They have done, 
through a combination of the free trade deal and  

Bill 20, the sell-out of our birthright. And for that I say this 
party will never ever be forgiven, and we will never forget. You 
will be defeated like you’ve never been defeated before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. Imagine that 
situation. Imagine that legal situation and that constitutional 
situation. And you know I asked the question a little while 
back: why are they doing this? Remember I asked, why are they 
doing it when they’ve racked up a profit of $106 million this 
year — why are they doing it, I ask myself. 
 
And I said they’re doing it because they are ideologically 
committed to some world of the 1930s and 1940s or 1950s, 
these Neanderthals politically who are so far back in the Dark 
Ages. And they laughed at me when I said it, but why are they 
doing this in the context of the free trade deal? Why are they 
doing this? 
 
Well you know, about the only thing that I can think of is a little 
exchange that I ran across in Crown Corporations Committee 
which took place on February 3, 1988 when my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview, was examining the Deputy 
Premier, the member from Souris-Cannington, on the proposals 
of the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
the question was asked to him in this context. And the Hon. 
Deputy Premier is quoted at saying in the February 3, 1988 
Crown corporations Hansard, page 349, as follows, Mr. 
Speaker. He said, this is the motivation for doing this, quote, the 
Deputy Premier said: 
 

I think that can happen here as well (referring to the 
consequences I’ve talked about). We’re going to do what 
we can, though, to make it very difficult for you people 
(meaning us) to take it over again when you get back into 
power, if that ever happens, because our desire is to have 
these things (done) as broadly distributed as possible so 
that it’s very difficult for you folks, if you should ever get 
back into power. 
 

That’s the motivation. Revenge, as The Globe and Mail said, 
revenge of the nerds, revenge of the nerds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They are doing this because they don’t want 
us ever to be able to build for the future for the province of 
Saskatchewan again. They want us tied in to the free trade deal, 
of course, which they are strong advocates of. And now this is 
the first example of the free trade deal coupled with Bill 20, 
with the consequences that I portray are going to happen to the 
future, because these people don’t ever want to give any other 
political party a chance to try to build that which they have 
brought down and destroyed. 
 
Is that where we are in political life in Saskatchewan today? Is 
that where the government is reduced to? I am doing this, the 
Deputy Premier says, because I’m never going to let you people 
ever again build or respond. I mean, it may be, it may be even 
in their circumstances  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

953 
 

that a multinational-corporation-controlled large resource 
industry like potash would require action, some form of action 
which would require perhaps rolling back the clock on this 
particular Bill. And they have tied their hands. They have given 
away our right. They have surrendered the sovereignty of this 
legislature in doing so. 
 
And the free trade deal of Canada, section 6, confirms that, 
because section 6 now makes it superior to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 16, I’m sorry, 16, which makes it now superior 
to all of the provincial legislatures. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Deputy Premier laughs. They did this voluntarily, Mr. Speaker. 
Nobody brought a gun to their head. There wasn’t an invasion, 
there wasn’t a foreign country that came over and won this 
province over. They walked over, willy-nilly, to the negotiating 
table and they signed this away, and they’re doing it now with 
section 20, Bill 20, with respect to potash. 
 
This is a resource like Saudi Arabia. In almost no other resource 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, do we control the world, in 
some senses. We’re the largest producers outside of the Soviet 
Union. Everywhere else, wheat and hog and cattle production, 
we’re dependent upon the world, we have to react to them to 
compete; but here we can manage the world. And these people 
opposite they voluntarily turn over the tools to build for the 
future for our schools and our hospitals. I say shame on them. 
They will pay a political price they will never ever forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — See, Mr. Speaker, these people can laugh at 
me if they want. I don’t care. I tell you, I’ve been laughed at 
political professionals in this legislature over the 20 years that 
I’ve been here, and from those people next door, that doesn’t 
bother me at all. What I challenge them to do is to give me an 
analysis which counters the one that I advance for the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The history of government, Mr. Speaker, is to build, one 
government on top of the other. We don’t have to buy 
everything that a government does. But anything that a 
government normally leaves behind, there’s something which is 
of benefit. Not these people. They’re following the scorched 
earth policy. Simply because the New Democrats did it, it’s got 
to be automatically wrong. 
 
And they say, we’ve got to do it because that’s the way the 
world wants us to do it. Everybody is privatizing, they say. 
Nobody is privatizing like this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, giving 
away our right — nobody. Everybody says that they’re 
privatizing. They say that’s the way of the world. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to tell all of the 
members of this House that that argument isn’t going to cut like 
that with me about what the rest of the world is doing, because 
we had that argument in Saskatchewan in the Dirty Thirties 
about what the rest of the world were doing. And we fought 
back because we said back in the Dirty Thirties, there’s another 
way to do it. And we set up our co-op movements, and we set 
up our wheat pools, and we set up our CCF, and we set up our 
medicare, and we set up our power corporation, which they’re 
going to undo tomorrow. We set up our potash  

corporations because we did it together. People working 
together. I tell you, I’m not afraid of the fact that all the world’s 
doing it. We never did it the way the rest of the world did it. We 
are doing it the Saskatchewan way to build the hope and future. 
A better way, that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — A better way! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I may 
not convince The Globe and Mail, and I may not convince the 
Leader-Post, and I may not convince the Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation, and I may not convince CTV 
(Canadian Television Network), but I tell you, I am as confident 
as I’m standing here, I’m going to convince the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan of that point of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I don’t expect the media or the journalists to 
be on side of our vision, because after all this is where they 
come from. I don’t expect that at all for one moment. But I have 
faith and confidence in the people of this province, that there is 
a great future with great vision, with people with ability and 
determination. That’s how we built. That’s what this debate’s 
all about, and it’s not potash. It’s power tomorrow, it’s the 
power corporation tomorrow and after that it’s SGI. Because we 
believe that the people of the province of Saskatchewan know 
our history and tradition, and they’re going to stand with us and 
they’re not going to stand with the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) and CTV when it comes down to it. 
We know that. 
 
Now let me close, Mr. Speaker. I’ve touched on how the potash 
corporation was set up — not an act of ideology as much as it 
was an act of pragmatism and philosophy of Saskatchewan; 
how we performed and how we did and the jobs we created, and 
the headquarters. I’ve talked about the legislation. I’ve talked 
about the impact of the free trade deal. I analysed the 1988 
annual report, which is proof positive that they ought not to be 
doing what they’re saying they’re going to be doing. 
 
And now I want to close by saying that there is a better way, in 
the few minutes left to me, a better way to do this. 
 
Some people may say, well you know, you’re wrapped up in 
this debate because you piloted the potash Bill back in 1975-76 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sorry, I didn’t quite hear what 
the hon. member from Weyburn said, but it doesn’t matter in 
any event. It doesn’t matter in any event. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I am . . . If I’m feeling 
passionate about this debate, it’s not because of what we 
experimented with in 1975 and 1976 in response to the 
circumstances that were before us — an experiment that 
worked, a Saskatchewan experiment. That’s not what’s 
motivating me, although I’m very proud of what we did with 
the mistakes that we made. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

954 
 

This is not a defence of the past. I am not defending the past. I 
think that if we had been re-elected in 1982 we would have 
moved the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to the future, to 
the next plateau, to the great opportunities that I think it still has 
under some government some day in the future. But we were 
denied that when we had this gang elected, deciding to turn the 
clock back to the 1960s and 1970s. 
 
This is not an emotional thing with me. What is emotional, Mr. 
Speaker, for me, is that I think that future and that policy, that 
vision of a better way, is one which is the way that we as 
legislators ought to be working and building towards for the 
people of this province. My vision, and our vision, is a vision 
not which tears down strengths, but it’s a vision which builds 
on those strengths. 
 
Our vision is a vision of a mixed economy, Mr. Speaker, where 
private entrepreneurs and business people supplement what 
government and co-operative people do — where they lead, 
where they innovate, where we reward entrepreneurial risk, 
where we put our emphasis on Main Street, Saskatchewan, not 
Bay Street, Toronto. That’s my vision, the mixed economy. 
 
My vision is not to eliminate a department of co-operatives as 
these people have and put in a minister of privatization. For the 
first time in modern history in Saskatchewan we don’t have a 
minister of co-ops, but we have a minister of privatization. 
That’s not our vision. 
 
Our vision, Mr. Speaker, is to build on our strengths and to 
build through co-operation and to build on the mixed economy 
in that tradition that I’ve talked to you about. And PCS is 
central to that. 
 
A New Democratic government would work with the people of 
this province to create new jobs at PCS, to generate new profits, 
to come back for schools and hospitals and roads — new profits 
for exports, to provide new avenues of research and 
development for our universities and our technical schools. 
 
(2015) 
 
This is a high-tech business. It can be a high-tech business, 
working with the synergy of high education which in itself 
spawns off another level of economic activity apart from a 
process of learning and growing and maturing. Potash 
corporation can work, and industry and resources can work 
hand in hand to develop that. 
 
Our vision of the 1990s is a vision where men and women and 
young people have a future of economic growth and renewed 
hope and increased opportunity, not one where a select few who 
can afford to buy the shares are going to benefit, but the rest of 
us don’t. 
 
We see PCS as a bright light in that future. A properly managed 
PCS, owned and controlled by the people of this province — 
right here — can be a powerful economic development tool to 
keep Saskatchewan people right here. And the possibilities are 
almost limitless. 
 
As I’ve noted to you, Mr. Speaker, the reserves are almost  

endless — 4,000 years. We have the most efficient mines. We 
already have 25 per cent of the total world market. We can get 
more. It’s there to get, with a three and a half million dollar a 
year pie out there waiting for our share to increase. 
 
I see a strong vibrant corporation, 100 per cent owned and 
controlled by the people of this province, with a real head office 
right here, with all the functions that any real head office, major 
international corporation would see perform — right here. That 
was our dream; that is my dream; that is our dream for the 
future. 
 
I see a head office which creates research and development, 
works in harmony with our technical schools, provides jobs for 
the graduates of our technical schools and our universities. You 
know the current government closed down, closed down the 
research and development division of PCS and shut the door on 
the dreams of young men and women. 
 
We would renew the PCS commitment to research and 
development in Saskatchewan. That’s good, not only for PCS 
because it keeps the company a world leader in mining 
technology and in the development of new product lines, but 
it’s good for the province as a whole. The graduates will have 
new jobs and opportunities if we succeed. They won’t have to 
leave the province as they’re doing, at 6,000 a month. They can 
stay here and build their careers and take on the world, right 
here from Regina and Saskatoon and Yorkton. 
 
The universities and the technical schools can benefit from joint 
ventures where they sell knowledge and expertise to major 
customers. PCS can fund agricultural research in nations like 
China or India because that research can help increase 
long-term sales of Saskatchewan potash, and do it, not 
necessarily for profit, but to do it because we are also our 
brothers’ keepers in the world, and we want them, too, also to 
have hope and opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We could develop new product lines to be 
processed and manufactured right here with jobs, and exported 
to the world. When the current government closed down PCS 
Cory last year it closed down a major initiative in this whole 
diversification area. It closed down the potassium sulphate pilot 
plant which was developing whole new lines of speciality 
fertilizers for the citrus and tobacco industries. They shut it 
down. This is a whole new sector of the fertilizer market which 
is growing in importance in Saskatchewan, and we can be a 
world leader right here at home. 
 
And I see the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan marketing it 
aggressively all over the world. Why shouldn’t, Mr. Speaker, 
the largest potash company in the world have its own 
international sales force seeking out long-term contracts right 
here with nations like China, India, and Brazil? Why can’t we 
do that? We can do that. Why shouldn’t we be competing head 
to head with the private multinational companies for these 
markets, and beat them? And I think we can do it. We’ve done 
it in the past before. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

955 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, the gentlemen 
opposite, the ladies and gentlemen opposite, they talk about 
competition. How about some true competition? How about 
some Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan people-owned and 
run competition against the large privately profit-motivated 
corporations competition? Let’s see who can do the best job in 
marketing and selling. We can do that. We can compete, we can 
play by the rules of economics and by the market-place. We’ve 
done it before, we can do it again. 
 
We say PCS can sign long-term sales deals with the nations of 
the Pacific Rim. That’s the future, the Pacific Rim. And we 
don’t have to sell them shares in our potash mines to do it. We 
sell them our wheat, but we don’t sell them our farms, Mr. 
Speaker, so why should we sell them our potash mines? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a secure supplier who lives up 
to contracts and delivers quality product at the best price is 
going to break into any market anywhere in the world and do 
well. We’ve got the confidence and the ability of our 
Saskatchewan young men and women to do it right here. That 
kind of aggressive global marketing scheme would be the kind 
that PCS has produced in the past; it would see in the future 
PCS mines working at full production. We would see PCS 
going ahead with its expansions at Bredenbury and elsewhere. 
 
Why should Israel and Jordan and New Brunswick and New 
Mexico be increasing production while we stand on the 
sidelines and watch our market share fall? 
 
Where are these people? Why aren’t they standing up for jobs at 
our mines here? That’s what a future can do for the province of 
Saskatchewan under a PCS owned by the people of the 
province. That’s the way to build a prosperous future. 
 
And why should PCS stop at being a basic supplier of raw 
products? Why can’t Saskatchewan become home to a fully 
integrated world-wide fertilizer product corporation — world 
wide fertilizer product corporation. That’s a dream, perhaps. I 
think it’s a realistic one — a corporation which would own, 
process, and sell its product line right from the mine gate to the 
farm gate and do it probably for a change without ripping off 
the farmers in the process of doing that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the dreams are endless, if 
only we dare to dream and if we act on our dreams. The dreams 
are endless not only in terms of product development, and 
mining opportunities, and selling in the world. The dreams are 
endless in making the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
more responsive to people. They’re endless in terms of whether 
or not we should be electing people to the boards of directors 
under a future government, to make sure that they are 
responsive in that sense; to a variety of other similar  

schemes and ideas which have been advanced by many people. 
The dreams are endless. 
 
All of which, however, would not detract from but would 
enhance the central issue of this debate. And the central 
question that I ask again in closing, as I did at the beginning: 
who do we want developing our future and the future of our 
children? Do we want the IMCCs and the Chinese and the 
Indians and the Toronto and Montreal investors, or do we want 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan to build our futures 
in our communities right here? That’s the choice. Are you 
standing with The Globe and Mails and with the IMCCs and the 
big, large, multinational corporations, or are you standing with 
the farmer and with the business men and the people of this 
province? That’s the question that’s before us. 
 
And that dream, our dream, not only my dream, but the dream 
that started with Tommy Douglas and went through Woodrow 
Lloyd and Allan Blakeney and even Ross Thatcher — even in 
his own way with Ross Thatcher — all of that dream is now 
standing at risk at coming apart, because we have in office men 
and women of little faith and little vision and little hope, those 
who are surf-board economists; those who say they can’t 
control the world. They say they simply want to ride the 
surf-board, they can’t control the waves. We can only stay on 
the surf-board; we can’t manage our direction, we can’t manage 
our hope and our future. I am not going to support those 
defeatists. We are building for tomorrow because we can do it. 
We must do it, if this province survives. That’s the dream, 
that’s the challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, working men and women and farming people and 
young people and those who are entrepreneurs, everybody who 
believe and love this province, know what I am talking about. 
It’s not only PCS, but it’s the power Bill tomorrow and the SGI 
Bill; it is all of this privatization mania which is captured here 
that’s at issue. 
 
I ask you, sir, and everybody else, anybody watching this 
debate: how has privatization helped your income taxes? Have 
they gone down? How has it helped your health care? Is it 
improved or has it gone worse? It’s gone worse. How has 
privatization helped education? Do we have quotas on 
universities? Do we have quotas on post-secondary education? 
Has it helped you? How has privatization helped the $4 billion 
debt that these people have rung up in seven years? It’s gone 
up. How has privatization done anything except turned us over 
lock, stock, and barrel to those who do not understand 
Saskatchewan, don’t love Saskatchewan, and don’t have the 
faith in Saskatchewan that we do? 
 
Privatization is a failure. This Bill symbolizes that failure. Mr. 
Speaker, I am going to vote against it. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think you will agree that you and I and members of the press 
and members in this legislature just witnessed a very historic 
speech. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

956 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — We witnessed a speech, Mr. Speaker, which 
I say that if every member in this House took and showed to 
their constituents that there would be no more need for any 
campaigning. Our member from Riversdale would become the 
Premier in the next election. You could call the House to an 
end. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 
what I’m going to do with this speech is I’m going to ask the 
member from Riversdale for a copy, and I’m going to ask him 
for a copy of the tapes that he spoke on today and the previous 
day. And I’m going to offer them to any member in the viewing 
public and to my constituents to look at because I think they 
should take a look at. And I think my members, the members on 
this side, will be doing the same. If there’s anybody there, if 
there’s anybody that wants to take a look at the speech and have 
it to show to their friends, just get a hold of their MLA in any of 
the cities. Any New Democratic MLA will be more than willing 
to send it to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And just for the proper comparison, Mr. 
Speaker, we will also send them, if they really insist, we will 
send them the Minister of Finance’s speech, the member who 
introduced this speech, just so they can do the comparison. His 
four- or five-minute, or 10-minute blurb on it, his impassionate 
blurb on it, let them compare. 
 
Let them look at the people and ask themselves . . . Let the 
people ask themselves the question: who is it that cares? Who is 
it that really loves this province? Who is it that’s got the passion 
and the vision to lead us into the 1990s just like Tommy 
Douglas did in the ’50s and the ’60s, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We are going to, and the members on this side, Mr. Speaker, are 
going to see to it that this member becomes the Premier of the 
province when the next election is called. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I waited a minute before I got 
up out of my seat today because the tradition of the House is, in 
a major debate, that you alternate, as you should, from this side 
of the House to the other side of the House, and we are giving 
them the opportunity to come up and speak. But I see that they 
are not too interested in speaking and defending, and standing 
up and defending this. What they are expecting to do instead is 
they’re expecting, they are expecting their multinational friends 
to fund a great, big media campaign, to fund it so they don’t 
have to do any work. They haven’t got the guts to defend this 
stuff. 
 
(2030) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, when I first was advised of 
this year in this legislature, the government side said that they 
were going to privatize SaskPower and SaskTel and Sask 
Potash, I thought to myself, these guys must be nuts, absolutely 
nuts! It just didn’t make any sense — no sense at all. Just think, 
Mr. Speaker, of what you can do when you’ve got the finances 
in your hand to put programs into place. Just think what you can 
do! 
 
We know that we’ve got schools that need funding. We know 
that we’ve got hospitals that need funding. We’ve got roads that 
need building. But what are they doing with something that’s 
going to provide us with some funds this year — 106 million; 
we just got the report today. They’re going to sell it off. That’s 
like going into your herd of 50 cows and selling the one that 
gives the most milk. That’s exactly what it’s like, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s exactly what it’s like. Now who’s going to be left holding 
the can? Who is going to be left to pay for that? If all of this is 
. . . If all of the potash is privatized, where is the money going 
to come from — the money to put these programs into place, 
that we wanted in place and the people of Saskatchewan need in 
place. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, about how this government set up 
this whole operation, the whole scenario to sell the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. What did they do? First of all 
they took a few years, first four or five years of it just to 
discredit the corporation. 
 
You know, that’s right out of the textbook of Maggie Thatcher. 
If you want to privatize something, if you want to privatize 
something, what you’ve got to do is you’ve got to establish the 
atmosphere for it first. If the people of Saskatchewan — and in 
this case they did — if the people of Saskatchewan really liked 
the benefits that they were getting from potash, first of all you 
had to turn them against the potash mine, see. So what do they 
do? They run the thing into the ground, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
exactly what they do. They run it into the ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at the record of the PCS, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and you see what 
happened to it, whether it was making money or not, you can 
see . . . And I have a graph here before me and this graph tells 
me that from the years 1978 to 1981, the potash corporation 
was increasing in profits all the way through until 1980, 
dropped a little in 1981. As a matter of fact, in 1980 it peaked 
with a profit of over 130 million, over 150 million by the looks 
of the graph. 
 
Well as a result of this, and this is all the time . . . during the 
time while it was repaying its debt as well — repaying debt on 
the principal borrowed to buy the potash mines and contributing 
dividends to the people of Saskatchewan, a total of $431 
million, Mr. Speaker, a total of $431 million. That’s enough to 
pay . . . Would that be enough to pay the interest on this year’s 
debt? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just enough to pay it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Just enough, just enough to pay the interest 
on this year’s debt. But then I look further on this graph, Mr. 
Speaker, and I see what happened after the PCs took power. 
Well in this graph that I’ve got, it shows that it’s got . . . The 
potash corporation had showed a  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

957 
 

slight profit in 1983 and 1984, and then by 1985 and ’86 they 
had driven it completely into the ground. 
 
But all at the same time, even though there was a downturn in 
the market, you would expect that the profits wouldn’t be quite 
as high — and I grant you that. But at the same time as the 
potash corporation is unable to make money, they’re extracting 
dividends so they can cover up the debt set up by this Minister 
of Finance, the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, the potash corporation, if I get 
back to those numbers, came up with $413 million in profits 
during the time that the NDP was operating it. In addition to 
that it paid the provisional . . . That was the profits. What it did 
from that is it paid the treasury — the people of Saskatchewan 
— 270 million in taxes and in royalties, and it paid taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan $100 million in dividends. 
 
All this time the potash corporation, in addition to doing these 
things, was employing 2,200 people. That’s a significant thing, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s a very significant thing, because at these 
mines our own people were actually able to train, work their 
way up through the corporation. The head office of the 
corporation was in Saskatoon. It was a major world head office 
right here in Saskatchewan. So it gave us access not just to the 
labour jobs and to the clean up jobs, good paying jobs with the 
corporation and the rest of the potash corporations in the 
province, and good head office jobs. We didn’t have to import 
the whole cadre of experts from outside of Saskatchewan for 
this. 
 
As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 what happened there was 
the profits were about a million dollars. This was the year that 
the potash market started to decline. But even though the profits 
were only a million, this government, this bunch of bandits, 
what they did is they took $50 million of a dividend from the 
potash corporation. They started to run it into the ground. 
That’s what they were trying to do. They were trying to make 
the corporation look bad, as I said earlier. 
 
Now it’s interesting that at this stage of the game, when they’re 
ready to sell it, all of a sudden they turn the picture around 
hoping that the people of Saskatchewan would have a rather 
dim picture and dim view of the potash corporation. Turn it 
around, and we’ve got a company that shows $106 million 
profit. 
 
Now we’re trying to sell $400 million worth of corporation. 
Now that’s not a bad price for a corporation that just made $106 
million. And I think if I was offered that kind of a deal, and if I 
was given it under the conditions where I didn’t have to pay any 
interest, and if I didn’t have to pay anything unless I made 
thirteen and a half per cent, I think I’d take that deal. Would 
you take that? Anybody is liable to take that kind of a deal. 
 
But you know what’s happened? In the interim period, while 
they’re preparing for this particular case of privatization — 
that’s a difficult word to say, Mr. Speaker — this case of 
privatization, they had tried to privatize several other things, 
and they managed to do so. And you know, I had a couple of 
cases of privatization in my home  

town, and I want to talk about them briefly, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to refer to them. 
 
And if you want to call the Minister of Social Services in, you 
might advise him that I’m going to say a few things that I think 
he should hear tonight. I’m going to be talking about the 
privatization of North Park Centre, Mr. Speaker, and how it fits 
into this whole privatization scheme of this government here; 
how it fits in, and how they’re trying to save money by pushing 
out residents and causing residents of North Park Centre to go 
through a period of suffering — and 13 of them ended up dead. 
And 13 of them ended up dead so that they could save money 
and get into this privatization scheme, because they knew that 
there wasn’t going to be any money left once they sold a thing 
like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to come back to that issue in a minute, Mr. Speaker, 
and the member from Kinistino might want to hear it as well 
because it’s something he should take a look at real carefully, 
real carefully. And this is the first time I’ve ever mentioned this 
in this House, and the first time I’ve mentioned it any place 
because I had too much respect for those poor people whose 
lives you jeopardized and suffered on account of your careless 
and your non-caring attitude — your attitude strictly to 
privatize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a situation here where, as I mentioned 
earlier, we have a historical debate; historical debate because 
it’s around this debate, the privatization of Saskatchewan’s 
potash, of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, SGI, and 
SaskTel, that brings out the real contrast and the real difference 
of the vision that they have — the Progressive Conservative 
Party in government have — and the people of Saskatchewan 
represented by the New Democrats on this side have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And it’s sometimes worthwhile just putting 
into a little bit of a historical perspective, Mr. Speaker, because 
I can remember going to see Tommy Douglas when I was a 
teenager and listening to him speak. And those were the days 
when Mr. Douglas was talking about hospitalization for 
everybody, and he was proud of the fact that he had brought in 
hospitalization right across, using a technique where people 
together joined in government to do something that they could 
not do as individuals. And using that same technique, he 
organized and set up the power corporation. The New 
Democrats set up a power corporation. Why? So that the people 
of Saskatchewan could get together and pool their resources 
through government to do something that they could not do 
individually. 
 
And I’ll bet you, Mr. Speaker, that the member’s farm from 
Shellbrook-Torch River, the member’s farm from 
Shellbrook-Torch River would not have received power from 
any private company out there in Shellbrook or your neighbours 
in Canwood or somebody in Hoey or wherever would not have 
received it, would not have received it if hadn’t been for 
SaskPower. And now at this stage, what do we hear? They’re 
going to sell the potash. They’re going to get rid of the cash 
cow. They’re going to  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

958 
 

get rid of SaskPower. Why? Because of a principle, their 
principle of what I call raw capitalism — every man for 
himself. 
 
It wasn’t just SaskPower, Mr. Speaker; there were the roads in 
Saskatchewan. And I know that you could talk to . . . in the 50s 
and the 60s you could talk to any traveller that had come 
through Saskatchewan and he’d compliment us on the roads 
that we had in Saskatchewan because we used the same 
principle to build the roads as we did to set up the potash 
corporation. The people working together, using the 
government as a tool to do together what they cannot do as 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, — to do what they could not do as 
individuals. 
 
And the same thing happened later on with the Blakeney 
government when we started talking . . . when we set up the 
corporation to monitor the oil and the oil profits in the province. 
Now we already had the experience, Mr. Speaker, of Sask 
Potash. We had a window on the potash world. We, the people 
of Saskatchewan, through a New Democratic government, had 
a window on it. They were able to tell us just how much the 
companies needed to make a fair profit, to pay good wages to 
their employees, to keep the working conditions clean and safe. 
And then in addition there was a windfall, because in the case 
of potash, there was a monopoly. 
 
And in the case of Saskoil, there was a monopoly very similar 
to that shared with Alberta. And so they established the Saskoil 
corporation to do the very same thing, to set it up. And through 
that, by setting up the Saskoil corporation, we were able to get a 
window on the world, a window on the world of the oil 
industry. And following that, you were able to set royalty rates, 
which in comparison to that set elsewhere, in comparison to 
what we were getting before, we’re able to take that money, like 
the money from the Sask Potash Corporation, put it into the 
treasury, and use it to build our schools and use it to build our 
hospitals and use it to set a denticare plan for our children, 
which you destroyed, and which this government subsequently 
destroyed. 
 
But they don’t understand that. They don’t understand that that 
was what happened. It just happened; all of a sudden it just 
happened. Forgot their history, forgot that in Saskatchewan 
we’ve got a million people scattered over millions of acre. 
We’re not living side by side by side in three major cities and 
that’s it; over half of the population of Saskatchewan is in the 
rural areas. It’s switching slowly. But when these things were 
done, three-quarters of the population of Saskatchewan was in a 
rural area. We were scattered around. We needed to set up tools 
for ourselves, tools that were unique because we had a unique 
situation. But they’ve forgotten that, they don’t care. 
 
(2045) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re still a rural province, we still need to 
work together, we still need to set up schemes and economic 
plans where we can put the resources of our province and put 
the will of the people together so that we can accomplish those 
things which we cannot do as individuals and which no foreign 
corporation will do for us as individuals. 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, with Saskoil and SaskTel and Sask 
Potash corporations, we had people trained right in the 
corporation, sons and daughters of our neighbours, trained in 
the corporation, work their way up, were able to compete and 
get jobs in any place in the country and any place in the nation. 
And you know that a lot of them are moving out right now, of 
course, because you’re privatizing everything. Nine thousand 
this year alone, Mr. Speaker, moving out as a result of what’s 
happening here, privatizing the potash corporation along with 
SaskPower and the rest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just go back one minute before I proceed 
with my address because I want to mention once again, as I did 
at the beginning of my delivery on this Bill, that I had . . . I’ve 
sat here and I’ve listened to our leader as he put forth his vision 
and the vision of this party in this legislature on this very 
historic debate. 
 
And I want to reiterate that my colleagues and I are more than 
willing to send out copies of the speech to anybody who would 
care to have it, and all you have to do is phone our caucus 
office. I can give you one number, it’s 787-1888, that’s my 
number. And if you phone it, somebody from the caucus office 
will answer, and they’ll be more than willing to take your name 
and address and send you a copy of the Leader of the 
Opposition’s historic speech on this debate. And you will get it 
— no charge. You can also call any constituency office, and 
I’m sure they’ll be willing to send it to you. 
 
Now my colleagues remind me that you should probably call a 
New Democratic MLA if you want to get the authentic speech. 
The number, once again, Mr. Speaker, in case you would like to 
phone in and call me about it, is 787-1888. And I’ve just 
received another number here from a colleague from Regina 
Rosemont, and his number is 787-7388. No charge, and he 
repeats, no charge . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s 
fine, I think I’ll repeat those later if you just remind me, 
colleagues. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I promised you that I would spend a few 
minutes describing about the tragedy forced upon a few people 
by this government, by this government’s mania for 
privatization. And I do so now in great sadness, Mr. Speaker. 
But at the time, a person has to do it at a certain time, and I 
think this is probably just as an appropriate time as not. Because 
what I’m going to do, Mr. Speaker, is show how this 
government, and I will digress a little here from potash, but I’m 
trying to do it in this context, Mr. Speaker, with your 
permission, that this government and this Minister of Social 
Services, who is so bent on privatization and so concerned with 
writing up this Bill — he said so in the House today, that he 
wrote up this Bill — that he forgot about 40 people, about 40 
people in the city of Prince Albert. And I want to bring a few 
things to his attention. 
 
See, what happened, Mr. Speaker, is one of the first things that 
were privatized in Prince Albert was North Park Centre. North 
Park Centre is a home; it’s housed in a large building. It used to 
be called the sanatorium. It was built back in the mid-40s I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, and it was built in the days when there 
was a tuberculosis epidemic. And they built up a beautiful 
structure on the river bank  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

959 
 

on the north side of the North Saskatchewan River. 
 
And when the epidemic had been contained — and I might say 
that there was a lot of people that went through that building 
and the father of our current mayor in Prince Albert was a 
doctor, chief doctor in charge at the time, and I remember . . . I 
know also that I had some relatives that had tuberculosis, 
including my father, who spent a couple of years there, and the 
building I found quite . . . has a historical significance, at least, 
not only to Prince Albert but also to my family personally. 
 
Well it was a beautiful building, Mr. Speaker. When that 
epidemic was over, as I mentioned, it was then converted. At a 
later time it went through a couple of stages, but it was 
converted to what was known as North Park Centre, a centre for 
mentally retarded people in the province. We were going into a 
stage in Saskatchewan when that was converted from private 
care for mentally retarded to publicly administered care for the 
mentally retarded. That was what people thought was the right 
time, the right thing to do. 
 
At this stage we are now going in the reverse direction. We are 
going again from the publicly funded and public care to private 
care. And that’s a philosophical move, I think, that’s accepted 
fairly well across the province, Mr. Speaker, fairly well across 
this province. I’ve had occasion to talk to with members of the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living and they 
ascribe to that philosophy and I can understand it. 
 
But in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, what we have is 
something that’s slightly different, slightly different. Because at 
North Park Centre we had youngsters who were mentally 
retarded who were, first of all, as in their youth, hidden from the 
public — or if not hidden from the public by their parents 
because in those days things were a little different — if not 
hidden from the public, they certainly didn’t have the services 
and the educational services, or the medical services or the care 
services that we did following that. They just didn’t exist. 
 
So people banded together and said: we’ve got to do something; 
we don’t know how to handle them at home; we can’t handle 
them at home and manage our farms at the same time. And they 
put these good people into the institution and we developed an 
excellent care staff there, just like at Valley View Centre — 
Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw — and they were living 
there. 
 
And as people aged, some of them went in there in their 20s and 
30s and 40s, and there were people there who were generally 
ageing, probably from the age now of 40 up to 80, ages 40 to 
80, and that had become their home. And I had visited North 
Park Centre many times. In fact, the member from 
Shellbrook-Torch even visited North Park Centre and passed 
out his campaign buttons there, only to get what, Mr. Speaker? 
Well the government in its wisdom — and I am using that word 
very facetiously in this case, very loosely — in its wisdom 
decided to privatize. All right, so they’re going to privatize 
North Park Centre. 
 
That wasn’t enough. They said they had to have them out by a 
certain date. Bang. A certain date. I don’t know, Mr.  

Speaker, what it’s like in your family, or your neighbourhood, 
but if you told your neighbours they had to move out of their 
neighbourhood by a certain date, I think it would cause a little 
bit of stress. Yes, it would cause a little bit of stress if you set a 
deadline. That minister set the deadline, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the government was advised, Mr. Speaker, by the 
professionals and by the families of the people that resided 
there, but no, there was no listening. We’re privatizing, he says, 
we’re privatizing. Well they were warned. They were warned 
that you had to put things into place to make sure that the care 
level was up to what they were used to. They were warned that 
some of these people needed 24-hour care, that their behaviour 
patterns were such that ordinary people without any training, 
and without respite from 24-hour training, just couldn’t handle. 
They were warned. They were told; they were pleaded with, 
Mr. Speaker. They were pleaded with. And the reason for me 
bringing this out now is because I want to plead with the 
minister not to do the same thing at Valley View Centre. They 
were pleaded with. 
 
Well we have the record now, Mr. Speaker. We have the record 
now of what happened. And to put this in the proper context, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all, out of 180 residents, 140 
I believe were quite well placed. I don’t want to make this 
sound like it’s some kind of an exaggeration. And I think that 
maybe the rest of them could have been well placed if it had 
been staged and done when they were ready; if they hadn’t have 
been forced out by this minister. 
 
But you know what happened? I paid a visit, Mr. Speaker, to 
the people who were doing the monitoring and I says, well 
what’s happened? And I said, well we have a situation where 
. . . since then I think it’s approximately 24 had to be moved 
several times and 13 of them have died. And I was kind of 
shocked at this Mr. Minister, and I wondered, gee, what’s going 
on, is that rather unusual? 
 
And so I went to visit the doctor, the doctor that had talked to 
them. I talked to him and I said, doctor, what’s the life 
expectancy of these people? What do you expect to happen? I 
was a little taken back. I thought that maybe it was just a little 
bit out of hand. And the doctor told me, he says, well what are 
you dealing with? And I said, what do you expect their life 
expectancy to be? He said, well we were expecting usually from 
two to five people per year. That’s with their age, that’s what it 
was. I said, well why would this have happened? Is there any 
possibility that the stress of privatization, like privatization, 
which is part of this whole grand scheme, had anything to do 
with it? The doctor told me that under conditions like this, 
conditions of stress, two things could happen. First of all, 
there’s the trauma of movement themselves that could have 
contributed to it; secondly, that the level of care is reduced 
could also accelerate this. 
 
Well you listen to this, Mr. Minister, you listen to this. You 
should already know it. So when I found this out, when I found 
this out, I wrote the minister, but I guess he must have been too 
doggone busy writing up this Bill to privatize the potash 
corporation to pay any attention to the letter I wrote. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

960 
 

So I wrote him a letter, Mr. Speaker. I wrote him a letter a way 
back, three or four months ago, and I indicated some of the 
problems, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to be asking him these 
questions again in his estimates because I think we still deserve 
an answer. And I indicated what some of the situation was. I 
indicated to him that there was a need for respite beds. I 
indicated to him that there was a need for in-service training for 
those people who were now taking care of them, Mr. Speaker. I 
indicated — but he didn’t reply. He mustn’t have paid any 
attention at all because he was too busy privatizing the potash 
corporation. 
 
You know what he did? He wrote me a paragraph . . . I’m sorry, 
I take it back, two paragraphs. There it is — two paragraphs. 
And he said: 
 

No, the safeguards and monitoring mechanisms are in 
place and working adequately. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I was ashamed. I was ashamed, Mr. Speaker, to 
send that reply to any of the family members who would ask 
me. 
 
Now why am I doing this, Mr. Speaker? I’m telling you this 
because, because this is part of the grand scheme of 
privatization that this government has got itself into that is 
resulting in a loss of . . . resulting in a loss, Mr. Speaker, of a 
cash cow, the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, loss of 
services like the dental plan, and even the loss of dignity to 
people and cause suffering to people, some of whom resulted 
. . . who are now no longer with us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me get back now, Mr. Speaker, to what 
is happening in terms of the potash corporation and what we 
could do in this province, Mr. Speaker, if this thing hadn’t have 
been happening . . . if this wasn’t happening. What this Bill 
does, is it’s setting up the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
for privatization — the same corporation which made $106 
million for the people of Saskatchewan during the last year, Mr. 
Speaker, the same year. 
 
Now do you think that we might need that money, Mr. Speaker? 
Do you think we need that money in this province? Well I can 
tell you assuredly that we need that money. I had spent some 
time, Mr. Speaker, looking through what was happening in the 
government of Saskatchewan, where the money could be spent. 
One of the places I was looking at is school taxes. What’s been 
happening to school taxes? Is it possible that the profits from 
the potash corporation made this year and certainly will make 
next year according to the annual report — they’re very 
optimistic — could help with grants with school boards? 
 
(2100) 
 
Now we know that school boards need some money. And 
there’s proof positive if you look at the statistics, you see. And 
while this privatization scheme is going on, what’s happening 
to the tax revenue of the province as being applied to school 
boards? If you look back at a chart from 1980 to 1988, you will 
see that the level of funding of provincial grants to school 
boards has gone down, down,  

down, percentage-wise. And I’ve got it here in front of me and 
I’ve taken it right out of the budget. It’s . . . and the school 
boards have verified this, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees’ Association) has verified this, 56.7 per cent in 1980; 
1982, down to 54.6; 1984, down to 54.7; 1986, down to 50.5; 
1988, down again, down to 49.2 — privatization, privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t for the approach that this government 
is using; if they would just get it through their heads that in this 
province you can use the Crown corporations to the benefit of 
the people of Saskatchewan; if you get that ideological thing 
out of your head about privatization, you could do the right 
thing and you could straighten this graph right out. It wouldn’t 
have to go down, down, down, down, down, so that our 
property taxes would have to go up, up, up, up every year. 
Wouldn’t have to do that. Just get rid of that privatization idea; 
just get rid of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you see, part of the problem is, you want to do this 
because they are tuned in and wound up by the corporation, by 
the corporate interests of the international . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You’re right, by the multinationals. You 
haven’t said no to a multinational corporation since you were 
born, I’ll bet. 
 
Now I have before me here, Mr. Speaker, another graph, 
another graph to show just what’s happened. We know we need 
money in this province. We’re so far in debt, I don’t know if 
we’re ever going to get out under this group. But we know we 
need money. But look, what’s happened when they’re 
collecting taxes? 
 
And I’m going to do a contrast for you, Mr. Speaker, to show 
you what’s happened to the individual income tax since these 
people have been in government and the corporate income tax. 
When I take a look, Mr. Speaker, at the graph of how much 
individual tax has been collected from income tax, that’s from 
our pockets, yours and my pocket — income tax, we’re just 
busy filling out the forms. 
 
And before I go to that, I might just remind this government of 
the booboo, of the booboo that their Finance Minister pulled 
again this year — totally incompetent. We’ve got 18-year-olds 
in this province, everybody that’s got an 18-year-old who’s 
earning under . . . when the family’s earning under $36,000, this 
government is charging them an extra 200 bucks this year 
which they shouldn’t have if the Minister of Finance hadn’t 
boobooed — just like he’s boobooing here with this Potash 
Corporation. Just like it. All it needed is a little attention on his 
part, and cross out the 1981 and put in 1980, and he’d have had 
it. But no, he refused to do that, and even when he was told — 
no, he’s busy taking care of something else. He’s busy 
privatizing, privatizing the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Corporation income tax is what I’m getting back to, Mr. 
Speaker, and individual income tax revenue. Individual income 
tax revenue would not have to go up, would not have to go up if 
we maintained the profits from our Crowns and maintained the 
services — would not have to go up. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

961 
 

So what’s happened to the individual income tax revenue? 
From 1985 through to ’89, the figures that I have before me, 
every year they’ve collected more money from the pockets of 
the people of Saskatchewan — your pockets, my pocket, Mr. 
Speaker — up from 626 million to 699, going higher, 752 
million, and this year a record amount collected from the people 
of Saskatchewan through income tax, 831 million. And they say 
we’re running out of money. It’s not running out of money, it’s 
mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. They’ve collected more income 
tax than anybody has ever collected in this province, in the 
history of this province. 
 
But at the same time . . . Okay, if they’re able to do that, at the 
same time why didn’t they do the same thing with corporations? 
Why didn’t they do so? And when I look at the corporate 
income tax, I don’t see a graph that’s increasing as you go 
along. I don’t see that at all. What happens is it bobbles up and 
down like this. Back in ’84 it was 156 million. This year it’s 
projected to be 148 million; in fact, that’s a decrease. 
 
What they did is they gave a 2 per cent decrease to the 
corporations. Why? That shows that they just don’t believe in 
taxing them, Mr. Speaker. They don’t believe in taxing them. 
They don’t believe in using the corporations for the benefit of 
the people of Saskatchewan like we were using the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, like we were using it. It was just 
a tool, Mr. Speaker, just an excellent tool — just an excellent 
tool to get done together what you and I couldn’t do as 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we need the money from 
corporations like the potash corporation, like Saskoil before it. 
Not only the money, but also the window on the world into that 
industry. Because when you take a look at what’s happening to 
our deficit and our debt since this government took office, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s enough to astound you. 
 
At this stage, we came from a profit in ’82, when we had the 
vision of a potash corporation and when we were taking 
dividends from the potash corporation, at the same time paying 
off its debt. Now, they took some dividends, but they didn’t pay 
off its debt until they were forced to in order to make it look 
good for this year. But during that period of time they put the 
province into debt — $3.9 billion. That works out to $3,900 per 
woman and man and child — everyone. Anybody had a child 
born this week, that child is born with a debt on its head, born 
with a debt on its head. 
 
The cost of servicing that debt is 381 million — 381 million; 
that’s $381 for every woman and man and child. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is almost as much as they’re going to get from selling 
this corporation, almost as much, what they expect to get for 
selling this corporation. But that’s 400 million they’re expecting 
to sell it for, but you know, it made 100 million this year. It 
made 100 million this year, and they’re going to sell it for 400 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a little bit about the finances of 
Saskatchewan and some reasons why we shouldn’t sell it 
because of the finances and the help it could give us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat something I mentioned  

twice here, because we know that we’ve had people that have 
called in and asked about a possibility of getting a tape of our 
leader, the member from Riversdale, when he spoke in this 
historic debate today and when he spoke about it yesterday. 
Now if you phone the caucus office or any one of your New 
Democratic members, and you might want to do so, Mr. 
Minister of Education, and see if I’m telling the truth, we will 
offer you and we will make sure that you are able to get either a 
copy of his speech or a bit of a tape that you might be able to 
use in your VHS. And I’ve been handed, by the member from 
Saskatoon University, a phone number that you might call if 
you want to, and you can call in right away and you will be 
given this, and the number is 787-1892. And if you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Call toll free at that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Call toll free. The member tells me that you 
can ask that the charges be reversed. You will not have to pay 
for the tape. You will get the tape with a smile, and the phone 
call will be answered with a smile as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, I say, 
was a unique, successful experiment which was done and set up 
by the people of Saskatchewan, unique in this world, unique in 
this world just like rural electrification was; just like rural roads 
and the highway network that we have in our province; just like 
medicare; just like the school dental plan; just like the 
prescription drug plan — all pioneered by the New Democrats, 
the people that sit on this side of the House. 
 
And we now see this thing slowly being tried to get pushed out 
the door by the members opposite. We see them trying to do 
this, and they’ve come across . . . they’ve done it one step at a 
time, one step at a time. We’ve experienced it slowly, but now 
they’ve finally brought down the big whopper, the PCS 
corporation along with SaskPower and SaskTel. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, the Premier opposite has said is going to 
be the Waterloo. We will see whose Waterloo it’s going to be, 
Mr. Speaker, because the decision on this Bill, that this 
government has made, is going to be rendered by the people of 
Saskatchewan in the next election. Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be 
rendered in the next election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention a couple of other things 
about the potash corporation just in case people are still . . . or 
anybody might still have the idea that the potash corporation is 
not really such a great thing. I want to say that we have, and we 
know we have, the richest deposits in the world. And I’ve been 
down one of those mines, Mr. Speaker, and I know the number 
of people that depend on those jobs and how the communities 
benefit from those jobs. 
 
And I note that in annual reports previous there were other 
people that agreed. In a 1982 annual report, the chairman, who 
now sits as a member opposite there, said, “It is our firm belief 
that a new and stronger PCS can emerge.” Do you remember 
saying that? Do you remember saying that? What happened? He 
said: 
 

With this belief in mind, the board of directors  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

962 
 

supported management’s recommendation to continue with 
all our major projects in Saskatchewan. I refer to the PCS 
mine in Lanigan, phase 2 expansion which is now under 
way. 
 

Well, you know, something happened to that member. At one 
time he made a little bit of sense. And now? He had the 
opportunity to stand up and at least say why he changed his 
mind. He wouldn’t do so. No. Why? Because they bought lock, 
stock, and barrel into some idea that Maggie Thatcher is setting 
up in Great Britain, and they think they can apply it here in 
Saskatchewan. What a ridiculous idea. 
 
And he can’t see through it — either that or he doesn’t have the 
guts to tell the members on his side, hey, we’ve gone too far, 
boys. We better hold back or we’re going to get kicked out of 
office. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what has happened. 
They have gone too far and they are going to get kicked out of 
office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
responsible for the Crown Corporations Committee, who sits on 
the front bench there as well, he said this at one time: 
 

I think that we’re doing better in our management. 
Certainly the board of potash corporation has confidence in 
the management of potash corporation. 
 

Well that was in 1983. I guess he’s changed his mind as well. 
Now he’s also dancing to the tune of Maggie Thatcher — 
privatization. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, what the people are telling me when I 
go home? They’ve experienced the privatization of our highway 
equipment, and they’re asking the question: are our roads any 
better? And the answer they’re saying is no. They’re thinking: 
are the roads any better? No. And they’re asking the question: 
well, we privatized our dental plan; are our children getting any 
better service? No. The answer is no, absolutely not. Part of 
SaskTel has been privatized. Are our telephone rates going 
down? No. Are our insurance rates going down? Not at all. Not 
at all. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need, we need the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to do those things together which you and I can’t 
do as individuals, Mr. Speaker. We need it for that. We need it. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan fear, Mr. Speaker, that by the time 
these guys are finished privatizing there will be nothing left. 
There will be nothing left. They will have run every corporation 
into the ground and there will be nothing left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close now with the similar type of 
remarks that I made earlier. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I 
feel quite privileged to have sat in this House and listened to the 
member from Riversdale when he gave  

what I consider will be the historic speech of this session. It will 
be the speech that motivates the members on this side and New 
Democrats across Saskatchewan. It will be the speech that will 
motivate us enough to throw those guys out of office whenever 
they call the election. And I don’t care if it’s this fall or next 
spring or the year after, or they wait until Her Honour has to 
come in and force them to call an election. But that’s what’s 
going to happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if the people of Saskatchewan, or anybody 
who might be watching television now, would like to get a copy 
of that speech, the speech from the member from Riversdale, or 
a copy of the speech either on tape or in print, they can phone 
in. They can phone any one of the members of the New 
Democrats . . . any New Democratic constituency office, or any 
New Democrats here that are sitting in this House. And I’ve got 
a few numbers which I’m going to give you here. The member 
from Moose Jaw North says you are quite welcome to call him, 
call him on reverse, he’ll give it to you. His number is 
787-1884. I’ll repeat that. The member from Moose Jaw North, 
his number is 787-1884. You can call collect. I’ll give you 
another number in a minute. 
 
The member from The Battlefords is here, and he says that you 
can call his office number, and his office number is 787 . . . so 
anybody in The Battlefords or that area who want to get a hold 
of him — 787-1623 is his number. I have another number here, 
and that’s the number from the member of Saskatoon 
University, I believe, and his number is 787-7388. 
 
And if you can’t remember any of these numbers, if anybody’s 
listening, what you can always do is call information and 
straight to the caucus office in Regina, the New Democratic 
caucus office, and we will be more than pleased to receive your 
call — call us collect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak 
to this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hesitated, 
like the previous speaker, in getting up. I had thought that one 
of the opposition members might have risen to his feet or her 
feet to join in this debate, a debate that will be seen by many in 
Saskatchewan now and probably in the future as a historic 
debate; a debate about the very soul and the heart of this 
province; a debate about the function and the role of 
government; a debate about the role of foreign influences in this 
province. 
 
The people at home may not necessarily know this, but it’s 
customary when we debate a Bill, or any other proposition for 
that matter, it’s customary for one of the government members 
to get up to speak to the Bill, and then for someone on this side 
of the House to get up to address the Bill, and then to listen 
again to a government member, and back and forth, so that all 
points of view might be taken into account. 
 
We are immensely surprised, greatly surprised by what we 
perceive to be a wall of silence on the part of the government, a 
wall of silence in this House. And whether  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

963 
 

it’s an inability or whether it’s a shame on their part — 
whatever the reason, it’s manifesting itself in not getting up and 
participating in this debate. 
 
Even the member who moved the Bill, who moved it on second 
reading, the minister responsible for the potash corporation 
spent only 20 minutes in putting forward his viewpoints, not in 
any detail, and mostly that was rhetoric. So we are very 
surprised, Mr. Speaker, very surprised to hear the silence, to see 
the inactivity on the government benches when it comes to 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Whether it’s because they can’t think of anything to say, or 
again, whether they’re ashamed to say or to contribute to the 
debate on this Bill, we’re not sure, and at some point they’ll 
have to explain, and they’ll have to come clean with the people 
of Saskatchewan and explain everything. 
 
It’s also been suggested that perhaps some of the government 
back-benchers don’t understand the provisions of the Bill, and 
that may well be the case, but that certainly shouldn’t excuse 
some of the front benches, some of those who sit on the front 
benches, and who ought to know about the provisions of this 
Bill, from participating in this debate. 
 
It’s a sorry day, it’s a sorry day, Mr. Speaker, when the 
government of the day, when the government of the day refuses 
— refuses to account to the public of Saskatchewan, the people 
of Saskatchewan in the forum that is set aside for such 
accountability; refuses to account to the public; will only give 
them advertising on TV as a means of explaining what it is that 
they’re trying to do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Slick ads, no ideas. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Slick ads, no substance, that’s this 
government. 
 
And I’ll get back, Mr. Speaker, to the business of slick ads, but 
it’s a sorry day, it’s a sorry day that the government will not 
take the opportunity that is provided in this legislative chamber 
and through the broadcast of these proceedings to explain its 
point of view to the people of Saskatchewan, in substance, in 
detail, in principle, but chooses instead to sit silently, to sit 
silently; and the only explanation that it can afford of its actions 
are a number of slick television ads about so called public 
participation, which the public know as privatization, and that is 
the only information that the public is going to receive from the 
government opposite. I say it’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was doing some travelling and I 
stopped for supper in a small café in a small town and two or 
three hours from Regina. And I don’t want to say which small 
town, it’s not important, and the name of the café isn’t 
important. This, I guess you might call it, was a triple C café, a 
Chinese-Canadian cuisine café, which is common to many 
small towns in Saskatchewan, and the café was empty, the café 
was empty . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I don’t 
want to mention the town or the constituency that  

this café was located in, for fear, Mr. Speaker, that somehow 
some narrow-minded PC back-bencher will see it as being 
necessary to go and address the person that I am going to be 
talking about, and to bring down the heavy clout of government 
on that person, because that’s the nature of that government. 
 
That’s the nature of that government, to drive fear into people, 
so that whenever anyone speaks out about the smallest thing, 
it’s to strike fear into those people so that they are afraid to 
speak out. 
 
And this person I talked to in this café is a waitress, and the café 
was empty when I came there, and I talked to her. She was a 
middle-aged woman, energetic, helpful. She and I talked about 
the weather, the fact that that part of the country was dry and 
that that was a problem. 
 
We also got to talking about her family. And she told me, Mr. 
Speaker, that she has three sons. Two have finished high 
school; one is 19 years old; one is 17 years old; the other, I 
think, is 16, is just completing high school or will be finishing 
school shortly. She was just so frustrated, she was so angry, and 
she was so afraid, Mr. Speaker, of the future for her children 
and what it might hold. 
 
And the Deputy Premier and the Minister of Education and the 
newly elected member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the 
minister of rural affairs and the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, they may laugh. They may laugh, but this 
is no make-believe story, this is no make-believe story, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This woman had three boys. None of those boys had been able 
to find any work. I want to correct that. One of the boys did find 
some month’s work in Ontario, some diamond drilling work, 
but has come back. But no jobs in Saskatchewan except for the 
odd job at harvest time. And if they’re not unemployed, then 
they’re underemployed. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this woman was frustrated, she was 
angry, but mostly she was very afraid of the future; afraid of 
what was in store for her sons; afraid of what opportunities 
there might be. 
 
And as I listen to the government members in their brief 
explanation of this Bill, I ask myself, and many people in 
Saskatchewan are asking themselves: how will the Bill make 
any difference for those kids? How is it going to provide some 
opportunity for them? How will this privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, how will that translate into jobs 
for that 19-year-old, for that 17-year-old, for that 16-year-old? 
How will that mean that they’re going to be given some 
opportunity that they can plan on, that they can think about 
getting married and raising families in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
They can’t, Mr. Speaker, they can’t. There’s nothing in this 
privatization of the potash corporation Bill about hope and 
opportunity and future and jobs for young people. The 
government may make you want to believe what this is all 
about. And the minister, in introducing the Bill, used words like 
“new economic direction”; words like “building in 
Saskatchewan and diversifying here”; words like “companies 
building and expanding.” 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

964 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have been 
hearing that line since 1982. And whether it was the Premier 
talking about, gee, we’re open for business, and we’re open for 
business now, so come on in. I mean, the NDP is no longer in 
business and they’re no longer in government, so we’re the 
government and we’re open for business. So come on in and 
let’s see a lot of investment here and growth and expansion and 
economic development. 
 
(2130) 
 
And it didn’t happen. So he said, well I’ve been using the 
wrong lines. I can’t say we’re open for business. I’ve got to say 
things like “we’re building and diversifying here,” maybe that’ll 
attract them. 
 
Well that didn’t work either. In fact, some of the people in the 
press think that was a big joke. The joke around the press 
gallery that time was that, when they talked about building, it 
was — what was the line? — building until you puke. That was 
the line they used. That was the line they used. 
 
I’m not sure what comments they might have had about your 
open-for-business direction, but the point is that the people of 
Saskatchewan have heard all these lines. They’ve heard all 
these lines from the Premier. They’ve heard all these lines from 
the Minister of Finance. They’ve heard them from all the 
cabinet ministers. And it’s like the past doesn’t exist, like that 
there’s some big black hole from 1982 to 1989, some big black 
hole about past performance that doesn’t exist. They don’t want 
to talk about the period from 1982 to 1989 — that’s kind of a 
black hole. It doesn’t exist. It’s not there. It’s just not real. 
 
What we want to talk about is the future because we want to 
build and diversify and all those wonderful things. And it’s 
going to happen with the potash corporation. The privatization 
of the potash corporation is going to result in all these 
wonderful things. 
 
If you really think the people of Saskatchewan are that foolish 
. . . Well I guess maybe that’s why they’re spending millions of 
dollars in those advertising campaigns because the public of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan believe an entirely 
different story, Mr. Speaker. They’ve seen this government. 
They’ve seen their operation. And it’s going to take more than 
hype and advertising to now convince the public, the people, 
that this privatization of the potash corporation is going to be a 
good thing. 
 
You know, like, they’ve undertaken . . . I mean, it’s not as if 
we’re dealing with a new thing here, that privatization is an 
entirely new thing that somehow, you know, is some new 
economic instrument. You know, the public might say, well 
gee, we’ve got to give it a try. We’ve got to get behind the 
government. They’re doing it for the first time, so we should 
help them out. We should at least believe them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is it the first time? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — It isn’t the first time. 
 

These people have been privatizing since 1982, but it hasn’t 
resulted in this massive economic expansion. It hasn’t resulted 
in a massive business development. The picture is one that is 
very contrary. The privatizations that these people have 
undertaken . . . I think the one that most people will remember, 
the very first one, the highway maintenance, where the minister 
of Highways at that time said, well I just fired — what was it 3 
or 400? — 400 highway workers here today because the private 
sector is going to take over all those jobs. 
 
And when asked: do you have any concerns about 400 people 
losing their jobs in Saskatchewan? He said, well we didn’t 
really fire them, we just gave them the opportunity to transfer to 
the private sector. I think that set the tone; that set the tone. 
That’s simply one of the most callous statements that has ever 
gone down in the legislative history of this province — 
transferred to the private sector. No owning up, no fessing up 
about what it is that you are doing, but just display an 
insensitivity and a callousness. And that was the very first 
privatization that these people indulged in. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And it didn’t work. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And it didn’t work. I mean, you know 
. . . Whatever else one might think, as a city MLA, that I don’t 
drive much beyond the road between my house and the 
Legislative Building. I want to let you know, government 
members, that I do get out of town once a week, and I do spend 
time in some of your ridings. I do spend time in some of your 
ridings, and so I am in a position to comment on the state of the 
highways in this province. 
 
Now I’m not a highways engineer and I won’t comment from 
that perspective, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you from the viewpoint 
of a user I can comment, and also from the viewpoint as one 
who talks to others and who have comments to make. That was 
their very first privatization, and I think the general agreement 
is that it hasn’t resulted in any improvement in highway driving 
conditions in Saskatchewan. In fact, it’s gone the other way. 
People kind of chuckle about the highways in this province. 
 
That was the first one, and there have been others. I think the 
one that a lot of families are especially angry about, and I don’t 
think they’re going to forget very quickly, is the children’s 
dental plan. This is a government that in 1987 arbitrarily, 
without prior consultation, fired 400 dental nurses, 400 dental 
nurses, young professionals, mostly women, who lived in 
communities throughout Saskatchewan, part of community life, 
and provided a valuable service, and were part of providing the 
very best children’s dental program in all of North America, 
and one of the best in the world. 
 
And this government said, we can’t have that; we don’t want it; 
we have to get rid of it. They said at that time it had something 
to do with saving money, although they haven’t been quite able 
to explain how in the long run we’ll save money by what they 
did. But that was another one of their privatizations. And again 
I ask, where are the jobs in that one? 
 
Someone gave me here a copy of Hansard from April 13,  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

965 
 

1989, and these are remarks by the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale, the minister of rural affairs, and what he had to 
say about the dental care and the dental program. And the 
minister of rural affairs said: 
 

Mr. Chairman, the dental care beyond the children . . . I 
mean, but children are very, very important. 
 

Well we can all agree with that point. He went on to say: 
 

The dental care being available to take them to a dentist, 
professional dentist, I believe, can’t be . . . at least it has to 
be . . . Those people are as good as or better than a trainee 
that may be out there working on those children’s teeth. I 
don’t say that they weren’t. It wasn’t . . . At the point it 
was, it might have been okay. But I believe that a 
professional dentist who has seven years of training has to 
have, and should have, a better knowledge of what is 
needed for not only the children, for the grown-ups and the 
rest, and it’s part of building rural Saskatchewan. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Read that last part again. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: —  
 

. . . I believe that a professional dentist who has seven 
years of training has to have, and should have, a better 
knowledge of what is needed for not only the children, for 
the grown-ups and the rest, and it’s part of building rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Well, now you had, you had 400 professionals throughout . . . 
dental therapists throughout rural Saskatchewan. You had these 
people working in communities such as Assiniboia and 
Gravelbourg and others. Part of that community providing the 
service, and even if the Minister of Rural Development believes 
what he just said, experts in the field, people from dental 
colleges in other jurisdictions who have no axe to grind but 
might tend to side a little bit with professional dentists, had 
done evaluations of that program, and said that in terms of the 
work that the dental therapists were being paid to do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’ve been listening very close to the 
debate and I can’t see where the member is relating it to Bill 20, 
which is the Bill before the House. The Chair is . . . Order, 
order . . . The debate . . . Order, order. Order . . . The Bill before 
the Assembly is Bill No. 20, and I’d asked the member to make 
his comments on Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What I 
was talking about was the children’s dental program, and it was 
an example, I believe, of a privatization, a public participation, 
if you will, that has been undertaken by this government. And I 
was illustrating a point in connection with my remarks to this 
Bill, which is about the privatization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I respect your comments, Mr. Speaker, that if you don’t 
want me to range too far afield, then I won’t do that. 
 

But I did want to point out that this privatization of the Potash 
Corporation is not the first privatization in Saskatchewan. And I 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, if this group, these PCs, ever get 
re-elected in Saskatchewan, it ain’t going to be the last 
privatization in Saskatchewan. It won’t be the last privatization 
in Saskatchewan. But I was simply making the point that this 
was not the first privatization. 
 
It’s not a matter as if the public should be expected to support 
the government in this venture because it’s something new and 
therefore the government should be given an opportunity to 
display or to put into practice, so that it might be evaluated, you 
know, given an opportunity of chance, if you will, with this Bill 
to show the people what they had in mind. 
 
The fact is that there had been privatization — privatization 
such as Sask Minerals — which is a very appropriate, I think, 
example to talk about in the context of the potash corporation. 
This was the Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation, owned by the 
province of Saskatchewan, owned by the public, returned a 
profit to the people of Saskatchewan and sold by the PC 
government to Ontario and Quebec interests, people who have 
no interest whatsoever in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
they call that public participation. 
 
We’re still trying to track down somebody from Saskatchewan 
who’s got a share in those Ontario and Quebec companies and 
therefore might be publicly participating, but we haven’t found 
one yet. And maybe there’s one out there somewhere, Mr. 
Speaker. Maybe there’s one out there somewhere, but we 
haven’t found that person yet. Well they call that public 
participation. What they mean by that, Mr. Speaker, we just 
don’t know any more. 
 
In any event, there are lots of examples of privatization for the 
public to be able to form an opinion about whether privatization 
has worked in their best interests; whether privatization has 
meant an expansion in the Saskatchewan economy; and whether 
privatization has helped stem the flood of people leaving rural 
Saskatchewan and leaving Saskatchewan for other provinces; 
whether privatization has resulted in better services for the 
people of Saskatchewan; whether privatization means, as an 
example, that you’re getting your SaskPower bills on time and 
more consistently — which seems to be a question — because I 
don’t think that most of the public is aware that the mailing out 
of the SaskPower bills has been privatized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskPower used to mail it out themselves; they’ve now turned it 
over to a company, I believe it’s called D-Mail, which is a 
company set up by a former principal secretary, or whatever, to 
the Premier. I mean, it’s not as if new companies haven’t been 
started in Saskatchewan; it just seemed that a lot of them seem 
to have Tory connections. But in any event, this aspect of 
SaskPower has been privatized, and the bills are now sent out 
by this company. 
 
And I had a call the other day, Mr. Speaker, in this connection 
— speaking of privatization — I had a call from constituents 
who didn’t get a bill the previous  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

966 
 

month, didn’t get any bill, wasn’t delivered to them, and now 
this month they’re getting a late payment charge because they 
didn’t pay the previous month for a bill they didn’t get. These 
are people who’ve lived in that address for 35 years, have 
always paid on time, and all of a sudden some private company 
can’t do it right. The service gets worse, and these people are 
hounded by the bureaucracy on account of this government’s 
mismanagement. 
 
(2145) 
 
So the point that I’m making, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Saskatchewan people have had ample opportunity to judge this 
government on the whole question of privatization, whether it’s 
good for them, whether it benefits them. And their impression is 
that it’s not good, and they don’t support this Bill. They want to 
see this government gone. They want to see them ended. They 
want to see an end to foreign ownership of Saskatchewan 
resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — But this government believes all those 
things. I mean, they must believe all those things to do so many 
stupid things. You wouldn’t do them if you were just plain 
stupid. They must be doing it if they believe them. 
 
And we call it, on our side, nerdonomics — nerdonomics, Mr. 
Speaker. This in reference to the recent article in The Globe and 
Mail, which, in discussing the privatization of the potash 
corporation; the heading is: Potash and pablum. And it starts 
out: “Is this the Waterloo of socialism or the Revenge of the 
Nerds? When Saskatchewan Premier blank, blank . . . and I 
respect your ruling that I shouldn’t use the name of a member 
or the present . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . “ I can do that? 
 

When Saskatchewan Premier Grant Devine announced 
plans last month to sell off three provincial Crown 
corporations he predicted a battle royal with the opposition 
New Democrats. This is their Alamo. This is their 
Waterloo. This is the end of the line for them, he 
thundered. Now he has unveiled a Bill to privatize Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and he shows a 
disappointing failure of nerve. 
 

Well this is nothing new to the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Former NDP Premier Allan Blakeney was wrong to 
nationalize Saskatchewan potash industry more than a 
decade ago (Well that’s their opinion.), but at least he 
showed the courage of his convictions. 
 
And now we have the sad spectacle of Mr. Devine who has 
trumpeted the return of capitalism with such a sickly 
quaver that it can only cheer those on the other side of the 
battlefield. 
 

Cheers, Mr. Speaker, cheers. But anyway . . . Is this our 
Waterloo? Is this our Waterloo? And you got to remember in 
Waterloo there were two armies, Mr. Speaker, one was  

the army of Napoleon, the other was the army of Marlborough, 
I believe. 
 
We speak of nerdonomics. When they talk about privatization, 
Mr. Speaker, we talk of nerdonomics, because only a bunch of 
nerds could devise the kinds of things that they’ve been 
devising, in terms of privatization. You know, it really isn’t 
funny, some of it, but when you look at it, that these people 
would fire 300 dental nurses and say this is good for rural 
Saskatchewan — 400 dental nurses and say that’s good for rural 
Saskatchewan. When these people would sell off highways 
equipment at 10 cents on a dollar — now there’s a good 
business deal for you. You know, we call that nerdonomics 
because only a nerd could get away with such a nerdy deal, and 
on and on it goes. 
 
Only a bunch of nerds could sell off something that makes 
money every year, Sask Minerals, and somehow lose $400,000 
in the process. Only nerds would turn over the mailing of the 
SaskPower bills through a private company, only to have 
people calling up in arms about: where’s my bill? And why am 
I getting my bill late? Why is there a late payment billed? Why 
didn’t I get that? Then sending out two bills instead of one bill. 
Nerdonomics, Mr. Speaker, nerdonomics. Nerdonomics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was talking earlier about young people and 
young people leaving Saskatchewan in droves. There is some 
that would suggest that the Premier is, in fact, the new Pied 
Piper, the Pied Piper of Saskatchewan. You will recall, Mr. 
Speaker, the Pied Piper of Hamelin who was paid by the leaders 
of the people of Hamelin to pipe the rats out of Hamelin. And 
then when they refused in payments because all the rats were 
gone, he promptly piped all the children out of Hamelin. 
 
Well I’m not sure whether the Premier is doing in that exact 
order. And we know that he’s trying to pipe the rats out of rural 
Saskatchewan because he’s announced a bunch of money to do 
that, although one wonders why he cut back on that program a 
few years ago only to reinstitute it now. But that’s probably 
another one of those nerdonomic things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But he’s, in a sense, been called the Pied Piper of 
Saskatchewan, because in a very real way his tune of 
privatization and mismanagement has hastened the droves and 
droves of young people who are leaving rural Saskatchewan; 
who are leaving Saskatchewan for better economic 
opportunities elsewhere. And that is why he is called the Pied 
Piper. 
 
And it’s a serious, serious matter, Mr. Speaker, that so far this 
year, in the first three months of 1989, 9,000 people — 9,000 
people have left Saskatchewan . . . or 9,000 more have left 
Saskatchewan than came to Saskatchewan in search for jobs 
and economic opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1987 the net out-migration, the net 
out-migration in Saskatchewan was 8,000 people; in 1988 the 
net out-migration was 13,000 people; in the first three months 
of 1989 the net out-migration, the net out-migration, Mr. 
Speaker, is 9,000 people. And at this rate there will be a 
phenomenal loss of people from Saskatchewan. And the very 
sad part about this, and  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

967 
 

getting back to this waitress in a café in this small town, is that 
the majority of these people leaving our province are young 
men and women between the ages of 20 and 29. 
 
Our future, our most precious resource, leaving Saskatchewan 
because there is no hope and there’s no opportunity; leaving 
because the Premier of Saskatchewan has been playing and 
calling a tune of privatization and mismanagement. And they 
will continue to leave in spite of this Bill. And they will not 
come back to this province until there’s a government who 
understands the problems facing Saskatchewan, and especially 
rural Saskatchewan; will deal with them, and will provide hope 
and opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s when 
they will start to come back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just might say that, as an aside, that I for one cannot 
understand, given this tragedy that faces our young people — 
this tragedy resulting from privatization — that this tragedy 
facing our young people, Mr. Speaker, that this government, at 
a time that young people are crying out for economic 
opportunities and jobs, that this government would cut back, cut 
back on the programs that have historically been provided in 
this province to assist young people through troubled times, to 
give them some chance of jobs — that this government would 
cut back. That the Minister of Human Resources, that the 
Minister of Human Resources would somehow take pride in the 
fact that he’s cut back the funding for things like the 
opportunities programs that are provided on an annual basis, 
and where we see less people being helped by the government 
to find jobs on an interim basis than was the case three or four 
years ago. 
 
This is shameful, shameful, shameful indictment of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. A shameful indictment, and one that 
just, you know, one that frightens young people. But I’ll tell 
you the group that are most concerned about this are the elderly. 
The elderly people that I’ve talked to — and there are many in 
my constituency — who are just deathly afraid of the lack of 
opportunities that exist for their grandchildren. 
 
And they fear for this province, they fear for this province that 
they built up and that there are simply no opportunities in a 
government that doesn’t seem to care; a government that turns 
its back on the challenges and the problems facing 
Saskatchewan; that says we don’t want to deal with the real 
issues of the day; we want to turn our backs to the real issues of 
the day; we want to deal with privatization, as if privatization 
was somehow a solution to these problems. We say it’s part of 
the problem. They say it’s a solution. We say it is part of the 
problem. And that’s all they want to talk about. All they want to 
deal with is privatization. 
 
You know, the Bills they call forward in this Legislative 
Assembly — Bill No. 1, privatization. And which Bill have we 
spent all our time on, or most of our time on, until this time? 
What was the subject? Privatization. Which Bill are we 
spending time on now and will be spending time on for some 
considerable time to come? Privatization. 
 
You’d think that there was no other problem in Saskatchewan. 
You’d think that there was no problems of  

unemployment. You’d think that there was no problems in 
agriculture. You’d think that there was no problems in health 
care, that there was no problems with the economy, no 
problems with the provincial debt, no problems about trade or 
other things that Saskatchewan people need. You’d think that 
the only problem in Saskatchewan was privatization, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, if you ask people, if you ask people, what do you 
consider to be the most important issue facing the province of 
Saskatchewan today? the chances are that they would say, in 
order of importance, the following: unemployment, agriculture, 
health care, the economy, the provincial debt, and free trade. 
But not one of them would say the most important problem 
facing Saskatchewan today is a lack of privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, if you were to ask people in rural 
Saskatchewan about the most . . . if you were to ask them to 
pick the most serious concern facing the people in rural 
Saskatchewan from a list of eight, and ask them to rate those as, 
you know, the most important, the most important concern of 
people in rural Saskatchewan would be the lack of jobs for 
young people, then the drought, the world price of wheat, 
maintaining the family farm, financing farm debt, the cost of 
farm inputs, retaining rural services and businesses, the need for 
farm management training. 
 
But nowhere, nowhere do the people in rural Saskatchewan say 
our greatest, most pressing problem is the lack of privatization 
or too much public ownership. They never say that. It’s not a 
concern of theirs. They don’t see it as a priority in their lives. 
They have a whole different set of priorities as to what they 
think the government should be doing, what they think the 
government should be getting involved in. 
 
And it’s especially the people in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that are so concerned, I find, about privatization. 
These are a group of men and women, farmers in our province 
who understand, who understand the concept of ownership, I 
suppose, more so than many others in Saskatchewan. These are 
people who are tied in with the land and production, and many 
of whom will own their own properties, understand ownership 
and understand what special significance that has. 
 
So they understand, they understand things like when the 
people of Saskatchewan own something, as opposed to 
something being owned by outside interests. They understand 
those concepts; they understand those concepts very clearly. 
And they are not amused, they are not amused when their 
government would seek to limit local ownership, would seek to 
promote foreign ownership of Saskatchewan resources. 
 
You know, the government may delude themselves about what 
a wonderful job that they’re doing for rural Saskatchewan, but I 
think these people are caught up in their rhetoric. I think these 
people sit around and talk to each other and say, boy, what a 
wonderful job we’re doing for the farmers out there. Don’t you 
believe that? Yes, I do. That’s what they’re believing — their 
own rhetoric. They’ve lost touch with the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

968 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — They sit around and tell each other 
about what a great job it is that they’re doing. But I tell you, the 
people of rural Saskatchewan no longer believe your rhetoric. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on in that vein, I want to go on 
in that vein at an early opportunity, but I see that it’s a few 
seconds before 10 o’clock, so I beg leave to adjourn the debate 
at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


