


















































April 17, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 17, 1989 
 
 

849 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you, and to all members of the House, a group of 16 grade 5 
students from St. Michael’s School in Duck Lake. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Lois Cameron, their chaperon, 
Mary Cameron, and their bus driver, Jim Laviolette. I ask all 
members to give them a warm welcome. We’ll be meeting with 
refreshments this afternoon with them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 
to you and to the members of the Assembly, four gentlemen 
seated in the west gallery. They are here today to visit with the 
Minister of Environment. They are Jim Parsons, Rob Wells, 
Gordon Beisel, and Reg Parsons, and they’re going to be here 
looking at some water development in the south-west. 
 
I just wanted to inform the Assembly that they, the four of 
them, represent 110 years of irrigation. I think that that’s a 
credible kind of group of people, and I thank them for coming 
and taking the time to visit with me and the Minister of 
Environment. I’d like you to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of PCS 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Urban Affairs says we have a peppy group because 
it’s Monday. I tell the minister, this group is always peppy, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But I have a question for the minister in 
charge of Saskatchewan’s privatization, Mr. Speaker, and it 
concerns the announced intentions of the government on Friday 
with respect to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. My 
question to you, Mr. Minister in charge of privatization, is this: 
what percentage of shares does your government intend to 
retain in this corporation pursuant to this — how shall I 
describe it — adventure that you’re embarked upon, and can 
you tell me what safeguards you will have in place to ensure 
that a voting block of shareholders doesn’t force the corporation 
into steps which are detrimental to the interests of the people of 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the amount retained by the 
Government of Saskatchewan will be forthcoming when the 
prospectus was filed. And secondly, Mr.  

Speaker, in regards to safeguards on the voting, as my colleague 
the minister in charge of the potash corporation said on Friday, 
that there was a maximum of 25 per cent voting shares. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister in charge of privatization on a related area, and that is 
this, Mr. Minister. Can you tell the House today what assets 
will not be included from PCS, for privatization, and will you 
also tell us what guarantees you will give that those assets that 
are retained, not subject to privatization, are not going to be 
independently and subsequently, or even currently, sold outright 
by your government to out-of-Canada or out-of-province 
interests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think if the member 
opposite consults the Bill, he will see in the Bill where there’s 
any substantial portion of the potash corporation will not be 
subject for sale or for leasing. Those things are explained in the 
Bill and will be debated when the Bill is brought to this House. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary 
question to the minister in charge of privatization. I’m asking 
you a question precisely because I don’t know the answer, and 
the public is asking. When you say a substantial portion, we 
want to know what you mean by a substantial portion. Surely 
you can tell this legislature and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan what you mean about a substantial portion being 
retained or not being retained. Please stand up and give us the 
answer to this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think in a corporation as large as the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, most people would 
understand what a rather substantial portion of it is. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the very reason the Bill is in the House. The Bill 
will be debated in second reading on general principle and then 
clause by clause, at which time those questions would be best 
directed in that discussion of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to 
the minister in charge of privatization. What in the world, Mr. 
Minister, are we to make, what in the world are the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan to make, from a situation which 
is as follows: here we are, Monday, the day after you’ve 
introduced your Bill after a lot of hoopla and a lot of fanfare 
and publicity, and you are unable to tell this legislature and 
unable to tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan what 
shares are going to be retained within PCS, what is going to be 
transferred out for sale, and what is not going to be transferred 
out for sale. 
 
You people have introduced the Bill, announced the big 
propaganda scheme in so doing it, and you don’t have any of 
the details of this cock-eyed scheme? What’s going on? How do 
you explain that? 
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

850 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 
full well that that is the type of discussion that takes place when 
the Bill is debated in the House, and we welcome that 
discussion. I’ve reiterated to him that no substantial portion of 
the potash corporation would be for sale or for lease, and the 
details regarding the amount retained by the Government of 
Saskatchewan will be forthcoming when the prospectus is 
issued, and not before. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask a question of the 
same minister in the hopes that this time we can get an answer. 
 
Now one of our concerns, Mr. Minister, is that the assets of the 
potash corporation are going to be grossly undervalued, and 
every statement we’ve heard from the government side of the 
fence has been to the effect that these assets will be 
undervalued. 
 
Now the undertaking that I’d like to get from you, if you’ll give 
it to me, is: will you undertake to table in this House the 
valuations that you have of the assets of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I’ve said previously on various 
aspects of public participation, when we’ve gone through the 
issue, when we’ve debated the Bill, when this is in place, 
there’s nothing to hide. You saw me the other day table all the 
aspects of Kam-Kotia. We will do the same sort of things with 
whatever transactions take place in public participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
interested in the kind of valuations you’ve been tabling in this 
House to date, because the fact is that you haven’t tabled any 
that are worth the paper they’re written on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want you to cast your mind back, Minister, 
to the recent past when we were having difficulty with the 
United States over anti-dumping charges. And we saw then a 
conclusion to that particular dispute which involved the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan unilaterally raising the world 
price of potash, and we saw the entire industry fall in behind the 
lead of PSC. 
 
Now under your privatized PCS, what clout is this government 
going to have with the privatized PCS in order to accomplish 
that sort of thing in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — First of all, you’re wrong in saying there 
was no tabling of evaluation. Just a few days ago I tabled the 
evaluation of Kam-Kotia — 9.6 to $11.4 million. Maybe you 
missed it, but it was tabled in this House. 

Secondly, what control would the Government of Saskatchewan 
have and Saskatchewan people? It was well explained by my 
colleague on Friday that the way the Bill is drawn up, and the 
intention of the operation, is that there will be a control, a 
majority control by the people of Saskatchewan. And by that I 
mean the Government of Saskatchewan, I mean employees of 
the potash corporation, and I mean people who buy shares in 
the potash corporation that are Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I am surprised 
by that answer because on my reading of the Bill there is no 
provision in there guaranteeing that there be any shareholders in 
the province of Saskatchewan at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — When the Premier was on his Orient express 
he tried to sell this potash corporation to a number of countries, 
about five of them, I think. And he talked, when he got back, in 
terms of a tax break that he had discussed with them. Now 
we’ve looked in this Bill and we can’t see any reference to taxes 
at all. Would you stand up, Mr. Minister, and tell this House 
just what those tax breaks are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, if you would read the Bill, you 
would see the reference to any foreign ownership. The majority 
of any foreign ownership is 5 per cent, and that’s what it states 
in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this minister read 
that Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I have a new question and a final question to 
this minister, and let’s hope this time we can get a good, 
straight, logical answer. Can you tell this Assembly what 
safeguards you’ll be putting in place to ensure that the main 
competitors of PCS do not buy into this privatized corporation 
for the sole purpose of attempting to undermine its market share 
and/or its competitiveness? What safeguards, Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again I indicate 
to the member opposite that the maximum amount that any 
company or individual can hold is 5 per cent, or a combination. 
So, the other thing too, is that PCS could buy into some of those 
corporations if they so wished. Same thing is true. 
 

Legislation to Assist Farmers and Small Businesses 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Deputy Premier, and my question to the 
Deputy Premier is this. Mr. Deputy Premier, this is day 27 of 
the legislature. Bill No. 1 was an Act for  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

851 
 
 

privatization; Bill 20 is an Act for the privatization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, yet your Speech from the 
Throne, 27 days ago, promised legislation for small-business 
people, promised legislation for farming people, promised 
legislation to get this province going again economically, to 
stop those people leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you is: why in the world is it so that you’re 
holding up the rest of Saskatchewan to ransom until your 
favourite ideological jobs of privatization of potash and selling 
everything away from Saskatchewan first is passed? Why are 
you holding up the people to ransom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m told by the 
Legislative Review Committee and the various departments that 
deal with this legislation that most of the legislation is prepared 
to move forward fairly quickly. I have four here that I’m going 
to be giving notice of today, Mr. Speaker, and I know that 
they’ll be anxious, I know that they’ll be anxious to see them, 
Mr. Speaker, when they show up on the whites, and later on the 
blues. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they will have as many positions 
on each of these individual pieces of legislation as they appear 
to have on the Rafferty project, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
flip-flopped back and forth on that one 26 times from Sunday, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re wearing it now politically, as they will 
these other measures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
House Leader, and I want to tell the House Leader that our 
position on Rafferty and our position with respect to the 
privatization of this Bill and your privatization mania is all the 
same. Our position is that we are opposed to your waste and 
mismanagement and misplaced priorities; that’s our position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You’ve got farmers going belly-up; you’ve 
got small-business people going belly-up; you’ve got 6,000 
people leaving the province in February alone; you’ve got an 
economic crisis; you haven’t had this session sitting for nine 
months, and what you’re doing is you are forcing this 
legislature to deal with your Maggie Thatcher pet projects of 
privatization while the other people demand action. And my 
question is: when do we get that legislation now? When do we 
get that. . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The unfortunate thing is, Mr. Speaker, 
is some of the people, some of the people who were working on 
Rafferty may well be the people that are leaving the province, 
that were put out of work by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
Now let me . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. 
Order. 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Let me tell you how ideologically 
driven the Rafferty dam is. Jack Chapman supports it. You 
know Jack, right? Ron Gallaway, a very prominent NDP in the 
Estevan area, supports it. Everybody in the world supports it 
except members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I rise one more time. I hope 
it’s not a vain attempt, but I’ll try one more time to get the 
Deputy Premier and the House Leader of the government 
business to tell this legislature and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan about this government’s priorities. We’ll have 
lots of time to debate Rafferty dam. 
 
My question to you, sir, is: why is it that those two pieces of 
legislation on privatization, after day 27 in the legislature, are 
before us, and nothing else with respect to business and young 
men and women looking for summer jobs is not here. Why isn’t 
that legislation here? We demand that that legislation be put on 
the table now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . Thank you. I want to 
thank members opposite for that resounding round of applause, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, what 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is I said last Thursday — or 
Wednesday, whenever it was — what this province does not 
need is another dose of hypocrisy from members opposite. 
What this province needs, Mr. Speaker, and one thing that 
they’ve been against from day one, is diversification, Mr. 
Speaker, diversification. And that’s what drives us, Mr. Speaker 
— diversification that follows from the Rafferty dam, 
diversification that follows from the Shand project, 
diversification that follows from the Alameda dam, 
diversification that follows from pulp mills at Meadow Lake, 
diversification and jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have to tell the Deputy 
Premier, that slamming the table trick is one time too many, Mr. 
Deputy Premier. You’ve lost your effectiveness on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Moreover, some of your friends on this side 
are worried, you know, that you get carried away. 
 
The hon. minister talks about diversification, he talks about the 
need for diversification, and I’ve got to ask the Deputy Premier, 
how in the world does this privatization of the potash 
corporation Bill amount to diversification? 
 
Why isn’t your legislation before us now? Why isn’t your 
legislation before us to help the family farm? Why isn’t your 
legislation before us to help the small-business people? Why 
aren’t you diversifying new capital in new areas instead of old 
capital in old existing areas where  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

852 
 
 

everything is working just fine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As that member, Mr. Speaker, struts 
across the stage with his cowboy hat on backwards saying, 
anything for the farmer, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you about 
diversification and how diversification and privatization come 
together, Mr. Speaker. Diversification and privatization — a 
living model of how it can be so successful is the Weyerhaeuser 
thing. The Intercon . . . 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they laugh. They laugh at the 
Weyerhaeuser deal, Mr. Speaker, when we have more jobs, 
better markets, everything is going . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Making paper. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And we’re making paper and we’re 
cutting paper. And we’re going to do more things with 
Weyerhaeuser. And they will all be job creation things, Mr. 
Speaker. I think they obviously don’t like what they’re hearing. 
The Meadow Lake project, Mr. Speaker, will create hundreds of 
jobs. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, even Intercontinental Packers that 
they used to own 42 per cent of, we sold it back to the Mitchell 
family. Do you know what they did? They created about 
another 400 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization of Sask Minerals 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I wish that Deputy Premier 
would act for the people and not for these cameras. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister of 
privatization about another one of his privatization deals. Mr. 
Minister, here in the annual report of Sask Minerals, your 
annual report, you indicate that Kam-Kotia should pay to this 
province $12.5 million for the sodium sulphate division of Sask 
Minerals. 
 
Now how do you explain, therefore, that in the Kam-Kotia 
annual report it is reported they paid $12.1 million? Please 
explain that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can’t explain Kam-Kotia’s printing, but 
I can tell you that certainly we sold it for $12.5 million, and I 
can tell you that we sold the peat moss for 2.5 million . . . 3 
million with 2.5 value added with 500,000 research at the 
University of Saskatchewan. And if you add them all up — if 
you add them all up — all the quotients that came as well, as 
well as the profit sharing for the employees at Chaplin of 
$1,100, at least, per employee, you will find it comes to $19 
million, and I think that’s a good deal for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this man’s figures are as  

credible as his bench-mate there, the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I have here the report from 
Kam-Kotia. I will read it to you: 
 

Effective March 1, 1988, the company acquired the sodium 
sulphate operations from the Saskatchewan government for 
$12.1 million. 
 

Explain to the people of Saskatchewan where the other 400,000 
went or came from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, I know 
what’s in our reports, and I can tell you what is here, and I’ll 
repeat it again for the member: 12.5 million for the sodium 
sulphate plant at Chaplin; 3.4 million for the Carrot River plant; 
2.5 modernization, expansion, development at Carrot River; 0.5 
of research dedicated to University of Saskatchewan for new 
products in peat; and 0.1 profit sharing for the employees — 
that comes to $19 million and on an asset that was evaluated at 
11.4. I think that’s ridiculous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Perhaps before the hon. member begins his 
question, all members should just take a deep breath and allow 
him to begin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Job Creation Through SEDCO Loan 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I . . . with the continuing 
absence of the Minister responsible for SEDCO, I’ll direct my 
question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I see that 
your Minister responsible for SEDCO announced that last year 
loans totalling $38.9 million were given through SEDCO, 
creating 464 new jobs. Mr. Minister, that works out to $83,000 
— 83,800, to be precise — of taxpayers’ dollars per job. 
 
Now that . . . there would be some who would debate whether 
that’s a good return on the investment, and I ask you, I ask you, 
Mr. Deputy Premier: are you satisfied with your government’s 
records creating jobs over $83,000 of taxpayers’ money? Is that 
your judgement of a good record? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I just wanted to 
ask the members opposite to make up their mind. Are they 
suggesting we should spend more or less? We’ve heard both 
arguments in this very question period — we’ve heard both 
arguments. 
 
Now the member asked a specific question that was: are we 
satisfied with our job creation programs to date? And the 
answer, Mr. Speaker, is that in the circumstances, in tough 
economic times that we face in Saskatchewan over the last 
several years, particularly in agriculture, Mr.  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

853 
 
 

Speaker, we’re not satisfied. There’s much more to be done, 
and we intend to do it. And it would be a whole lot easier to do 
it without the obstruction of members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker, and it really is a question of priorities; you’re quite 
correct. Your Opportunities ’89 program spends $1,000 dollars 
for a 12-week job, at $83 per week for student summer 
employment. That’s a fact. 
 
For each job created through a SEDCO loan, that money could 
create a thousand weeks of student summer employment. It’s a 
question of priorities. I agree with you on that, and I ask you, 
Mr. Deputy Premier: will you recommend to your government 
moving some of that SEDCO money to summer employment 
for Saskatchewan students to create some employment for our 
students to be able to work and go back to university and 
technical studies this fall? Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I know the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, doesn’t expect me to have the detail of that precision 
that he asks in his question at my fingertips, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m not going to disappoint him; I don’t have that kind of detail. 
But he asked me earlier if I was satisfied. I said we can always 
do better, Mr. Speaker, but as it relates to summer employment, 
we have an excellent record over the last several years in 
creating employment for our summer students, Mr. Speaker. 
And to provide the additional detail that the member has asked 
for, I’ll take notice of the question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just like to draw to the 
attention of the hon. member — I know I don’t have to — that 
when a member takes notice, he certainly shouldn’t take notice 
with a very long preamble. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Premier, you say that you can 
always do better. There would be a whole lot of folks in this 
province who would agree with you on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — They would also be of the opinion that you 
won’t have much time to do it, either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Premier, let me ask you again then 
if you and your government will allow the taxpayers of this 
province to be the judges as to whether your money being spent 
in SEDCO is worth the money that their taxpayer dollars are 
subsidizing? I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, will you table the 
information related to loans approved by SEDCO last year? 
Will you table that in this House, or are you hiding something? 
Will you let the people of Saskatchewan judge the priorities of 
your decisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t answer the 
question on behalf of my colleague, the minister responsible for 
SEDCO, but as a general rule it’s always been the practice, Mr. 
Speaker, that the financial affairs of SEDCO clients, Mr. 
Speaker, is confidential information and ought not to be 
bandied about as members opposite would like to have it, Mr. 
Speaker. And so my guess is that the minister responsible 
would say the same thing that I’m going to say, and the answer 
is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I made a summary 
statement wherein I said . . . I mean on Friday, I made my 
statement where I said that privatization . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member is 
having a little difficulty getting started because of the 
interruptions. I will now recognize him again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every time I’m going 
to talk about privatization they get a little bit edgy on their seat 
across there, and I must feel that they never want to protect their 
statements either because they’re afraid to get into the debate 
because they know they’re losing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I don’t even know how many have spoken. I 
couldn’t even count on . . . maybe one or two, or maybe three at 
the most. I think they’re embarrassed to protect their 
privatization Bill. 
 
I guess overall, in summarizing the other day, all I can say is 
this, that the overall basis of privatization is just simply 
following the example of Maggie Thatcher and Oliver Letwin 
and trying to bring these ideas back into Saskatchewan. And the 
point there right off the bat is that they do not respect 
Saskatchewan history, they do not respect what we have built in 
this province, and they do not like Saskatchewan ideas and 
Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan co-ops and 
Saskatchewan Crowns, because they’re looking elsewhere to 
look at and determine our economic future. 
 
As I look at the example of England, one can say 
straightforward that they have a crisis in their hands now in 
England. We look at the situation in health where it’s a real 
disgrace compared to what it used to be. 
 
And also in the whole area of education, many people are 
becoming to realize now in Saskatchewan especially that  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

854 
 
 

the privatization, open-for-business strategy simply means less 
services but increased taxation and increased costs for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I look at the whole question, I must look at it in different 
aspects. And the first way of looking at privatization is in terms 
of looking at it as a basis of economic growth. And the basis of 
economic growth anywhere in the world is having a solid base 
of assets. You need assets in order to be able to compete on a 
world-wide scale. What we are looking at in terms of our 
Saskatchewan assets is that the Tory PCs are selling them off. 
 
And the basis of the first sell-off that I want to discuss is SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). As I look at 
SMDC, I have to look at it in historical terms. I looked at 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation as a 
world-class Saskatchewan corporation. We had worked in joint 
venture with private industry to develop a mining base so that 
indeed we could get the returns and we could have the use of 
profits back in for our education system, for our health system, 
and so on. 
 
And for a lot of people who don’t know the amount of profit 
that our assets had made, we had made in SMDC $60 million 
back in ’87 — $60 million. We had made over $126 million in 
the previous five years prior to that. So here we were making a 
lot of money, with a tremendous return for any business that 
makes a 19 per cent return. That’s what SMDC was on in ’87, 
and this is the type of business we are giving away to foreign 
ownership. 
 
What we are saying is that the Japanese corporations and the 
U.S. corporations and the West German corporations and so on, 
the foreign corporations are supposed to do a better job than we 
did through SMDC. But the proof lies in the historical data. We 
are shown very clearly that we were a world-class mining 
corporation that had done investment not only in uranium, but 
in gold, in zinc, in copper; not only in various stages of 
exploration, not only at construction phases but at operational 
phases and so on, so that we were vertically and horizontally 
integrated in the mining industry, and it was very well laid out, 
and the profit margins show that. 
 
So what shows very clearly from this is that the PC government 
is so ideologically committed to the Maggie Thatcher approach 
to privatization that they will sell off even when the Crowns are 
making money. They will sell off at any time, at any situation, 
providing that they sell it off cheaply. And when I look at that 
aspect, one has to look at the historical fact. The point is that 
Saskoil, they said, well, it’ll be Saskatchewan ownership; if we 
sell it off, people from Saskatchewan will own most of it. But 
the proof lies in historical fact again, Mr. Speaker — 75 per 
cent of the ownership is from outside Saskatchewan, and that’s 
where it lies. 
 
When you look at the magnitude of large-scale corporations — 
and I will look at the next one as another example: 
Weyerhaeuser, Weyerhaeuser. How do you compete with a 
world outfit like Weyerhaeuser when you give away our forests 
to Weyerhaeuser? You look at  

Weyerhaeuser. In the past three years, in 1985 to ’87, how 
much profits do you think it made? How much profits did 
Weyerhaeuser make — $867 million! How do you think that a 
shareholder from Saskatchewan can compete with an $867 
million profit corporation in just a three-year period. There is 
absolutely no way. They will own most of the shares, as has 
been proven by the SMDC situation. 
 
The other myth that I see, as I look at SMDC and as I look at 
Weyerhaeuser, two of the most key resource areas of control for 
the province, they said, oh, we’ll sell to the workers. But did 
they sell to the workers in Weyerhaeuser? Did they sell in 
Cameco? Of course not. The vast majority, 99 per cent, is 
owned by the large-scale companies. And that’s a simple fact 
that a lot of people have now become to understand in this 
province, that when they sell off the assets, it’s going to be by 
foreign ownership, and the large American-based multinational, 
Weyerhaeuser, owns 12.5 million acres of our best forests in the 
North. 
 
And as I look at our assets in regards to the forests, many of the 
small businesses from northern Saskatchewan tell me outright 
that they are not getting the same level of contracts that they 
used to, that even when they are given the contracts, they’re 
given the poor cuts. Weyerhaeuser gets the best cuts. And that’s 
where they use their technological advancement and so on, and 
just clear-cut the operations, and so on, and the small-scale 
operators are given the poor poplar cuts. And they’re not even 
given the spruce or whatever, or the pine to be able to do, you 
know, a decent rate of profit for their businesses. 
 
So a lot of the small-business operators in the North have talked 
to me in regards to the fact that, you know, although they get a 
small percentage of those contracts, but never at the same rate 
as they used to; it’s on a basis where they get the poor cuts. 
 
As I looked at the Weyerhaeuser, not only is it a super big 
corporation which we have turned it into, the record shows that 
when the NDP government was around, PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) made $48 million in ’80 and ’81 — $48 million 
of profit. What we have seen with this Tory government is that 
with a lot of pressure on their internal work-force and a lot of 
pressure on even other Crown corporations, that it appears that 
they have deliberately mismanaged during that following 
period. 
 
Of course, I recognize that there was a downturn in the 
economy, especially during the ’84-85 period, but one 
recognizes that it shouldn’t have amounted to the degree of loss 
that existed during those periods. And I recall when the Tory 
government took over in ’82 there was a $9.4 million loss, then 
in ’83 there was a $29.1 million loss, then there was a $5.2 
million gain, and a $33.6 million loss in 1985. 
 
And one of the things that you begin to realize is that the Tory 
level of mismanagement is not only one that pertains to general 
government management, but in terms of economic 
management. Not only have they mismanaged our overall 
finances and our resources in the governmental sector, it has 
also done so in the business sector within the Crown 
corporations. And I think that  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

855 
 
 

becomes fairly clear as we look at the record. 
 
So while they were deliberately trying to utilize the downturn of 
the economy at setting it at very cheap prices, one recalls the 
debates that gone on during that period in time, and we have to 
remember that people thought that the value of PAPCO at that 
time was about $400 million. When we checked it around, the 
final sale value of it was $248 million. And a lot of people said 
there was an automatic cheap sell-off in regards to a big, 
super-giant who made $800 million, you know, in the past three 
years as we now look at it in historical context. 
 
I mean, it would have been very simple to get another $100 
million from Weyerhaeuser who makes $800 million, you 
know, during this ’85-87 period. They knew that there was 
going to be an upturn in the economy. Weyerhaeuser knew that. 
They wouldn’t come to Saskatchewan to buy PAPCO because 
they knew it was going to go down and down and down and 
down. They’re one of the major world players. They determine 
exactly how market conditions can go in the world. And so they 
knew that it was going to rise. They knew very well that they 
were going into a sweetheart deal. They knew it was going to be 
a lucrative deal, and that’s precisely and exactly what happened. 
Because I look at the record for ’86 and ’87, and they made 78 
million — $78 million. And I look at the return that we got. We 
didn’t get the $78 million. If it was PAPCO, we would have got 
the 78 million. What did we get in return? Thirty point five 
million dollars. We lost $50 million. 
 
(1445) 
 
And they call themselves business managers. And just in 
Weyerhaeuser alone they lost $50 million, and just in ’86-87 
period alone. And ’85-86 period and ’86-87, the world record 
shows that the profit margins went up, and one has to look at it. 
In ’85, for example, Weyerhaeuser made 124 million. In ’86 
they made 221 million. In ’87 they made a whopping $522 
million — $522 million in ’87. 
 
Now you tell me what a lot of people are wanting. A lot of the 
businesses in northern Saskatchewan and a lot of businesses, 
small businesses, in P.A. and a lot of the farmers in around P.A. 
region and throughout the province want a bit of support from 
this government. You know, then they want $10 million here or 
$20 million to help out, you know, our students that are looking 
for summer jobs and so on. But there’s no money. Where does 
it all go? It goes in the pocket of Weyerhaeuser, to the tune of 
$50 million alone in 1987, ’86-87. 
 
So when you look at the record, you know, selling out our 
assets and putting it under a foreign ownership, the automatic 
solution, this government said, is that it’s going to benefit us. 
How does it benefit us? It if had been PAPCO, we would have 
got an extra $50 million in the economic purse of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Those assets that we had owned before would 
have benefitted us. Now it’s under the foreign multinational, 
under U.S. control. They get the profits. They will determine 
where the money goes. If they want to put it in the forestry 
industry elsewhere in the world, that’s precisely what they will 
do with it. But when it was under our control it  

was invested back to the people of this province so that the jobs 
could be created right here and so that the small business sector 
could benefit at a greater rate than they have in regards to the 
Weyerhaeuser deal. 
 
So when I look at the overall aspect of Weyerhaeuser — one 
looks at the interconnection there too in regards to the issue of 
interest payment — they not only got a sweetheart deal in 
regards to the cut rate on the initial sell-off, they had to pay in a 
30-year period. In a period of 30 years a lot of businesses in this 
province, a lot of business people in this province, a lot of 
farmers, would be very happy if they said stop the foreclosures 
and we only have to pay 8.6 per cent interest rate and we’ll pay 
for it in a 30-year period. 
 
You know, the farmers would ask . . . if the farmers ask for it, 
then they say no. Even when we ask them for a three-month 
waiting period so that they will stop . . . on the overall for the 
Farm Credit Corporation they say no, simply because they 
know that the money is going into the Weyerhaeusers of the 
world, and they simply won’t do it. They will give 
Weyerhaeuser 8.5 per cent interest rate, but they will not do the 
same for the farmers or the small-business person in this 
province. 
 
And as I looked at that I said to myself, my goodness, I wish 
they would do the same type of deal for our business people and 
our farmers — a 30-year, long-term deal where there would be 
an 8.5 per cent interest payment. 
 
The other thing that was very lucrative about this sweetheart 
deal in Weyerhaeuser is the fact of when they’re making profits 
they wouldn’t have to pay one cent if they didn’t make 12 per 
cent. They didn’t have to pay a cent because they would have to 
wait till they made over 12 per cent profit. And the fact remains 
is that if the economy goes on a downturn again about three 
years or four years down the road and there is another crisis in 
world demand and so on and the prices go down, Weyerhaeuser 
doesn’t have to pay a cent. While everybody else goes down the 
drain — and there are, let’s say, 1,500 businesses that are going 
down the drain in Saskatchewan every year — while they go 
down the drain, Weyerhaeuser will be saved. They don’t have 
to pay one cent unless they make profit over 12 per cent. And 
that’s the type of sweetheart deal that the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation had. 
 
And a lot of businesses and a lot of farmers are looking around 
and digging up their land, you know, for the creation to try and 
beat the small profit margin or even when they go in the red in 
many situations. And you know they want some help, some 
more help to do this whether it’s in the North or whether it’s in 
the South. 
 
But who gets the help? Not only do they get a good interest — 
Weyerhaeuser gets good interest rates — they also get a free 
road construction program. While our road conditions are 
deteriorating in Saskatchewan and there is holes all over our 
roads, whether in the South or the North, in our roads it’s very 
dangerous. And just last week I was travelling and I saw one 
truck overturned in the road. I checked to see whether or not it 
was dangerous chemicals, but lucky enough it wasn’t; it was 
only diesel, and so on. So that, you know, our roads . . . a lot of 
the  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

856 
 
 

people who are travelling through our roads recognize the 
dangerous conditions that they are in in the North. 
 
But what does Weyerhaeuser get? Thirty-two kilometres of 
road every year, just like that, we provide for them. It used to be 
that in the North, during the NDP government days, we used to 
provide moneys for trappers to build roads for themselves, 
which this Tory government took away and no longer are those 
types of benefits available for the traditional resource users of 
the North. But I know that from a very straightforward 
viewpoint we see it available for Weyerhaeuser. 
 
So the other thing that I noticed very recently this year in 
regards to Weyerhaeuser — and this goes on the topic of 
mismanagement all the time; we see this Tory government . . . 
time and time again we have examples of mismanagement. 
Well when we looked at the legal document back in ’85 when 
. . . back in ’86 when this deal was made, we saw that it was 
sold for $248 million. Well I looked at the documents and 
re-examined it again, and sure enough, it was not $248 million. 
It was $236 million. I asked around and I said, well, where did 
the money go? There’s $12 million that disappeared. Twelve 
million dollars could be well used for our students who are 
looking for summer jobs, for our farmers, for everybody. And 
the Tories, of course, they say, well it’s only $12 million. 
 
And again I sensed a bit of corruption and a bit of financial 
mismanagement in that case because there is still no answer to 
the question about where the $12 million went. 
 
When I looked back in historical context on the type of 
questions that we raised in Weyerhaeuser, I remembered there 
was an $8 million transfer to them that we never knew why the 
transfer was made. There was another $7 million that was 
transferred to Weyerhaeuser during that period in time in ’86, 
and we wondered, well why is that money being transferred for. 
There was $15 million, you know, that was given over to 
Weyerhaeuser at that time. Of course, there was never any 
clear-cut answer that came from the PC government members 
because I don’t think they simply knew. I know that the 
Minister of Finance never knows where the money goes, 
whether it’s a billion dollars or $800 million or $300 million or 
whatever. 
 
So I look at this situation again, and I sense a bit of, not only 
mismanagement, I sense a bit of corruption behind that. And 
that’s not the type of a government that we want. 
 
I reminded the minister when I was talking the other day, I said, 
the Tory government puts its faith completely and solely on big 
business. And when I looked at the Tory government, I said, 
look, a hundred years ago we had the situation where the 
Tories, under a PC government in the early . . . in 1873 said, 
we’ll give whatever we can to the big CPR corporation. We’ll 
give them 23 million acres of land, we’ll give them all kinds of 
money. We had a Pacific scandal. 
 
The Tory government lost the election because of corruption 
and because of their sole reliance on big business of the day. 
And they gave away a lot of land and  

a lot of money, and they lost . . . (inaudible) . . . And I tried to 
tell them, look, every time you get into this corruption, 
mismanagement idea of selling off and relying only on big 
business and not looking at the Saskatchewan historical 
experience of co-operatives and Crown corporations, you end 
up in defeat. 
 
When I looked back and reminded the members in the 1930 
period, I said, look, during that period again you solely relied 
on big business to try and pull it off. You gave too much away. 
You gave away our assets during that period. You gave away 
our jobs. But in the end result we ended up, in combination with 
a bit of drought, again it ended up in Tory defeat because of the 
Tory mismanagement of the day. 
 
Now I look at it in the 1980s, in the late 1980s, and the Tories 
in the past six years have been promising us this open for 
business, big business strategy only approach. And what it has 
brought us basically is that we’ve been losing our assets. We’ve 
been losing our houses; we’ve been losing our farms; we’ve 
been losing our mining industries; we’ve been losing our 
forestry industries; we have been losing a lot of Saskatchewan. 
A lot of this that Saskatchewan people have built in the past, we 
have been losing. 
 
This simplistic ideological commitment to privatization, 
Maggie Thatcher style, Oliver Letwin style, it’s just not 
working for Saskatchewan. It ends up that we have to put flat 
tax this and flat tax that, and we have to raise our taxes all 
throughout the province. We’ve never seen anything like it in 
the history of Saskatchewan in the last . . . since the last, you 
know, seven years. 
 
So we’re not only selling off our assets, it’s costing us money. 
We have to pay higher interest rates, and so on. 
 
As I look at the aspect of privatization, I also have to look at the 
fact of the promises in regards to jobs. And I remember the . . . 
The example I will use: when I was talking about the 
privatization of Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation, I asked the Deputy Premier at that time, I said, 
well why don’t we put a clause in there for the protection of 
jobs? Why don’t we protect Saskatchewan jobs? because I 
know the record of this PC government. Six years it’s been 
promising jobs, and six years we’ve been losing jobs. We 
cannot rely on your word, I said; we cannot rely on your 
promises in regards to jobs and job security in this province; 
we’re losing jobs. 
 
And this year I look at the record again — 43,000 people are 
unemployed in this province. We have 6,000 that recently left 
our province, and I really feel that their strategy of open for big 
business in this province simply hasn’t worked. You combine 
that with the privatization program, and it doesn’t work. 
 
I remember, the Deputy Premier, and I said, well why don’t 
you, in regards to SMDC, why don’t you at least put a clause 
saying that you’re going to live up to the legal obligations of the 
existing agreement, the existing lease agreement? Not to worry, 
we’re going to follow the law. There’s no way that we will be 
breaking any laws. We’re going to follow our laws that we set. 
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

857 
 
 

I look at that, and of course the law says we have to hire 50 per 
cent of the people in the North and that it’s a good thing. The 
Deputy Premier recognized it was a good thing. I knew it, as a 
member from the North, that it was a good thing. But when the 
record clears, and I said this last year, I said the consolidation 
program, any place where there is major mergers and on which 
was precisely the basis of SMDC, there was a merger between 
SMDC and Eldorado, so that in the process of a seven-year 
period, 30 per cent of it would be sold off in two years, 60 per 
cent would be sold off in four years, and 100 per cent would be 
sold off in a seven period. 
 
In the process of major mergers in an international context, we 
said, look, every time that happens there is jobs that are cut 
through the consolidation process, basically because that’s what 
happens in major mergers, whether it happens in Europe, 
whether it happens in Africa, or whether it happens in the 
Pacific Rim or the United States or Canada, we lose jobs when 
the large-scale mergers occur. But the Deputy Premier said not 
to worry, not to worry, those jobs will be there. We don’t have 
to, we don’t even have to say anything about the existing lease 
agreements because we will follow the law. 
 
Well I looked at the law this year and it was very reminiscent. I 
said to myself, I looked at this basis in regards to the situation 
of the Rafferty-Alameda project, and I looked at the minister, 
and I’ve never seen a . . . I’ve been here since 1986, and I’ve 
never seen a better act that he put on in my two-year period 
here. And it was quite an act, I saw anyway, his face was all 
red, and stuff like that, and he was pounding on the table, and 
stuff like that. It was a great piece of act, but I didn’t see that 
same act when a hundred jobs were lost in the North through 
the merger and the privatization of SMDC. I didn’t see him get 
red-faced. I didn’t see him pounding the tables when a hundred 
jobs were lost in northern Saskatchewan; I didn’t see him pound 
the table when 35 jobs were lost through the other mine that 
was shut down by this government; I didn’t see him go on and 
act like in that sense. 
 
And the point is this, that he knows that there was a law that 
was broken in regards to the agreement in the North, but he 
completely wanted to wish it away. He knew he was breaking a 
law when he went into that Rafferty-Alameda and he was 
ashamed to lose his job, so he got a little bit perturbed and he 
started hollering down on the table. And that’s how I look at the 
situation. 
 
(1500) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So when it comes down to his own political 
fortune, sure he will get red-faced and pound on the table and 
stuff like that. But he sure didn’t do that when we lost a 
hundred jobs in Rabbit Lake and 35 jobs in Star Lake, and the 
other job that we’re going to lose through this further 
consolidation and privatization program of the PCs. 
 
So when I looked at this aspect of privatization, one of the 
things that people say, oh, of course we’re going to create  

jobs — more jobs here, and more jobs there, more jobs 
everywhere. But the fact is no matter how hard, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Deputy Premier may act in regards to his sorrow, no 
matter how much the Deputy Premier may act, Mr. Speaker, 
and no matter how teary-eyed he might get about a specific 
situation where it means his own re-election in 
Souris-Cannington, or whatever, or in terms of losing his 
position as Deputy Premier, sure he protects his own 
self-interest and he starts making a big deal about it. He starts 
going pounding on tables and stuff like that, and then he gets all 
carried away. 
 
But I wished he would have been carried away like that in 
regards to northern Saskatchewan jobs. I wished he would have 
gotten carried away about the 35 jobs that we lost in Star Lake. 
I wished he would have been carried away and said, look, I’m 
really concerned and fired up about the unemployment rate in 
northern Saskatchewan and I’m going to do something about it. 
But no, the Deputy Premier only goes on an act when it means 
his own political life is at stake. 
 
So when I look at the overall aspect of privatization and jobs, I 
look at the general history. I say to myself, look, when we had a 
very good prevention program in health, a lot of the people in 
the North said, we don’t want the privatization of the dental 
health program, you know, to come in over here. And of course 
there was quite an outcry. And of course it didn’t happen within 
the northern Saskatchewan context, but it happened throughout 
the rest of the province. 
 
And as I look at the privatization of the dental plan, there was 
400 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that workers lost . . . that 
dental workers lost in this province. And it was quite a shocking 
thing for them all of a sudden. They had a bright future. All of 
them were talented. They had a good solid education. They 
were just raring to go in Saskatchewan and help and work with 
the people at the local level throughout this province and 
working side by side with community people in making sure 
that we had the best preventative dental program in the whole 
world. 
 
But what did this government do? What did this government do, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? What they did was they just knocked the 
dental workers right out with no concern. With absolutely no 
consultation, they just slashed the program. And there was 
absolutely no justification whatsoever. They just went about 
and maliciously tore apart our dental program under the old 
guise that privatization would solve the problem. But we know 
very clearly it hasn’t, from the reports that we’re getting, not 
only from the rural areas but from the urban areas as well. 
 
So as I looked at that old question of jobs, one not only looks at 
it in the area of mining sector, we saw it in the forestry sector, 
and I’d like to remind the people from Saskatchewan that we 
also lost 400 jobs in highways. And of course, because we lost 
those 400 quality workers throughout our system, look at the 
pot-holes that we have throughout this province now. Our 
highways used to be the pride and joy. When I used to travel 
around, I said, you know when you’re getting into a 
Saskatchewan highway. Now I’m afraid to even say anything 
about that because now everybody says, we know we’re in  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

858 
 
 

Saskatchewan because that’s where all the biggest pot-holes are 
in Canada. 
 
So when I look at the aspect of jobs, there was no caring for 
those people. I hear them all the time — we care for the 
individual, we care for the family. But they did not care for the 
individual highway workers, the individual dental workers, the 
individual forestry workers, the individual mining workers, and 
also their families. They didn’t care anything about those 
families. And that is precisely what privatization does — you 
lose jobs! And that is the record in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When I look at the other area in joint fashion 
with jobs, I always look at the area of services, because one of 
the major promises that the Tories said, oh, if we privatize, it’s 
improved services; that’s the way it will be. Well that simply 
hasn’t been the case with dental workers. We haven’t had 
improved services in dental work. In many cases it has simply 
vanished. We can’t even complain about less services because 
it’s vanished. But a lot of people now have to pay for it. You 
see, what they have to do now is travel the extra 50 miles that 
used to be within their school. They have to pay gas costs. They 
have to pay extra costs for baby-sitting so that they can go — 
and even stay a day off work — so that they could take their 
kids to the dentist. It’s costing them more money. 
 
They know that privatization not only costs in terms of 
increased costs and services, but those other costs such as 
transportation, and also in regards to the whole area of 
baby-sitting, and so on, that are sometimes the unforeseen costs 
in situations such as this. 
 
So that our services are lacking also, as I mentioned before, in 
highways. I would like to point out the area of services which I 
personally recall, you know, during the throne speech. I said, I 
used to live in Ontario at one time when I was teaching there. I 
lived there for about a five-year period doing some teaching and 
getting some training while I was in Ontario for a five-year 
period. When I was there I remember paying an arm and a leg 
for insurance. And I remember it was four times the rate of 
what Saskatchewan insurance was. A lot of people used to say 
when I would go back to Ontario, my goodness, you should be 
moving back to Saskatchewan as quickly as possible to take 
benefits of the insurance rates on that. And of course I did; I 
moved back to Saskatchewan. I was happy to be back in 
Saskatchewan. I can say, look, we have the best insurance rates 
in Saskatchewan. The public insurance . . . the publicly 
controlled insurance, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), was the best in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — But what do we get from privatization? What is 
the effect of privatization? Where has the open for business and 
big business approach taken us in the past few years? Not only 
have we lost our assets, lost our homes, our farms; not only 
have we lost our jobs, our services, but it costs us more in terms 
of taxation because the big companies put pressure, political 
pressure, on the Tory politicians. Because they have to fund 
their election  

programs they send them $10,000 here, $15,000 there; they 
provide them with money to run their elections. And of course a 
lot of the Tory people have to pay back the big corporations 
because they fund their election programs. We saw that in the 
free trade debate. 
 
We saw the tremendous millions of dollars that big corporations 
put in on the free trade debate, but we know that . . . 
Saskatchewan history knows that people count. We had our 
people movement in Saskatchewan against free trade, and we 
won it 10 to 14 in a clear-cut case. 
 
We know that it’s people who count, that it’s the door-to-door 
interaction with people; that it’s the trust in people; it’s the trust 
in their businesses; it’s the trust in their co-operatives; it’s the 
trust in our own Crown corporations that makes it a basis of 
better economic living for everybody. And it’s the mixed 
economy approach that we look at over here. But the Tories, 
they have to pay back the businesses. 
 
We look at the fact that in oil . . . in the oil patch about 
approximately $1.5 billion was lost because they would not 
collect that money from the big corporations and just gave it 
away to the tune of 1.5 billion during the ’82 to ’87 period. And 
when I looked at the . . . just even recently for the uranium 
companies, they got an extra 1 per cent, an extra $7 million. 
Well they don’t need the $7 million, our communities do, our 
co-ops do, our businesses do. 
 
The big corporations just keep on syphoning off the money. 
Because they syphon off money, we have to get revenue 
somewhere. So who do we get it from? Well we have to get it 
from the middle-class people of Saskatchewan; we have to get 
it from the workers; we have to get it from the farmers; we have 
to get it from the small-business sector. So what do we do? We 
increase our tax. First of all, the flat taxes, and a tremendous 
amount of money has been spent, you know, by our people that 
. . . we transfer our wealth from ourselves to the big 
corporations because no longer does this government have the 
guts to get money from the big corporations — no longer, 
because they pay for their elections. They have to pay them 
back. And not only in hundreds of dollar bills — in millions, in 
hundreds of millions. 
 
We look at the Weyerhaeusers of the world make over $800 
million. We know that even in mining with Cameco, (Canadian 
Mining Energy Corporation), the privatization strategy of 
Cameco, that the amount that is taken out of the North is $700 
million. That’s how much is taken out of the North. Cameco, 
$52 million last year in profit. 
 
What we need to do is make them pay their fair share in the 
province, and what is happening is that they’re not paying their 
fair share. So we have to take it out of the middle class, the 
small business, and everybody else has to pay. The students 
have to pay with lost jobs. Everybody pays. 
 
We have to increase our taxes and we have to force the 
municipalities to increase their taxes, and it causes a lot of 
friction at the local level. It forces boards to close down 
schools. You know, seven schools being closed down  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

859 
 
 

recently. A lot of these things are a result of the huge 
give-aways to the big corporations and the very, very little in 
return. We don’t get them to devote a fair share of their 
large-scale profits back to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s the point that we make from this side of the House. 
We are saying we need to get a fair share of those resources that 
the PC government is now just giving away, lock, stock, and 
barrel to the big corporations. And at least they should have a 
fair share of it, but they don’t even do that. 
 
So when we look at the biggest cost to us, therefore, is the high 
increased costs in taxation, and everybody knows that. I haven’t 
heard anybody in my own constituency not come up to me and 
say: Keith, look, we’ve had for many years returns on our 
income tax; this is the first time in the past few years, prior to 
this government, where we didn’t have to pay taxes; we always 
had a return on income tax. In the past few years, they said, 
we’ve always had to pay income tax, no matter how little we 
earn; we always have to pay income tax. 
 
And it’s become to be a situation where more and more is taken 
from the middle class, the work-force, and everybody else — 
the seniors and the students have to pay for this. 
 
And as I looked at it, therefore, in summation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would like to say this: that the Tories, the PC 
government said, we are going to be providing new jobs and 
new economic incentives. But the only thing that we have seen 
is economic incentives for big corporations and less jobs for the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s pretty clear already from the 
record and it’s going to continue. 
 
The other thing that I see is that in terms of assets, we own 
Saskatchewan. We owned our farms; we owned our businesses; 
we owned our co-ops; we owned our Crowns. But now our 
houses, our buildings are going to be owned, whether it’s from 
our mines, our forests, and everything is going to be owned by 
people from Japan, from China, from India, from the United 
States, from West Germany, from France. Name it. Most of our 
assets will be foreign-controlled. 
 
The Tories say no, no, that’s not the way it is. But we look at 
the example of Saskoil — 75 per cent already owned outside 
Saskatchewan. And we know that it . . . they feel that that’s the 
way to do economic strategies, by selling off your assets. 
Nobody in their right mind sells off their house and says, I’m 
going to benefit from it, especially if that’s the only house that 
they have. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Tories have to know that there is only one Saskatchewan. If 
it was the last farm to sell, there is only one farm. We have to 
look at it the same way — there is only one Saskatchewan. 
Once we sell it, it’s gone. And that’s the point that the Tories 
seem not to understand. When we sell our assets, our forests, 
our mines, we are selling Saskatchewan. There is only one 
Saskatchewan and one house of Saskatchewan that is left. 
That’s all we have. We can’t just sell it off. The strategy that we 
had was  

a lot better, but we know that the Tory government will not only 
lose assets, we lose jobs, we lose services, we lose in terms of 
paying off taxation. 
 
I must add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the approach of the mixed 
economy approach, when we look at it in the past, looks a lot 
better than what this Tory government can offer. And we’re 
going to be even offering a better system as we go look forward 
into the future. 
 
We know that our unemployment rates were not at the 9 per 
cent level, they were less than half of that. We know that we 
had created more jobs in the area of small businesses in this 
province. We knew we had more jobs for many workers right 
throughout. We see so many people leaving our province, it’s a 
shame. And when we look at it in overall terms, people have 
become to recognize that the mixed economy approach, where 
we work side by side with business, we work side by side with 
the co-ops, and we work side by side with the Crowns; and 
when the Crowns such as the SMDC, which worked in joint 
venture with the corporations, where it was invested right 
throughout the mining industry whether it was uranium, or in 
gold, or in zinc, or copper, was the way to go; it was bringing us 
returns. But now the money goes to foreign corporations. 
 
And I must say that the only thing I could say that’s possible for 
the people of Saskatchewan is that we are probably going to be 
having an election in about a year, or half a year, or a year and a 
half. And the only thing that I could remind the people of 
Saskatchewan is that Tory governments fell when they relied 
solely on big business and the Pacific scandal, when they relied 
only on the CPR to do economic development. 
 
They fell in the Dirty Thirties when that’s all they relied on. 
And the only saving grace from my speech is that they’re going 
to fall in the next election because the mixed economy approach 
is the one that’s going to work for Saskatchewan, because we 
believe in Saskatchewan people; we believe in our Crowns; we 
believe in our co-ops; and we believe in our people. And that’s 
the reason why we’ll succeed in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to get into this debate on the Public 
Participation Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation has been so unfairly criticized 
by our members across the way, it’s going to have a tremendous 
impact on our province. It cannot be the socialist ideologies that 
blinds them all to positive aspects of public participation. I’m 
getting a little static from the member for Quill Lakes, but I’m 
used to that. 
 
I want to get into making some comments about what some of 
the opposition people have been talking about. The member 
from Athabasca the other day I remember, said that the 
Weyerhaeuser deal was so bad and that they discriminated 
against workers. Well he said that people couldn’t work for 
Weyerhaeuser unless they had a grade 12 education. 
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

860 
 
 

Well I remember when we came to office in 1982, I happened 
to be sitting on the agriculture caucus committee, and I started 
looking at some of the regulations on what the member from 
. . . is it Last Mountain? — Gordon MacMurchy. When Gordon 
MacMurchy was the minister of Agriculture you couldn’t even 
lease land from the Government of Saskatchewan unless you 
had a grade 12 education. 
 
And the member from Athabasca is right that that is 
discrimination. And he said that Weyerhaeuser discriminates 
against people that they can’t get work there because they . . . if 
they don’t have a grade 12 education. But one week out of 
every five they pay to upgrade the people that work at 
Weyerhaeuser. So that’s a far better job they’re doing for the 
employees than the former minister of Agriculture, Gordon 
MacMurchy, when he wouldn’t lease land to farmers unless 
they had a grade 12 education. 
 
And I was part of the ag caucus that helped change that, 
because I’ve only got grade 10. So I wouldn’t have been able to 
lease land from the Saskatchewan government prior to 1982. 
And I know you probably think over there that I should have 
never had any; and I never did get any, but I think that was 
discriminating against people. Farmers couldn’t lease land from 
the Department of Agriculture unless they had a grade 12 
education. 
 
And the member . . . I see the member from Athabasca paying a 
lot of attention to what I’m saying. Now I know he wasn’t 
involved in agriculture prior to 1982, but he says it’s 
discriminatory to force people to have a grade 12 education to 
have a job. But Gordon MacMurchy wouldn’t lease land to 
farmers unless they had a grade 12 education, and I helped to 
change that after I got on the ag caucus committee after 1982. 
 
And it was written right in the regulations. There was written 
regulations in agriculture and there was unwritten regulations. 
The written ones were that you couldn’t lease land unless you 
had grade 12. The unwritten ones was you had to have an NDP 
card. Mind you, that wasn’t written in the regulations, but 
unless it went through Gordon MacMurchy’s office, you never 
got it. I wanted to make sure that the member from Athabasca 
recognized that. I know he wouldn’t be too much interested in 
agriculture or what went on in agriculture prior to 1982. 
 
The other thing that I find a bit hypocritical about the 
government . . . or the members opposite, during the federal 
election they travelled all over this province condemning the 
free trade agreement. The free trade agreement was going to 
hurt Saskatchewan. Ray Funk, who ran in Prince 
Albert-Churchill River, put a piece in the paper, in the La 
Ronge paper, that we were going to drain the Churchill River 
system into Long Lake and then down into the United States. 
We were going to lose all our water. We were going to sell our 
water or give it to the United States. 
 
Now we own 50 per cent of the water in the Souris River, and 
now they don’t want us to dam it up and save it for 
Saskatchewan in the Rafferty-Alameda dam. Some of their 
members have got involved with the SCRAP (Stop 
Construction of the Rafferty and Alameda Project) group.  

Now they want us to drain our water into the United States. 
Ninety-eight per cent of that 50 per cent of the water goes into 
the U.S. every year; 50 per cent of the water belongs to us. 
They now want the Americans to have it. 
 
During the federal election campaign they scared people by 
saying that we’re going to sell or give water to the United 
States. Now they want to leave the water going into the United 
States into Lake Darling. They don’t want to save it for habitat; 
they don’t want to save it for Saskatchewan irrigation; they 
don’t want to see any diversification. They want to see our 
water go into the United States. Now is that a flip-flop, or is it 
not? 
 
I just can’t understand how they can go to their constituencies 
on the weekend and defend themselves, because they say on 
one hand we’re going to . . . the Conservatives are going to give 
water to the United States, and then they say on the other hand 
that we should be giving it to the United States. Where are they 
really coming from? 
 
They don’t want us to dam it up. They talk about agriculture; 
they talk about drought. When we want to save the water so we 
can irrigate Saskatchewan, they want us to let it go to the States. 
But during the federal election campaign they say, vote against 
free trade; they’re going to give our water to the United States. 
Now they want us to. I just can’t, I can’t understand where 
they’re coming from. 
 
But anyway, I know I’ve seen the article that Ray Funk wrote in 
the La Ronge paper. I don’t have it with me, but he said they 
were going to drain the Churchill River into Long Lake and 
then down into the United States. And you know, those kind of 
tactics can scare a lot of people and change a lot of people’s 
votes, and it did. It did in the last federal election. But I think 
that will come home to roost . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like in Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Like it did in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, yes. I 
mean we proved to them there that we can elect a Tory member 
in a seat that we’d never had a Tory in before . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What happened to John Gormley on 
either of those Tory ridings? 
 
Mr. Muller: — Well the member from Athabasca said, what 
happened to John Gormley? Well John Gormley ran up against 
the same kind of rhetoric that a lot of members in Saskatchewan 
ran up against — the scare tactics of losing our resources, 
losing our water to the United States. Now they’re saying that 
we should give it to them. They don’t want us to save our water. 
 
And, you know, I guess some members will say I sound like an 
old record or a cracked record when I start talking about 
Weyerhaeuser. But Weyerhaeuser to me is one of the best 
things that ever happened to Prince Albert. I know the member 
from Cumberland doesn’t like it. He would probably take it 
back. With all the expansion that they’ve made in the paper 
industry, and certainly the money they’ve paid to the 
Government of Saskatchewan  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

861 
 
 

over the years, and will over the years . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member says they were going to expand 
anyway. 
 
But, you know, I’ve got to go into the Manitoba situation. 
About a year and a half ago, I got to know one of the NDP 
members in the Manitoba government. I don’t think there’s 
many of them any more, but I got to know one of them pretty 
good. And he was telling me, you know, we’ve got two pulp 
mills in Manitoba. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hey, what about Bill 1? 
 
Mr. Muller: — Privatization is what we’re talking about, and 
I’m talking about Weyerhaeuser, which the member from 
Cumberland certainly brought into the debate. 
 
Manitoba had two pulp mills. One was government owned and 
one was privately owned. One was government-owned and one 
was privately owned. The public-owned pulp mill in Manitoba 
was losing money; the privately owned pulp mill was making 
money. 
 
And this NDP member from Manitoba — it was just after we’d 
sold the pulp mill to Weyerhaeuser — this Manitoba NDP 
member sat down with me and he said . . . He called me by 
name; I guess I can’t use my name, but he called me my name 
and he said, how did you sell this pulp mill to Weyerhaeuser? 
He says, we’re going to have to sell our government-owned 
pulp mill; it’s draining the coffers of Manitoba. He says, the 
private one’s making money, but the public one’s losing. 
 
And I read a piece in The Western Producer here — I think it 
was about two or three weeks ago — where the Manitoba 
government has now sold the pulp mill. And I guess if some of 
the . . . if the NDP government would have had the conviction 
to go out and sell that pulp mill and quit draining the public 
purse, that they may have still been in government. I doubt it 
very much, but they may have had a better chance. 
 
So these members on the other side of the House say that the 
pulp mill should belong to the government, but even the NDP in 
Manitoba recognized that government shouldn’t be in the pulp 
and paper business. It was something that they couldn’t break 
into that market; they couldn’t make it work. 
 
(1530) 
 
So I guess I could go back into the whole financial program that 
that party over there, when they were in government, how they 
bought that pulp mill, how they borrowed the money from the 
banks at 17 per cent interest, how they never made a payment 
on the interest or the principal. I mean, I guess it’s fairly well 
known around Prince Albert now. They don’t flaunt that very 
much up there, but I kind of bring it to people’s attention from 
time to time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We won two seats . . .  
 
Mr. Muller: — Well the member from Cumberland says they 
won two seats in Prince Albert. They did, but they may not next 
time. 

I understand that’s there’s quite a movement going to work up 
there now. I talked to a lot of people on the weekend at my fund 
raiser that had 270 people out to it . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, for supper. Anyway, we had an auction sale that ran 
for seven and a half hours, so it worked out pretty good. But I 
guess that’s getting a little ways away from the public 
participation Bill. 
 
I also wanted to mention that the member from Saskatoon 
Centre, when she was up speaking against this public 
participation Bill — at least I think she was speaking against it; 
I think she’s going to vote against it; it sounded like it in what 
she was saying. But she said . . . she mentioned too that the 
Weyerhaeuser deal was such a bad deal for Prince Albert. It was 
all going to the big corporations; there was no small industry, 
no small business. 
 
Well I’d like to tell her that in Prince Albert now we have many 
small manufacturing places because of the Weyerhaeuser mill 
and the expansion that they’ve done in Prince Albert. One of 
them that I can just think of off the top of my head that we 
never had before is that we manufacture chain-link fence now 
just north of Prince Albert in the good seat of Shellbrook-Torch 
River. And there was many of these small industries that have 
started up just because of that pulp mill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are you going to do in your 
retirement after the next election? 
 
Mr. Muller: — The member from Regina North East asked me 
what I’m going to do after the next election. I’ll probably sit 
right here in the legislature. I don’t know if I’ll have the same 
position as I have now, but . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — I can go back and remember a little bit of what 
happened before the ’86 election. I asked Al Engel from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg what he was going to do after the 
election. I still don’t know what he’s doing. Maybe he had to 
quit farming. I don’t know. I guess he’s still flying his plane 
around to California, but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well the member from Cumberland mentions another new 
expansion that Weyerhaeuser is putting in Prince Albert, a 
building that’s going to be the size of two football fields, and 
they’ll be able to make sheets of paper rather than sending it 
down to the United States in rolls and paying the duty coming 
back. So that’s finishing a product in Saskatchewan and in 
Prince Albert. And certainly that’s what this PC government 
certainly stands for, is diversification and finishing products 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We don’t want to ship raw materials. We want to finish our 
products, sell them on a world market, and certainly, this is the 
direction we’re going, and I think it’s 4,000 new jobs we’ve 
created in diversification in just the last few years. 
 
Certainly our agricultural sector is down because of drought and 
low grain prices. but the industrial sector  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

862 
 
 

hasn’t taken up all the slack, but it’s taken up some of it. We 
want to diversify some more so that we can take up more of that 
slack. 
 
Mind you, we’ll run into little snags every once in a while like 
the Rafferty-Alameda thing. The member from Rosemont gets 
involved with the SCRAP group and stops our work on 
Rafferty, but we never did anything that was illegal. We had all 
the environmental tests. We had the licence. We’ve never 
broken the law. We don’t intend to. We don’t intend to break 
the law. I’m sure when the reasonable people of this world take 
a look at the environmental studies, the environmental studies 
that the province of Saskatchewan has done on 
Rafferty-Alameda, that when it’s been looked at reasonably, 
that it will go ahead. 
 
I mean, how much of an environmental study was done on 
Gardiner dam? I understand there was little or nothing done 
when Gardiner dam was built. When the Boundary dam was 
built — and I believe that’s on the Souris River, if I’m not 
mistaken — the environmental study was about that thick. 
About an inch, an inch and one-half thick. And now we’ve got a 
study that’s about three and a one-half feet high on the 
Rafferty-Alameda projects, and they say that it’s not enough. 
They say that’s it’s not enough that the provincial government 
can do all this work and get an environmental study that passes, 
and that the federal government should do it over again. It 
should take taxpayer’s dollars and re-spend them to re-do it 
again, rather than accept what has already been done. 
 
So now they’re going to hold the project up, and it may be held 
up for a short period or a long period of time. We don’t know 
that. But we know that we’re not going to go outside the law or 
do anything. We’ve stopped the work. I’m sure that the people 
were working on there, the contractors and the people that are 
working on the Rafferty-Alameda project aren’t all that happy 
with the people that were against it. 
 
Certainly it’s going to hold up the diversification in that part of 
the province, and I hope that the people that threw the 
monkey-wrench into the works will be happy. It’s going to cost 
extra money, but they don’t seem to care about that. 
 
They don’t even . . . they don’t really care about the 
environment. They don’t care about the environmental study. 
They don’t care about the environment. The only thing they 
cared about was stopping it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m not sure which Bill this is you’re 
speaking. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Well privatization, diversification. If water 
isn’t diversification in this province, I don’t know what is. 
That’s been one of our biggest problems in the 1980s was 
water. And I think water is an important thing for the 
diversification of Saskatchewan, and if any of you people over 
there had an agricultural background you’d know what water 
means. 
 
There’s two fellows over there that I do think have some sense, 
have some sense of what water means. The member from 
Athabasca and the member from  

Cumberland, I think, realize what water means to environment, 
to wildlife, to fish and to birds. I think they understand what 
water means. 
 
And I wonder if they were against that Rafferty-Alameda 
project, because they know what water can do to a part of the 
country that’s dry, to the kind of wildlife that you can put into 
that part of the world when you put water there - 
_ ducks and geese, ducks and geese and fish. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s after your water. He wants to divert 
your water. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Well they know how important the rivers are to 
the North. They know how important the rivers are to the North, 
but the member from Rosemont is the one that doesn’t want 
southern Saskatchewan to have water. He wants us to drain our 
water down into the United States. And he’s gone on record as 
saying that, that he doesn’t want the Rafferty-Alameda dam to 
go. 
 
I seen him, I seen him in his seat laughing when the cameras 
were on him the other day, when the Rafferty-Alameda dam 
was stopped, when the construction was stopped. I’m glad to 
see that he’s at least happy. I know that he’s made a lot of other 
people very unhappy. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whoop-de-do. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Whoop-de-do, yes. I can certainly see the 
positive side of public participation and privatization. It 
certainly has done a lot for us up in Prince Albert. It’s done a lot 
for the people in North Battleford. It’s done a lot for the people 
at Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon, and now we’re going 
to have some more industry come into Saskatoon. There was an 
announcement here the other day. 
 
This is the kinds of things we have to do is finish our products 
here in Saskatchewan. We cannot be shipping raw materials. 
Our rural development corporations are also looking at going 
into diversification in local R.M.s. We have to do this to . . . We 
can’t have a single economy. We can’t have a single generated 
economy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Quill Lakes says he’s anxious to get into the debate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t know what Bill we’re talking 
about though with that speaker. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Well, we’re talking about public participation 
and diversification. If Weyerhaeuser isn’t diversification, I 
don’t know what is. And certainly these people over here are 
against diversification. 
 
He doesn’t like to hear what I’m saying about the 
Rafferty-Alameda dam, about the water we tried to save for 
Saskatchewan. He wants the Americans to have it. I got nothing 
against the Americans — I got nothing against the Americans. 
But they don’t want us to dam up our water and keep it here in 
Saskatchewan and use it for agriculture and . . . 
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

863 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — Well why are you giving our potash to 
the Americans, then? 
 
Mr. Muller: — He talks about potash. Certainly. They went 
down to the United States, borrowed the money, borrowed the 
money to buy the potash mines, and they talk about giving the 
potash to the United States. All we were doing was mining the 
potash, sending the money down there to pay the interest. We 
were paying them interest direct into the United States, weren’t 
getting anything out of our potash for ourselves. 
 
The potash mines were there when they bought them, but they 
never created one job by buying the potash mines. Then they 
went and borrowed the money from the United States and send 
the interest down to New York. So we’re not getting any good 
out of our potash. The money’s all going to the U.S., paying 
interest to the United States. 
 
But anyway, I just wanted to get on record that I was upset with 
the NDP and their stand on Rafferty and their stand on 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to seeing them get back 
into the debate. The member for Athabasca says Weyerhaeuser 
shouldn’t discriminate because of education, but it’s okay for 
the Minister of Agriculture under their government to 
discriminate against farmers. I was on the agricultural caucus 
committee when we got rid of that regulation. Gordon 
MacMurchy had it in there. And you can speak from your seat, 
but I know farmers who were discriminated against when you 
people were in government, because I was a farmer. I’ve been a 
farmer all my life. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to see some of these 
other folks get into the debate. I’d like to hear what they have to 
say. But I will be certainly supporting this Bill, and I’m sure 
that most of my colleagues, or all my colleagues will. We may 
even garner some support from those people over there that 
know the real value of water to the province of Saskatchewan 
and what we should be doing. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll give 
them an opportunity to get up and say a few words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for me to join in this debate on 
the government’s Bill No. 1, An Act to establish the Public 
Participation Program. And you know, the members opposite in 
particular wanted to hear from this side of the House. And it 
seemed that, in particular . . . They chided me from their seats. 
They said, you know, do you really have anything to say? Get 
up and talk. Well, now that I am, it appears that they had 
something more to say. Well they’re going to listen for a while 
because I will talk. 
 
As the member for the legislature from Regina South, Mr. 
Speaker, I know the constituents too, of Regina South, are 
keenly interested and supportive of new developments, and they 
would want me to enter this debate, and I will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us gives the people of 
Saskatchewan preferential access to the benefits of public  

participation, something that the members opposite don’t 
understand. You know, all we’ve heard from them so far it 
seems is encouragement to call an election, call an election. 
Well if I were in their boots, I don’t know that I would be in 
such a hurry for anybody to call an election. 
 
For instance, the member of North Battleford — and as my 
debate goes on I will name some of the members over there 
opposite and tell them why I wouldn’t be in such a big hurry — 
the member from North Battleford who spoke against public 
participation, I would like to go with him to the Gainer plant in 
North Battleford and talk to all the people that are working 
there and say, what do you think about public participation? 
Your member here speaks openly against it. What do you say 
about that? And then from there we would go to the employees 
at Hunters, ask them what they feel about public participation. 
 
(1945) 
 
That member will lose the next election, as will the other 
members opposite, that I will have a few comments to make 
because of their particular stand on this very important issue, 
Mr. Speaker. And if were them I just wouldn’t be pushing for 
an election call right now, except to say that the sooner that we 
can get rid of some of those members the better off the people 
of this province are going to be. 
 
This Bill lays the foundation for public participation initiatives 
that are creating jobs, that are increasing investments, that are 
bringing new businesses into this province — and those are 
only a few of the many benefits that will accrue to the people of 
this province as this legislative process occurs and as the Bill is 
passed. Our government’s commitment to a continued high 
level of public service is very much part of the Bill and of the 
whole public participation program. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana giggles from her seat. I’ll 
deal with her opinion on this Bill and how I would challenge 
her constituents. She too, calling for an election; she too will 
lose her seat on this issue. And I wouldn’t be in such a hurry to 
call an election because when this is over for you, you’ll be 
back to what you were doing before, whatever that might have 
been, but you sure won’t be representing the people of Nutana. 
And in my mind she’s not representing them very effectively 
right now, in any event. 
 
In a few words, the public participation process is part of our 
government’s focus on encouraging Saskatchewan people to 
play a larger role in the growth and development of their 
province. We are encouraging our citizens not only to take a 
larger role in the economic growth of their own province, 
certainly, but also we are encouraging them to take a much 
broader consultative role in all aspects of life in their 
communities as well as their province — culturally, socially, 
politically, and economically. 
 
Encouraging Saskatchewan men and women to have a major 
say in the decision making process that affects their lives is 
really what public participation is all about. The public 
participation movement is really ushering in a new era for our 
province, and I have spoken at length over the  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

864 
 
 

years, Mr. Speaker, about the new era that Saskatchewan has 
entered. 
 
And it seems that the members opposite still live in the past, 
still don’t recognize a movement that is occurring not only in 
Saskatchewan, not only in Canada or North America but right 
across the world. And it seems that they are still permanently 
embedded with the outdated economics of the ’50s and the ’60s 
and the ’70s, totally unable to grasp the new era that certainly 
has arrived in Saskatchewan and will certainly be welcomed by 
our people. 
 
Public participation initiatives are the keys to the overall 
programs to revitalize this province’s economy from the 
set-backs that result from the decline of world markets for our 
agricultural and resource products, and of course, from the 
drought. No longer can this province survive on simply being 
an agricultural and resource-based province. We have to 
diversify. 
 
And it seems that the more that we talk about public 
participation and diversification, the less the members opposite 
can really understand how one hooks into the other, and how 
really, Mr. Speaker, this is the key to the salvation of a province 
such as Saskatchewan that’s so large, so diverse, and has all of 
the God-given assets that we have. 
 
Now what we have to do is learn how to take all of these 
blessings and take them one step further along the line, and no 
longer be dependent on the prime market situation that is really 
controlled not so much by Saskatchewan or the government or 
the residents, as all of these prices and markets are controlled 
by the rest of the world, and we have no choice, Mr. Speaker, 
but to go along with what that world dictates. This is the vision 
of the new directions for the future that our government is 
indeed charting for Saskatchewan. They will help re-establish 
our pride and confidence in our province which, as I just 
mentioned, had to contend with poor world market conditions 
and drought. 
 
These public participation initiatives . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, the member from Regina Victoria now speaks up 
from his seat. He too called for an election, and I wouldn’t be in 
much of a hurry to call an election particularly if I were him, 
because I’m not so sure that he could win re-election again as 
an alderman. He is one of the typical NDP-type scenarios that 
dwells in the past, that has no vision of the future, and can’t 
comprehend it. He’s against public participation. 
 
And yet in many, many areas, many municipalities around this 
great province, all of this has started to be accepted — and 
times change; he hasn’t — public participation in municipalities 
throughout the province. He’ll be gone too. Next election his 
seat will be gone. And I think the sooner that that occurs, the 
better as well, because he can’t keep up to it — not only at the 
municipal level, but certainly here at the provincial level as 
well. 
 
And the member from Regina Elphinstone, your turn will come. 
Don’t call an election either because you too will have 
difficulty getting back. Even in Regina Elphinstone we see the 
people understanding . . . 

An Hon. Member: — Where’s this guy coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you had to come in from out of town 
to get that so-called safe seat, but even there the people of 
Regina Elphinstone are starting to understand the new direction 
that we’re trying to take this province in. They’re starting to 
accept public participation, and they will. And the more that 
you people speak like that . . . 
 
The member from Quill Lakes, I’ll get to you in a minute. You 
at Quill Lakes, you’re in trouble. Don’t call for this election 
because you people are history. And one by one I will show you 
why you are. They’re just missing the boat, Mr. Speaker. They 
just can’t seem to come up with what the rest of the world is 
doing, and they’re out of step with everybody. 
 
Public participation initiatives will give all of our citizens — all 
of them, no matter where they are — exciting new opportunities 
to participate in the development of their communities, and 
within their communities, such as Regina Elphinstone. It will 
help them participate in the development of our province to 
bring about bright futures that all of us desire for Saskatchewan, 
for my kids, for my children’s kids. 
 
And I’ve been in this city now for 50 years, Mr. Speaker; 50 
years I’ve lived right here in Regina. And I’ll tell you what. I’m 
proud of that fact and I believe that I know the people of 
Regina, what they want, what they understand. And they too, 
they voted for me, they voted for me in Regina North, they 
voted for me in Regina South, Mr. Speaker. I have no problem 
at all . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think we should just 
tone down the rhetoric, tone down the rhetoric among all 
members and get on with the debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
whenever I have something to say, they’ve got a little problem 
with what I’ve got to say, but none the less. 
 
But we are all fighting for the same future in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, and unfortunately the NDP find themself out of step 
with the rest of the people on this issue. 
 
Public participation is more than simply the sale of bonds and 
shares in governments and in Crown corporations, although 
these bond sales and share offerings are an important measure 
in involving more of our citizens in the economic affairs of their 
province, certainly. Public participation is more than the 
formation of employee-owned companies, although this 
represents new ownership and career opportunities for our 
citizens, and as such are another key measure in the public 
participation process. 
 
Public participation is more than the contracting out of public 
services to the private sector, to volunteer organizations, and to 
other third parties. And although these are major measures in 
taking as much economic activity as possible out of the hands 
of big government and placing it in the hands and in the work 
places of our citizens, doesn’t it just seem, if you stop and think 
about for a moment, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t it seem to make an  
  



 
April 17, 1989 

 

865 
 
 

awful lot of sense that if our people, the people of this province, 
our citizens, can get hands on, on all of these various things and 
become involved in it and take it out of the realm of the 
bureaucracy and out of the realm of big government and let the 
people do it, doesn’t it just really make sense that that would 
work? 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

Lack of Quorum in the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to call quorum. I 
don’t think there are enough members in the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Sergeant-at-Arms secure the 
doors? Would members take their proper seats if you’re not in 
them now, and we will call a roll. Would the members please 
rise, both sides of the House. 
 
McLeod Britton 
Gerich Lingenfelter 
Klein Koskie 
Petersen Thompson 
Gleim Atkinson 
Kopelchuk Van Mulligen 
Saxinger  
 
The Assistant Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, there are 14 members 
here. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. According to rule 5(1), in order 
for the House to constitute a quorum: 
 

5(1)  The presence of at least fifteen Members of the 
Assembly, including the Speaker, shall be necessary to 
constitute a meeting of the Assembly for the exercise of its 
powers. 

 
Since the count shows that the number of members in the House 
including the Speaker is 14, it does not constitute a quorum. 
Therefore this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:57 p.m. 
 
 


