


















































April 18, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 18, 1989 
 
 

867 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and other members of the 
Assembly, two very distinguished guests that are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker — is Mr. Dirk Van Lottum, the 
Consul-General of the Netherlands, and his wife, Mrs. Laura 
Van Lottum. We’d like to welcome you to our Assembly. 
 
Mr. Van Lottum will be meeting with the Departments of Trade 
and Investment and Economic Development and Public 
Participation, and Mrs. Van Lottum this afternoon will be 
touring the provincial correctional centre. 
 
We wish to welcome you to our province. I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings of the legislature, and look forward to visiting with 
you later this afternoon. Welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of seven students from the 
Milestone High School. Mr. Speaker, this is a special education 
class, and one of these students is seated on the floor, and the 
rest are in the Speaker’s Gallery. They are accompanied here 
today by their teacher, Mrs. Bev Seibert, and I’m not sure of 
this spelling here, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s Mrs. J. Carr and 
Mr. and Mrs. Ron Lunde. 
 
I hope they enjoy the proceedings of the question period this 
afternoon, and I look forward to meeting with them for drinks 
and pictures immediately following. And I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming the students from 
Milestone. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like all 
members to join with me in welcoming two people who are 
sitting in the gallery opposite me. They are Mr. Lynn Biggart 
and Mr. Herb Axten, who are the chairman and vice-chairman 
of the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan. The 
gentlemen do a fine job, and I would ask all members to help 
me welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today to 
greet these people from Eastend, Saskatchewan. It is my home 
town. They are the council from Eastend, along with the 
administrator: mayor, Terry Haggart; council, Ann Briggs, 
George Huhn, Kendal McCuaig, Clifford Wilton, and 
administrator Cindy Zabolotney. 
 
They are here on town business today. They drove up last night, 
and they come to the Assembly today to see the  

workings of the Assembly. I would like for all you people in the 
Assembly today to help me welcome those people to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of PCS 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, in the absence of the minister 
in charge of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan); 
perhaps it should be to the minister of privatization. It has to do 
with your government’s plans, as we now know, to sell off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
During your recent trip to the Orient, sir, and I have a copy of 
the article in front of me here, you referred to the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan as an albatross around the necks 
of the province of Saskatchewan. Now your minister of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is saying, on the other 
hand, that investors from all over the world are just knocking 
down the doors to get a piece of this albatross. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: can you explain what 
the foreign investors see in this public company that you 
apparently don’t see? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I sense perhaps just a slight 
move by the Leader of the Opposition towards maybe thinking 
that this might be a good investment for people in 
Saskatchewan, Canada, and indeed the world, Mr. Speaker. If in 
fact that he’s thinking along those lines, I congratulate him. 
 
We believe that it will be an excellent opportunity for people to 
invest in the potash corporation, to diversify the company, have 
an international company headquartered in Saskatchewan with 
shareholders world-wide, Mr. Speaker. It will show the maturity 
and the sophistication of the Saskatchewan people and, indeed, 
the Saskatchewan market. 
 
Now the hon. member knows my only concern obviously is 
with the great deal of borrowed money and the debt that was 
put into the potash corporation as a result of policies from the 
NDP that said what we should do, Mr. Speaker, is not build new 
mines, we should borrow the money and buy the mines. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we put at risk Saskatchewan people’s tax dollars. 
The NDPs decided to buy the mines. 
 
We’re saying, Mr. Speaker, to the rest of Saskatchewan and to 
Canada and to the rest of the world, why not invest in a fine 
company, remove the debt, replace it with equity, and the 
province can see diversification and jobs and exciting 
reputation for all the world to be proud of, Mr. Speaker, and 
particularly Saskatchewan people with a brand-new head office 
of an international company here in Saskatoon that we can look 
at for generations to come. 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

868 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Premier; I have news for the Premier. We’ve had an 
international head office for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan long before Bill 20 was tabled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — In fact, I think, Mr. Premier, it was your 
government, before actually being sworn in, that you did away 
with PCS International, seeking to sell Saskatchewan potash 
offshore. 
 
But the question that I have to the Premier is this: aren’t you 
really on the horns of a dilemma? On the one hand, you’re 
selling the argument to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan that the potash corporation is such an albatross 
because of some debt — by the way, which is basically untrue, 
but nevertheless that’s the argument that you’re saying here — 
and then on the other hand you’re turning around and you’re 
telling the foreign investors that this is a great buy. Come on in; 
take it all over; it’s all available for you. Everybody — China, 
India, Toronto, Montreal, come on in; it’s really great! 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: which version of this 
two-sided fairy-tale is correct, and which is false? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in The Globe and Mail 
today there’s an interesting editorial called “Potash and 
Pablum.” Mr. Speaker, we have said obviously that we’re going 
to offer the potash corporation so that people can participate in 
it and invest in it in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I am, in this article, criticized because I have kept it for 
Saskatchewan people. The offshore can only have 5 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker, and they only get 25 per cent of the vote. And 
we’re going to have three members of the board, and the head 
office has to stay in Saskatchewan. A multinational company, 
Mr. Speaker — imagine what they’d say if the opposition had 
their way in saying that we can’t allow investment in this 
province; you can’t come in here at all; we’re going to have to 
run it all by government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The pablum that they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, is 
kowtowing to the NDP in their old, old philosophy that says, we 
don’t build mines; we buy them. We don’t build packing plants; 
we close them. We don’t build pulp mills, Mr. Speaker; we take 
them over and we run them into the ground with borrowed 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those days are over. Those days are over, Mr. 
Speaker. We are not going to spend $91,000 a day in a loss in 
the pulp company, Mr. Speaker. They’re against a new paper 
mill; they’re against upgraders; they’re against trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say we like to see investment and building, 
and yes, the potash corporation will be a fine international 
company with investors from all over the world, Mr. Speaker, 
because Saskatchewan has matured to be world class under the 
kind of opportunities we’re  

providing at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I must admire the Premier on the 
inventiveness and the imagination of his answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This is a new question, Mr. Speaker, and I 
might say to the Premier that it might present his answer, some 
sort of an answer to the Toronto Globe and Mail article about 
potash or pablum, but I doubt it because the way I read that 
article, that article said, Mr. Premier, that you’ve done the worst 
of all worlds. You’ve neither kept the potash corporation in 
Saskatchewan, nor have you made it available to the 
big-business friends of The Globe and Mail and of your 
corporation. So it’s the worst of all worlds, not the way that 
you’re doing it. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this. You talk about the potash 
corporation in Saskatchewan being an albatross. You said this is 
a big problem. I want to ask you, sir, whether or not it’s correct 
that the PCS annual report for 1988 shows that this albatross for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan — which by the 
way, as I understand it, an albatross being a bird which is 
venerated for its strength and beauty and ability to survive in 
difficult times as well as good times, a misnomer that you use to 
the potash corporation. But leave that as an aside, I want to 
know about this albatross. 
 
And my question is whether or not in this 1988 annual report of 
PCS, the albatross has turned out to lay a golden egg; and 
whether or not you can tell this legislature when we can expect 
that 1988 annual report for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to settle this debate about whether or not really it 
is an albatross or something which has laid the golden egg. 
When will we get the ’88 annual report from PCS? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague says . . . I 
guess the PCS report will be tabled soon, and I believe that you 
will see that it made a profit, Mr. Speaker. And I ask the hon. 
member: would he rather invest in a company that was making 
money or a company that was not making money? The question 
here, Mr. Speaker, is: do we allow the people of Saskatchewan 
to invest? That’s the key. They not only want a say in that 
company, Mr. Speaker, they want a share in that company. And 
if you remove that debt from it, you will find that it will be a 
very profitable corporation. People who will invest in it will do 
well. Saskatchewan people will have opportunity to also, as 
well as having a say in that national, international company, 
having a share in it like any normal co-op member would like to 
have, Mr. Speaker. And why would the hon. members be 
against . . . and they weren’t; isn’t that the case? 
 
The question is not here the philosophical nature of it, because 
in 1982 they agreed to sell shares in potash — they did, you did 
— shares in uranium and shares in pulp and paper and shares to 
everybody, Mr. Speaker. Now they’re standing up and saying, 
oh, you can’t do it if it’s  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

869 
 
 

profitable. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would look at Power bonds that 
they never did in the power corporation and the telephone 
corporation. Those are guaranteed because it is a monopoly 
backed up by the Government of Saskatchewan, the best 
investment in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want Saskatchewan people to do well, and we’re providing 
them with the opportunity to invest and diversify this province 
and create economic activity, not smother it by government 
bureaucracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Hon. Premier. He says new investment not smothered by public 
investment. I say to the Hon. Premier that what he’s doing by 
way of his government policies is not smothering or enhancing 
investment, he is selling off the heritage of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You’ve gone too far. Yes, you’ve gone too 
far. You’ve gone too far. You’ve gone too far, and you and your 
supporters and the back-benchers in the government know that. 
 
But I want to ask another question to try to eliminate some of 
the confusion about your government policy. Your minister of 
privatization couldn’t answer any of the fundamental questions 
yesterday, and you’re not able to answer them today. 
 
Let me try this one out on you, Mr. Premier. You said, when 
you were on the Orient express, that the returns from the 
sell-off of this heritage of Saskatchewan potash would be used 
to reduce the long-term debts of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And now your minister of potash and your minister of 
privatization, at the time of the announcement of this Bill, say 
on the other hand, no, we’re not going to do that; we’re going to 
go around the province of Saskatchewan and we’re going to ask 
the people of the province what do they think we should do 
with the profit, so-called, of the sale of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now my question to you is this, surrounding this total 
flip-flopping and confusion, sir, my question to you is this: why 
are you selling PCS to foreign investors? Is it to reduce the 
corporation’s long-term debt, or is it to provide your 
government with a one-time — one-time, one-time — political 
slush fund in a desperate but doomed attempt to get re-elected 
in this next provincial election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member and his 
caucus are pretty good actors, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a little bit of 
false bravado over there because they look, Mr. Speaker, at 
their own plans to allow for diversification. And they even talk 
about, Mr. Speaker — if you go back and look at their ’82 
memo — and say, some of these things that we’ve bought 
aren’t worth it, Mr. Speaker, and maybe we should have 
diversification and offer share  

offerings to the people of Saskatchewan and indeed have it 
traded on Canadian stock exchanges to provide the liquidity, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I could go to all the new members that are elected there 
and say, if I was an NDP premier, Mr. Speaker, if I was offering 
shares here and the members were sitting over here, Mr. 
Speaker, they’d say, good for you, Mr. Premier. We’re offering 
shares to the people of Saskatchewan. Consider all these 
resources just like a big co-operative. We’re going to have 
shares in Saskatoon, shares in Swift Current, shares in La 
Ronge and Athabasca because the people of this province want 
to be in on that activity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll say to the hon. member: they know that this provides 
diversification opportunities that we haven’t seen before. They 
saw the light in 1982. Everybody in Saskatchewan saw it, Mr. 
Speaker, except for one thing. They knew that we would deliver 
and do it right, and they would chicken out, Mr. Speaker, 
because some of those members over there are so 
philosophically against private enterprise and people investing. 
If it was right back to the beginning, they wouldn’t even let a 
co-op develop in this province, Mr. Speaker, because they 
believe in nothing but rhetoric of government union leaders and 
big government, Mr. Speaker. And that’s no longer the case in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s getting more outrageous 
with every answer that the Premier gets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I just have one question of the 
Premier. Is there anybody over there at all who knows anything 
at all about what you’re doing on this privatization — anybody 
at all who knows something at all? Give me an answer to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen very 
successful public offerings in SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower, Saskoil, Mr. Speaker. That company’s gone from 
about a $300 million company to over a billion dollar company, 
Mr. Speaker, and widely held and invested in in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It is now, Mr. Speaker, the eighth largest oil 
company in this country, headquartered in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, in Regina. It’s one of the finest companies in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting, interesting to watch the opposition. When, 
Mr. Speaker, a company comes into Saskatchewan, like 
Weyerhaeuser or somebody else, they say, Mr. Speaker: oh, 
they’re coming in; it’s going to be terrible; they’re going to 
invest in Saskatchewan. So they don’t like them coming in. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, Saskoil invests in Alberta . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

870 
 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I think perhaps we’re getting into a 
little debate during question period, and I think it could be said 
about perhaps both sides, so perhaps future questioners and 
answerers, the people answering, keep that in mind. It’s 
interesting, but we’re getting into debate, I’m afraid. 
 

Call for Inquiry into Treatment of Indian and Metis 
People 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. I 
hope that the Premier is a lot more serious about this next 
question than in the previous questions. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you relates to the call for a 
commission inquiry by over two dozen organizations 
representing aboriginal people, church groups, women’s groups, 
unions, and also students. I want to know, Mr. Premier, whether 
you will take the positive action and the proactive approach that 
a lot of people are asking for in this province and do an inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This request 
for a special investigation was asked for before, and I’ve all 
ready indicated earlier that an inquest was done and the proper 
channels have been followed to inquire into this particular case. 
And there is no evidence that would suggest there should be any 
further inquiry with respect to this particular case. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
 
The Premier does not want to take responsibility for the issue of 
Indian-Metis people in this province. 
 
What the commission asked for yesterday was a broad-scale 
inquiry. What people are talking was not only the Pippin case. I 
raised the Joseph Morin case here the other week, and we are 
also talking about the case with Sparvier. We are also looking at 
many other cases which shows a complete disregard by our 
government to Indian and Metis people in this province. 
 
Not only do we see disregard from your province, we also see it 
from the Tory government in Ottawa where we see a lot of 
Indian students standing up for their education rights right 
across Canada. Now I would like to know, Mr. Premier, why 
will you not stand up positively for the Indian and Metis people 
in this province and call for an inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate sometimes 
the level of the debate gets lower and lower in this Chamber. 
For a member of the opposition to cry racism and denounce the 
authorities of justice, to denounce the authority of the police, to 
denounce all of the institutions of this province that have been 
built up for 85 years is indulging in sensationalism. 
 
All of these cases had either a fair trial — some of them with a 
jury system — there were inquests which have gone on for 
generations in this province, and to allege that all of the 
authorities in Saskatchewan practise racism is  

irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
Premier keeps evading the issue. What we were talking about 
was an inquiry which will deal with the issues of racism that, in 
many cases, your policies end up promoting. What I’m saying, 
straightforward here, is, will you get up and stand up in this 
House and say, look, we are going to start the proactive 
strategy; we’re going to start a positive strategy, and we’re 
going to use this mechanism of an inquiry to start out on this 
road to a more progressive society in this province for Indian 
and Metis people? Mr. Premier, will you stand up and support 
this inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan should not have to stand up and answer such 
scurrilous allegations. And I speak on behalf of the Department 
of Social Services, and I’m sure I speak on behalf of all 
authorities, to say that there are still fair trials by jury in this 
province, there are still inquests, and there is a Department of 
Social Services that provides assistance to everyone who is in 
need. And there is no need to have an inquiry simply to satisfy 
the members of the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, one final question, again to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, we know that your minister has made 
outrageous statements before, but I won’t get into the debate 
with him today. What I would like to know from you, Mr. 
Premier, is this, that many inquiries have been set up already to 
deal positively with the issue of Indian-Metis people in 
Manitoba, in Ontario, in Quebec and Nova Scotia. These 
provinces saw a need for a positive, proactive approach. I 
would like to know: why is it that you will not entitle the same 
type of consideration for the Indian-Metis people of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this province 
experimented with socialism for 40 years, and during that 
40-year period, during that period that system did very little for 
Indian and Metis people. During that period from 1944 until 
1982, the Indian and Metis people did not progress 
economically the same as other citizens under a socialist 
system. And now the member opposite suggests, after 40 years 
of failure, that this government does not have the appropriate 
policies. 
 
Our policies are jobs and opportunities for all citizens, and if 
socialism didn’t deliver it, this government, through a free 
market economy, will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, we have 
record unemployment in this province, and one of the big 
differences between our government and your  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

871 
 
 

government was that our government was willing to work with 
native people to solve their problems, and your government is 
not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I ask you to look at the crisis that native young 
people are facing. A suicide rate among young people in 
Saskatchewan who are native, 7.4 times as high as the suicide 
rate among young people of that age group at the national level. 
A disproportionate number of native young people in our jails; 
65 per cent of our jail population is native. 
 
You have no native child welfare policy. You look at foster care 
in Saskatoon — 128 foster care homes and 65 per cent of the 
population in them is native . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Does the member have a question? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — . . . and yet only nine of those foster homes are 
run by native people. My question to you, Mr. Premier, is very 
simple. These are urgent issues. Your government is clearly not 
willing to address them. If you have no ideas on how to proceed 
and address these problems, why are you so opposed to an 
inquiry which might finally give us some answers to the urgent 
crisis that native youth in this province are facing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this government is not 
interested in merely a public show of compassion. We are 
prepared to act, and have been acting. The Department of Social 
Services spends approximately $175 million per year on 
families. That’s the family services side of the Department of 
Social Services. 
 
Health spends money on families with respect to mental health. 
Education spends money on families. This government has 
spent money, and continues to spend money on parent aides so 
that we do not have to take children out of their families. We 
send in parents to assist the natural parents in learning how to 
deal with these problems. This government has expanded the 
foster care program and now has 15 per cent Indian and Metis 
foster-parents, and are recruiting new ones every day. This 
government has continued with the first agreements with Indian 
bands in the history of Saskatchewan for Indian child care and 
are now working to finalize that with the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The members opposite want a public 
inquiry so that they can make political noise. We are busy 
trying to solve these problems, and yes, they do exist, but 
rhetoric will not solve them. We are taking action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary. A new question, Mr. Speaker, 
to the Minster of Social Services. Mr. Minister, your comments 
are outrageous. Your government was the last government in 
Canada to enter into agreements  

with Indian bands with respect to the delivery of child welfare 
services on reserves. Your government, since coming to office, 
has consistently cut funding in family support services to native 
organizations. You have slashed the funding to family service 
workers in the Friendship Centres; you’ve cut the native court 
worker program. In this budget alone you’ve cut $800,000 to 
family support services. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Minister: could it be that the 
main reason that your government is opposed to an inquiry into 
the crisis that native people face in this province is that it’s very 
likely that such an inquiry would end up pointing a finger at 
you and your cut-backs in family services? Do you think, Mr. 
Minister, it’s more important to save your own political hide 
than it is to meet this crisis head-on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, earlier in this question 
period the members opposite questioned the integrity of all of 
the institutions in Saskatchewan — the police, the justice 
system, and the civil servants who try to help people. And they 
continue in that vein in questioning the integrity of the very 
people of Saskatchewan who provide over $175 million a year 
to assist with families. 
 
They distort facts. They will not mention that we have 
standardized the amount we pay for wages for counselling at 
Friendship Centres at $27,000 per person across the province 
for every worker. We feel that is a reasonable sum, considering 
the education and experience of those particular counsellors, 
and that if those Friendship Centres wish to top up that money, 
they may go ahead and top it up. We are contracting at $27,000 
per year. That is not stingy for those people who are being paid 
to help the poor. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite disregard the 
fact that this government has put money into economic 
development for Indian people. We believe they should become 
self-sufficient. Rather than the members opposite who would 
wish to build an industry of helping people, we want to build an 
industry of people helping themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate St. 
Margaret’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Biggar 
 
Mr. Baker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 01, 
An Act to amend An Act to incorporate St. Margaret’s Hospital 
of Biggar, be now read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

872 
 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 10 — Financing of Education 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, at the closing of my remarks on 
this resolution, I’ll be moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reverse its short-sighted, cost-cutting 
decision to educational institutions which are reducing the 
accessibility of education for Saskatchewan’s young 
people and impairing the province’s ability to compete in 
the knowledge- and information-based world economy. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan education at all levels is in 
crisis. This government speaks loud and long about its 
commitment to education, but when we examine the facts, when 
we look at the record of this government, we find that it has 
been a total, abject failure in providing Saskatchewan youth 
with meaningful educational programs and few opportunities 
for meaningful employment once they graduate. 
 
And what are the facts of this record, Mr. Speaker? Let’s look 
at education spending in this province. Let’s take a long, hard 
look. Education spending, according to the government’s blue 
books, rose 6.6 per cent to $841 million in the 1989-90 budget. 
Now that doesn’t sound too bad until you consider that the 
inflation rate in 1988 in our province was 4.4 per cent. That’s 
not too bad until you consider that the budget, the real 
educational spending in this province, only increased by 2.37 
per cent. When you take into consideration supplementary 
spending estimates for last year and you take out the large 
payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, this in fact is not a spending increase of 6.6 per 
cent, this is a cut. The real increase was 2.37 per cent, and when 
you take into consideration inflation of 4.4 per cent in 1988 
alone, Saskatchewan education, the young people of our 
province, the teachers of our province, the school trustees of our 
province, and the citizens of our province have, in fact, 
experienced a real cut in spending in education. 
 
And what are the results of this cut in spending in education? If 
we look at the city I represent, Saskatoon, the Saskatoon Board 
of Education is looking at a $500,000 decrease in provincial 
operating grants. That’s about 2 per cent less than they received 
last year. 
 
And who foots the bill, Mr. Speaker? Who else but local 
ratepayers in the city of Saskatoon. The Saskatoon Public 
School Board has few options. The public school board can cut 
teachers, they can cut programs, they can dip into the reserves 
that are fast being depleted, or they can pass along those 
funding decreases from the provincial government onto the 
backs of the local ratepayers, and that in fact is what they are 
doing. 
 
And in Regina, let’s look at what’s happening here. In Regina 
the schools are in fact closing due to the consistent 
underfunding of education by a government that claims  

to care about education. The Regina Separate School Board has 
been forced to close six schools. 
 
In 1987-88, grants to primary and secondary schools were 
reduced by $11 million. In 1979, provincial grants accounted 
for about 63.5 per cent of the Regina Separate School Board’s 
budget. But by 1988, under this Progressive Conservative 
Government, this figure had dropped to 44 per cent, and it’s not 
that the money isn’t there. The absolute shame, the real tragedy 
in all of this is that this government is spending $9 million on a 
political birthday party. They’re spending $9 million against all 
of the objections of those people in Saskatchewan who have 
common sense. 
 
They’re spending this $9 million against the objections of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. They’re spending this $9 
million against the objections of the Saskatchewan Rural 
Municipalities Association. They’re spending this $9 million 
when there are very, very few citizens in our province that 
believes that a political birthday party is in the best interest of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government which claims to care about 
education, in fact doesn’t. It cares so much that the percentage 
of the Saskatchewan budget spent on education has dropped by 
27.3 per cent since 1980. This government has not only 
decreased its proportional spending on education, it has 
decreased its spending more than any other province in our 
country. 
 
In 1987 the Government of Saskatchewan spent 10.6 per cent of 
its combined budgets on elementary and secondary school 
education, compared with a national average of 14.5 per cent. 
So all of this PC government talk about commitment to 
education is just that, Mr. Speaker — it’s talk, and talk is cheap. 
 
And what of this government’s commitment to higher 
education? Surely we would see some increases there to reflect 
the rhetoric. This government gave the universities a whopping 
2 per cent increase in operating grants. That’s not even enough 
to offset the inflation rate of 4.4 per cent. In fact, taking 
inflation into account, this supposed increase is actually a 2.4 
per cent cut. 
 
The president of the University of Saskatchewan has stated that 
this budget means no new programs, nor any response to 
students who are shut out of a higher education due to 
enrolment quotas. The university is receiving 2 per cent more 
when it asked for and requires a 7.3 per cent increase. 
 
The situation at the University of Regina isn’t any better. The 2 
per cent increase will not cover increases in costs at that 
institution. 
 
So who bears the brunt? Who bears the brunt of increased costs 
for education in our province? The people that bear the brunt 
are the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now since this government took office in 1982, tuition fees at 
the University of Regina per semester have increased by 88.8 
per cent — from $392 per semester to $740 per semester next 
month. This is more than double  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

873 
 
 

the rate of inflation since 1982. Tuition fees are up, university 
operating budgets can’t keep up with inflation, never mind the 
increased student load, and yet this government talks about a 
commitment to learning. 
 
Ask the students at the University of Regina what this 
government means by commitment. In April of 1986 the Tories 
made a commitment to pay for half the cost, $2.2 million, of a 
new student union centre, and they promised an additional 
$400,000 to convert the old student union building into a new 
day-care facility. 
 
Now was it a coincidence that this announcement was made 
with such fanfare six months prior to the election in October of 
1986? And was it also a coincidence that the minister withdrew 
this funding? He put it on hold six months after the election. 
Mr. Speaker, the students of this province know that talk is easy 
and talk is cheap, and unfortunately, all we get from this 
government is talk, talk, talk, and very little action. 
 
Now to add insult to injury, the Tories have changed the rules 
of the game for the Saskatchewan student loan program. Prior 
to changes made in 1987, a student who borrowed $2,640 in 
student loans was eligible for a bursary; however, after the 
changes, the same student had to borrow $5,940 before 
qualifying for any bursary assistance. 
 
Further, this government has reneged on its promise in 1986 to 
issue student loans at 6 per cent for the duration of the loan. Yet 
as the Provincial Auditor has pointed out, in practice these loans 
are only being set at 6 per cent for half the term of the loan. 
Again, this government shows its true colours when it comes to 
education. 
 
Many students in our province are married students. Many 
students in our province would like to be able to go to 
university or Kelsey Institute, but because they are married, and 
because they may have two children, and because one of the 
spouses is at home with those children, they can’t get a student 
loan to go to university. That really takes into consideration the 
real needs of the family. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to discuss with the Minister of 
Education and his staff the need to change the regulation so that 
married couples, who are low income couples or poor people, 
have access to student loans that genuinely meet their needs. If 
you look at how they are treated as people who require student 
loans, they are treated as a single person. They’re eligible for 
the same amount of money that a single person would get, yet if 
they were a single parent, or if they were a native person, a 
Metis, a non-status person, they would be eligible for some 
special assistance, some additional money that would meet the 
real needs of their family. 
 
(1445) 
 
And yet this government has said that they don’t have money to 
allow poor or lower income working people to get a much 
needed education so that they can have the hopes and the 
dreams of their single counterparts, or their native and Metis 
counterparts, or their counterparts that are single parents. 

And I would urge this government to change the student loan 
requirements so that poor people who are married, who have a 
spouse at home looking after children, have access to the same 
university or post-secondary education that many other 
Saskatchewan citizens do if they’re prepared to take out large 
student loans. 
 
Now many students in this province work hard to support their 
studies. Many are forced to work hard and to get jobs because 
they can’t get adequate student loan and bursary funding, so 
they work — or they try to — but even here the government has 
cut back. This government has slashed the Opportunities ’89 
student employment program by 2.5 per cent in the recent 
budget. There will be 1,000 less students employed under this 
program this summer. The fact of the matter is that the number 
of student jobs created last summer was only 3,000 jobs, in 
comparison to 10,384 jobs created in 1986-87. 
 
Now is it any wonder that the number of youth employed in this 
province dropped by 5,000 between January ’88 and January 
’89? Is it any wonder that 65 per cent of the more than 13,000 
persons that left Saskatchewan in 1988 were 29 years old and 
younger? I think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is that this government is forcing students 
and forcing young people in this province to bear the brunt of 
their misplaced priorities in the following ways. This 
government cuts back in funding, which results in dramatic 
tuition increases. This government makes promises to 
universities before elections, and then breaks those promises 
after elections. This government changes the rules on student 
loans, they increase the borrowing rates, and they cut back on 
the bursaries — all of this after an election. 
 
This government consistently underfunds school boards to the 
point where schools are closing, and this government ignores a 
50 per cent increase in the grade 8 to 12 drop-out rate since 
1981. This government announced in its throne speech that it 
was going to do something about our school drop-out rate. But 
have we heard anything? No, we have not. This government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You haven’t been listening. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I have been listening. I have been listening. 
This government has a disaster of a school drop-out rate. Since 
this government came to office in 1982, the school drop-out rate 
has gone from 31 per cent to 45 per cent. That is a disaster. That 
is a crisis, and we can lay that in many respects at the feet of the 
members opposite. That’s where we can lay that. 
 
Now this government will say that that drop-out rate is because 
young native people aren’t completing their studies. And yet 
when my colleague, the member for Cumberland, who knows 
intimately the problems of Indian and Metis people, asked your 
government for an inquiry, what do you say? You say no. You 
say no. 
 
We have the largest suicide rate in this country; we have large 
poverty rates amongst Indian and Metis people; we have student 
drop-out rates that are unbelievable amongst Indian and Metis 
young people; we have  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

874 
 
 

horrendous problems with the justice system; we see people in 
jails. And what does this government say? They say no. And 
they say no because they’re embarrassed, they’re embarrassed. 
But you shouldn’t be embarrassed. You shouldn’t be 
embarrassed because there is a problem, and you people 
continue to bury your heads in the sand. And any responsible 
government should start looking at what are some of the 
systemic problems facing Indian and Metis people. 
 
And the member from Mayfair, he giggles in his chair, he 
giggles in his chair, and it’s not funny, Mr. Member from 
Mayfair, who knows, who surely knows something about 
special education, who surely knows something about young 
people facing crisis because that member was involved with 
young people prior to coming into this legislature. 
 
Now this government is facing a number of critical issues. 
Educational spending is important, but planning and priorities is 
important as well. There are facts about this government’s 
record in education that cannot be disputed. And what do these 
Tories give us as solutions? They give us Decima polling; they 
give us empty slogans based on their polling; they give us 
empty promises based on their polling; they give us empty 
rhetoric based on their polling; they say that they’re open for 
business. 
 
The Minister of Social Services talks about the free market 
economy when asked for an inquiry into the issues and 
problems facing Indian and Metis people in this province. They 
government is open for business, but, Mr. Speaker, there won’t 
be anyone here to mind the store. Young people know that 
educational opportunities just aren’t here any more, and they’re 
leaving the province in droves. 
 
Instead of real solutions to real problems in our schools, 
problems like illiteracy and problems like a high school 
drop-out rate and underfunding realities which results in denial 
of access to education, this government offers cheap talk. They 
say, let’s ignore the real problems and teach our students about 
privatization and entrepreneurship. It says, let’s make some 
more promises before the next election and break them 
afterwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap. I know it; you know it; the students 
of the province know it; the voters out there know it; and after 
the next election when it’s too late for them, this government 
will finally know it. Thank you very much. 
 
And I would now move, and it’s seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon South: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government of 
Saskatchewan to reverse its short-sighted, cost-cutting 
decisions to educational institutions which are reducing the 
accessibility of education for Saskatchewan’s young 
people and impairing the province’s ability to compete in 
the knowledge- and information-based world economy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to second the 
motion moved by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. But while I take pleasure in seconding the motion, I’m 
also somewhat saddened by the fact that we know that each day 
that passes in Saskatchewan, a number of students, young 
people have left the province, either gone to the east across the 
Manitoba border and into Ontario, or have gone west into 
Alberta and B.C. — many of our young people who are, Mr. 
Speaker, the future of this province. 
 
We hear the Minister of Education saying time and time again, 
and made a long speech last year in the House, of preparing our 
young people for the 21st century, that he was going to make 
the opportunities available to our young people so that they 
would be able to meet the 21st century with vim and vigour and 
be prepared and have the knowledge and skills that they require 
in order to stay in Saskatchewan and make their home here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since last year we don’t know exactly how many 
young people have left this province, but it’s somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 9 or 10,000 who have left Saskatchewan 
because there was no hope, there was no opportunity made 
available by this government. 
 
And I will demonstrate today, Mr. Speaker, where they have 
gone wrong, where they have not kept their commitment to our 
young people. I remember well 1982 when the now Premier of 
Saskatchewan had a slogan which says, let’s bring those young 
people back to Saskatchewan; let’s make sure that all those 
parents who had to leave under those bad years of the NDP 
could come back; let’s bring them back. 
 
What has he done? What has this Premier and his government 
done? They have underfunded those very same educational 
programs that are needed for our young people in order to make 
their living here in this province. The Premier has not kept his 
promise. He has not kept his promise to those young people that 
he would provide those job opportunities, those educational 
opportunities to our young people so that they could make their 
homes in this province where they were born. 
 
In this last year alone, as I was saying, 33,000 people — 
33,000. I think I’m low, Mr. Speaker; it probably is even higher 
that. We know that if the trend continues this year, if the trend 
continues this year, an additional 36,000 people will leave this 
province. Of that 36,000, approximately 12 to 15,000 will be 
young people, the very people that we need here, the future 
leaders. Our bright students, our bright young people will be 
making their homes somewhere else in this country. They will 
be contributing to Canada, not in Saskatchewan but in Alberta 
and in B.C. and in Ontario and the other provinces. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because this government has failed in its 
obligation to provide, to provide those opportunities. And is it 
any wonder, is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that this is 
happening? 
 
All we have to do is look at the estimates for this year. If you 
look at the estimates this year and a couple in the past, you will 
note, with all the rhetoric that we get from  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

875 
 
 

the members opposite and the Minister of Education, if they 
were honest with the people of Saskatchewan, and I ask them to 
turn to the Estimates, turn to the Estimates — and I will refer to 
1986 Estimates and the 1989-90 Estimates — and if you do any 
calculation at all, you will note that the average income . . . 
pardon me, the average increase in operating grants to school 
boards was a meagre, was a meagre 1.3 per cent per year — 1.3 
per cent of increase in operating grants to school boards. 
 
And yet the Minister of Finance, in his budget speech just 
recently presented to this House, said he saw no reason, no 
reason why school boards would have to increase the mill rate. 
And he saw no reason why the local governments, the Regina 
government, would have to increase mill rates. Regina 
government, he said, would only do it because it was an NDP 
Government, dominated by NDP people. 
 
Well I just heard on the radio this morning, and the member 
from Mayfair will verify this for me, not all the councillors on 
the Saskatoon city government are NDP people — oh there are 
some who support the NDP, but the majority of them do not — 
and I note, I note, Mr. Speaker, that they are going to increase 
my property taxes by about $70 a year. 
 
Where is most of that increase coming from? Due to education 
increases. And it comes because the public school board has 
found itself short an additional $500,000. It is getting less 
money this year than it was receiving last year — $500,000 
less. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us about that, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And . . . yes. The member from Mayfair said, 
tell them about that. I will tell them about that, and if you were 
to meet with the director . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I have. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Oh and . . . oh, well then I think he would have 
told you, he would have told you that now, what is the share of 
the provincial funding for the Saskatoon public school board. I 
want to inform the member from Mayfair, who never seems to 
support anything that we want in Saskatoon — he’s always 
criticizing when Saskatoon is demanding things; it’s no wonder 
we don’t get anything from the government opposite if he’s the 
spokesperson for Saskatoon — I say to the member opposite 
that now, instead of them getting 48 per cent of provincial 
funding, they are now down to 34 per cent. Sixty-six per cent of 
the funding for the public schools in Saskatoon must come from 
property tax. 
 
(1500 
 
Recently when we met with the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ 
Association, they made it very clear to us that they would like 
to get back to the good old days. Well they didn’t call them the 
good old days, but they said, let’s get back to when the funding 
was between 56 and 60 per cent provincial. Well it had to be the 
good old days because — my memory serves me well — those 
were the good old days of the Blakeney government when 
provincial funding for education was close to 60 per cent. 

Well I assured the trustees that when we form the government 
the next time around, we will see to it that the provincial 
funding for education would move back to that 60 per cent, and 
that we would give education the high priority that it deserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated that if you look at the Estimates, look 
at the Estimates and take into consideration the Estimates of 
1986, in that four-year period, money increases in operating 
grants to school boards have gone up 1.3 per cent. Well, you 
would say, well that’s bad enough. Now it couldn’t get any 
worse. 
 
Yes, it did get worse for the universities. In that four-year 
period, the University of Regina and the University of 
Saskatchewan had annual increases of 1 per cent — 1 per cent 
in operating grants. And what does the Minister of Education 
do? He criticizes the two universities for not being able to spend 
their money wisely. He gives an increase of 1 per cent to the 
universities. In the meantime, the government has increased its 
budget by 9 per cent. And he criticizes the university, the 
president of the University of Regina and the president of the 
University of Saskatchewan, for not knowing how to spend 
their money. 
 
I say to the Minister of Education, you just keep your nose out 
of the affairs of the universities and let them run it the way they 
are doing it. They’re doing a fine job. It is your responsibility to 
provide the funds so that the universities don’t have to have 
quotas in arts and science; so that they don’t have to have 
class-rooms that are huge and crowded; so that they can provide 
a library that is not ranked 10th in the country, but should be 
ranked at least second or third from the top. Provide them with 
the funds and they’ll do the job. They’ll prepare those students 
for the future so that they can meet the demands of the 21st 
century. 
 
I don’t want the Minister of Education, in his enhancement 
fund, holding the big hammer over the universities and saying, 
now you do like I tell you or you’re not going to get your fair 
share of that enhancement fund. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
unacceptable in this province, and it is direct interference by 
that Minister of Education and that government in the internal 
affairs of the universities. This is the first time that that has ever 
happened in this province, and it is unacceptable. 
 
In my meetings, Mr. Speaker, with the presidents of both 
campuses, they have told me that they had wished that the 
government had put some confidence in the universities and had 
taken that enhancement fund and put that into their operating 
grants. 
 
The University of Regina has a deficit, as we all know, I believe 
of about 5.5 to $6 million. This year it is estimated that that 
deficit will increase by $1 million. The University of Regina 
basically is broke. It’s not allowed to run a deficit, but it must. 
It has no choice. And this government will simply not meet the 
demands that there are at the University of Regina. 
 
In Issues and Options, a study done by the University of 
Saskatchewan, they’ve clearly indicated, clearly  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

876 
 
 

indicated that they needed an increase of $11 million in 
operating funds alone in order to keep the status quo — $11 
million. But what have they received? Both the University of 
Regina and the University of Saskatchewan have received $3 
million — $8 million less than what the U of S needed in order 
to keep the status quo. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what are we going to see happening? 
Because of the lack of funding for education by this 
government, we are going to see at our universities several 
things happening coming this fall. We are going to see whole 
programs cut at the university. They have no choice; they’ll 
have to cut programs. We’ve already seen home economics cut 
at the U of S — no longer there. They have to cut other 
programs. I don’t know which programs they will be, but they 
will have to also continue the quotas. 
 
Students and the Issues and Options have clearly indicated this 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Issues and Options says that 
students who graduate from high school with a 65 per cent 
average do fairly well at the university on the whole, and that 
65, for now, should be the average in which high school 
students can enter university. 
 
What are we seeing today? In accounting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I believe last year the average to get into the College of 
Commerce was 87 per cent — 87 per cent. What happens to all 
those other students who could not get into the College of 
Commerce? I can tell you what’s happened. They are now 
attending school in some other province. Are they going to be 
coming back? Most of them won’t come back; we know that. 
Well over 80 per cent of those students will not come back to 
this province. They are lost to us. 
 
Their benefits and their contributions that they could have made 
in the 21st century are no longer for our benefit. They would be 
for the benefit of Canada, certainly, but not for Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will, within 10 or 15 years, not 
have those young people in this province that we need to fulfil 
those jobs that are absolutely necessary in this province. 
 
If the government is correct that they are going to diversify 
some day — I haven’t seen it yet — but if they are going to 
diversify some day, who are going to fill all those jobs? Our 
young people will be gone. They will be somewhere else. Does 
that mean then we have to import people? Does it mean that we 
have to then entice people through money and say, well, we are 
so short we’ve got to get people back into this province. Why 
don’t we do the right thing? Why don’t we say now that we will 
increase the funding for education so that our students will have 
the opportunity? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is what is happening at our 
post-secondary education at the universities. Now you would 
say, well, things are improving at the technical schools. Well let 
me tell you, if you listen to the staff, and if you listen to the 
students . . . And recently the minister and I attended the Kelsey 
campus, and we spoke on a panel. And I think if the minister 
was listening, they were telling him that many of the programs 
that were there before, now are gone. They are no longer there. 
Many of the classes that students want to get into are crammed.  

They can’t get in. They don’t have the up-to-date equipment 
that is necessary. In fact, in some of the classes they don’t even 
have equipment that is required for the course. That’s what the 
students were telling him and telling me. And the minister says: 
everything is fine; we’ve made such tremendous improvement 
since we reorganized. 
 
Oh, I’ll tell you what the minister has done; I’ll tell you what 
the minister and his board have done. They have replaced many 
of the top-notch, qualified administrators and staff with their 
own people — with their own people. And when I get to 
estimates in advanced education, I’m going to ask of the 
minister what qualifications he uses to hire administrators at the 
various campuses in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Arts and Sciences) Is it purely political? And in some cases I 
know it’s purely political. In some cases they have appointed 
people who’ve never in their life administered even a one-room 
school and are now administrating a huge campus. No 
qualifications whatsoever, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That does not speak well, that does not speak well for 
post-secondary education. We should acquire, and we can, the 
best, the best qualified people, the best educated people to run 
our campuses and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) and not have patronage appointments 
of people who clearly support members opposite in their 
ideology and their philosophy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does not speak well 
for quality education. That is money that is wasted. That is 
money that is wasted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How did you make out as a principal, 
Herman? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well I’ll tell you . . . The Minister of Health 
asked me, how did I make out as a principal? Yes. Well I’ll tell 
you what happened to me as a principal. In 1960-61, in 1960-61 
I started teaching and I was offered a principalship in my 
second year. I was promoted in my third year. I was promoted 
in my fourth year. I was promoted in my seventh year, and then 
I left and went into high school counselling. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you last? Did you last as a principal 
or . . . 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I was promoted. And I’m fairly proud of 
my record as an administrator. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I heard they were happy to get rid of you 
in Meadow Lake. It was one of the best moves they ever made 
. . . 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — But I’ll tell you . . . Yes, I could say something 
about the Minister of Health and his record in Meadow Lake, 
but I won’t do that, because that gets rather personal and it’ll be 
a black blotch on his career. Another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us get back to funding of education  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

877 
 
 

before I was interrupted by the Minister of Health. Let’s get 
back. I know it hurts him to know that they haven’t funded 
education the way they should have. When they provide 
technical schools, they say we’re going to reorganize so that we 
can have the technical schools provide those opportunities for 
our young people, that they can meet the 21st century. 
 
What is actually happening? Do the members opposite not 
know that only one in five — one in five — applications to our 
technical schools actually gets into the program that they want 
to get into? One out of five students. And at our universities we 
had 500 students last year at the U of S alone who could not go 
on to university because there wasn’t sufficient room at the 
university, because of lack of funding by you people opposite. 
 
If you are concerned about the technological age and the 
changes that are going to occur in the 21st century, then you’ve 
got to put your house in order now. You don’t do it in the 21st 
century — it’s too late. Many of the young people who could 
have benefitted from those programs that you should have made 
available will be gone. They will be in the other provinces, 
working there in the 21st century, and not here. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a crime. It is something that 
should not be left unchallenged, and I ask the members opposite 
to get their priorities mixed up and make absolutely certain that 
our technical schools and our universities have sufficient 
funding in their operating grants — in their operating grants — 
so that they can offer the programs that are necessary for our 
young people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me return for just a minute to the 
elementary and high school division in education. I spent a 
number of years and I know that we have many dedicated 
teachers, in that most of our teachers are very dedicated and 
they’re very loyal. They’re well qualified. And I think we can 
be proud of the people that we have teaching in our schools. 
 
But they are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, becoming demoralized. 
They’re becoming demoralized because they feel that they do 
not have the support of the Minister of Education and the 
provincial government in their endeavours to provide high 
quality education. 
 
Let me refer to just a few examples. A year or so ago, maybe it 
was two years ago, this Minister of Education was bent on 
providing standardized testing at the provincial level. And he 
almost threatened the teachers and the trustees that he was 
going to bring in standardized provincial testing. Now the 
outcry was so huge from the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) and the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees’ 
Association) that he backed down. He backed down. And he 
then set up a committee. That committee, I believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, unanimously opposed what the minister had in mind, 
and have said that the provincial standardized testing would be 
detrimental to the quality education that teachers have been 
providing in our high schools and in our elementary schools. 
 
(1515) 

And why did they say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They said that 
because most of our teachers are accredited. They are well 
qualified, and they did not want to teach their students for 
provincial exams. They wanted to train the students and to 
educate the students in acquiring skills and knowledge and how 
to acquire that and how to apply that knowledge and those skills 
in life situations, not just for provincial standardized exams. 
 
And I’m glad that the STF and the SSTA put that pressure on 
the minister, because if they hadn’t done it, we now would be 
looking at provincial standardized tests. And I think that would 
have been a backward step. 
 
Let me also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk a little bit about loans 
and bursaries. The member from Nutana already mentioned it 
when she moved this motion, that there was a dramatic change 
made in the student loan program. Oh, the minister will say, 
yes, we have provided a lot more money in our term of 
government than you people did when you were in government. 
And that is true. But that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has happened 
right across Canada, and the main reason for that is that the 
Government of Canada is providing most of the funds. The 
Government of Canada is providing most of the funds, and they 
have increased their funding, and I think they ought to be 
congratulated for having done so, both the Trudeau government 
and the Mulroney government. They have provided the funds. 
But what has this government done? 
 
In addition to the Canada student loan program, we had a 
provincial bursary program which would cut in when a student 
had taken a loan of $2,640; if there was further need, a bursary 
program would cut in, and they could get up to $1,800 in 
bursaries which would then be wiped out if the . . . well, at any 
case, they were wiped out whether they were successful or not 
successful. If a student was in need, he or she received a 
bursary. 
 
What have we got today? Most of our students are going to be 
saddled, most of our students are going to be saddled with a 25 
to $30,000 student loan when they graduate from technical 
school or university. 
 
Maybe that wouldn’t be so bad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oh so, 25 
or $30,000, if they were assured of employment — if they were 
assured of employment — but they are not. And we have some 
assurance of that from the former minister of Education when 
she said, and let me quote. The headline says: “Rejected 
students unlikely to find jobs anyway, says Smith.” Now what 
do we have; let me quote from what she says: 
 

“About 400 would-be students, turned away from the arts 
and science colleges at the University of Saskatchewan, 
wouldn’t likely have found work after graduation 
anyway,” says former Education minister, Pat Smith. 
 

What a statement by a minister, a former minister of Education, 
saying to the students, well, so you didn’t get into university; so 
what! If you graduate, you wouldn’t find any jobs here anyway. 
You might as well leave, and that’s exactly what those students 
and young people are doing. They have taken her advice and 
have said, look it, if there is no opportunity for the future for us 
here in this  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

878 
 
 

province, we will go somewhere else. That’s the attitude that 
this government has displayed. They don’t create jobs. 
 
How many students have gone? Well I’ll tell you how many 
students have gone just last year alone — about 9 or 10,000 
students alone. Our young people are leaving this province in 
droves. And as I indicated before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
will not return for the most part. They will make their 
contribution — and some of these are our top-notch students — 
they will not make their contribution in Saskatchewan, they will 
make their contribution in another province in the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could go on and on about the lack of 
funding by this government for education. And I want to read 
just a few of the headlines that have appeared in the various 
papers. Here is one which says: “Last nail driven in home 
economic coffin.” “STI tuition increasing.” “Technical school 
fees to rise.” “Tuition up 15 per cent at technical schools.” 
 
Well here is one. We are talking about facts, and I think the 
member from Nutana indicated very clearly, what we get from 
this government here is talk, talk, talk, but no action. We don’t 
get the funding to back up the talk. 
 
Here is a headline which says: “Hepworth gives students more 
rhetoric.” 
 

Why is provincial education spending not increasing when 
the federal government has been increasing its transfer 
payments to Saskatchewan for education? 
 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister for 
Health and the minister for Education and continuing education, 
I told the federal ministers at that time, I told them at that time 
and I warned them not to make those transfer payments to the 
provinces without any conditions attached. I told them what 
would happen. I said that the provinces wouldn’t spend the 
money on education, what it was designated for, that they’d 
channel it into other areas. And I said that they wouldn’t spend 
the money on health that they should be spending, that they 
would be getting from the federal government, and social 
services. 
 
And it was rather surprising. When I was defeated in 1982 to 
’86, I got a letter from one of the former federal ministers. Do 
you know what she wrote? You were right, I shouldn’t have 
agreed to the other provincial Conservative ministers because 
all of them wanted to get their greedy hands on that federal 
money so that they wouldn’t then have to spend it on the 
various departments for which it was designated. 
 
And that’s exactly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what has happened 
across Canada, but more so in this province. We now stand 10th 
in Canada on our funding vis-a-vis the budget. As a percentage 
of the budget we stand last in Canada — 10.5 per cent. But the 
national average is 14.5 per cent. We stand last. Is it any 
wonder that we don’t have opportunities in our post-secondary 
education for our young people when this is the kind of funding 
that we receive from the members opposite. 

Let me continue reading some of the headlines about school 
funding. The members opposite say, well it’s only the 
opposition that’s crying about lack of funding. It’s only the 
members opposite. Everybody else is happy. The Minister of 
Finance says, well there’s absolutely no need for school boards 
to increase their funding; I have provided ample funds. I say, 
nonsense, to the Minister of Finance. When you give a 1.4 per 
cent increase to technical schools and a 1.99 per cent to 
universities, that is not sufficient. When you only provide a 2.3 
per cent in operating grants to school boards, that is not 
sufficient. 
 
Not only that, the other thing they didn’t tell us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I wish you’d look into it, the other thing they 
didn’t tell us is that they raised the computational mill rate. I 
just found that out the other day. They raised the computational 
mill rate from 50 to 53. And that now has to be made up by 
school boards as well. 
 
Oh, you know, but oh those school boards and those 
universities, they spend their money recklessly. And what do 
they receive from this government? A 1.3 per cent increase. 
 
Let me continue reading. “Cut in school funding roundly 
criticized.” “Little assistance in store for the education system.” 
Here’s some more. “Education reductions called false 
economy.” “Educators chagrined by decision to stretch funds 
over 10 years.” “Funding cuts demoralize teachers.” 
 
And I want to tell the members opposite that you cannot put any 
more pressures on our teachers. They are stretched to the limit. 
They are doing a fine job; it should be recognized. And I would 
ask you members opposite to make additional moneys available 
so that classroom sizes can be decreased so that the teachers 
will be able to get some preparation time to prepare for their 
classes and so that they don’t have to have, as we had in the 
school that I was in, 47 people in a biology class. You can’t 
offer quality education when that happens. And that is not the 
fault of the teachers. That is the fault, and it lies squarely on the 
shoulders, of the members opposite and the Minister of Finance. 
 
Here’s another headline: “School divisions concerned about 
paying increasing shares.” And as I indicated already — and the 
Minister of Finance, I want him to know — that the SSTA 
recently said they want the funding, the proportionate spending 
on education, to go back to the good old days. And the days of 
the ’70s, when the funding for provincial education was around 
56 or 57 per cent, and not less than 50 per cent what it is today. 
 
Here’s another headline: “Rural funding and enrolment equalled 
fewer teachers.” “School boards, R.M.s get cut back.” “Lower 
provincial grants decried.” “School trustees blame province for 
higher tax rates.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion, this resolution that we have 
offered to the House today, condemns this government for the 
lack of priority that it has given to education. I think I have 
amply shown and I could go on and on to give proof of how this 
is true, and it hasn’t just  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

879 
 
 

happened this year. It has happened at least since 1986-87, and 
I’m not certain if it happened before because I didn’t have a 
chance to check those things out. But since 1986-87, the last 
four budgets, the last four budgets have not even provided 
sufficient funding and operating funds to our school boards and 
our universities and our technical schools to keep up with the 
rate of inflation. 
 
They’ve had to increase their class-room sizes, they’ve had to 
cut teachers, they’ve had to increase the mill rates, all because 
you people refuse to give education the high priority that it 
deserves. 
 
And if your rhetoric about meeting the challenges of the 21st 
century have any validity at all, I say to the Minister of 
Education, go back to treasury board; find that additional 
money. And you could easily do that; you could find $9 million 
by just cancelling that birthday party. Give that $9 million to 
the school boards and give that $9 million to universities and 
technical schools, and the future will be better off, and our 
young people won’t have to leave this province to find 
educational opportunities and jobs in other provinces. Do the 
right thing. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to introduce 
some guests to the legislature. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to 
all members of this Assembly, the grade 10 class from 
Gravelbourg. Along with them are exchange students from 
Ontario. They’re here to visit the legislature today, and I’d ask 
everybody here to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — They’re accompanied by Janice Evans, Darlene 
Pillon, Diane Marchand, Gloria Stringer. I’d ask you to 
welcome them also. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — They’re here to visit for a few minutes and I’ll 
be stopping to have some photos taken and some drinks in a 
few minutes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. On behalf of the 
official opposition and our leader, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, we’d also like to welcome the grade 10 students 
from Gravelbourg. We’ve had the opportunity to spend a great 
deal of time in your area, particularly in your town. It’s a 
beautiful town. And we hope you have a great time at the 
legislature and enjoy the debate. Thank you very much for 
coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(1530) 
 

Resolution No. 10 — Financing of Education (continued) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today in the Assembly and respond to the motion from 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. And I’d first like to say 
that I am not an educator, and don’t pretend perhaps to bring to 
the expertise to the House the fervour that the member from 
Saskatoon South or perhaps the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana did. 
 
I would like to say, though, that as a member from a large rural 
constituency who represents a very diverse area, and whose 
mother was a schoolteacher and whose wife was a 
schoolteacher and may some day be a schoolteacher again, and 
whose mother-in-law was a superannuated schoolteacher, I have 
had certain discussions around the kitchen table, you might say, 
about the field of education. 
 
I’ll never forget my wife coming home from school the first day 
that she taught the very first kindergarten class in Lindale 
School in Moose Jaw, and coming home after meeting her 26 
charges with tears running down her eyes, and I can sympathize 
with some of the things that people in the educational system 
have to go through. And I go along with the member from 
Saskatoon South in commending the schoolteachers in this 
province because they do a magnificent job with the most 
precious resource we have, and that’s our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And I’d also like to commend the Minister of 
Finance for the budget he brought down and the portion 
allocated there to education. 
 
In my part of the world last year, as you well know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there wasn’t a whole lot of crop. Many fields were 
worked down. A lot of taxpayers out there are paying their 
education taxes and are keeping them up to date, and I think 
they appreciate the fact that the Minister of Finance was able to 
take the larger picture into consideration, and still, when it came 
to the field of education — and I want to talk in numbers of 
dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not in percentages — he was 
able to go from $789 million to $841.2 million. 
 
Now you can break that down into percentages, but to the 
people in my part of the world who didn’t have a lot of crop last 
year and who are looking at a rather dry spring, that is a lot of 
money, and that’s a lot of commitment to the students and the 
educational infrastructure of this province, considering that 
things aren’t exactly booming in the farm economy. And that’s 
why I like to commend the Minister of Finance for those 
initiatives. 
 
And I think when we talk about this particular motion, it’s the 
accessibility of education to people in this province that we’re 
dealing with. And I guess the first thing that I would think of is 
some comparisons. And I’m not one to harken to the past, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but in listening to the members opposite, I 
think it’s important that we make a direct comparison in a few 
areas. 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

880 
 
 

We’ve talked a lot about our universities and we’ve talked 
about people going . . . And I’d like to say that when I started 
attending the U of S in 1970 there were entrance requirements 
on the College of Arts, because I had a 72 average and I just 
made it in. I don’t know what members opposite talk about 
when they say there’s never been entrance requirements on the 
College of Arts before. And that was after I stayed out . . . I had 
stayed out a year after that. 
 
But I think when we make some comparisons, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we can go right back to the student loan program, 
because that’s one that’s been in place for a long time and it’s 
one that’s very obvious to people. The highest number of 
student loans that occurred under the previous NDP 
administration was in 1972-73. There were 506 student loans 
processed in that year for a total of $314,597. And that was a lot 
of money at that time. In 1981-82 . . . or sorry 1980-81 there 
were only 71 student loans processed in this province, $62,855. 
So obviously from a good start in 1972-73, things went 
downhill by the time we got to 1981-82. 
 
And I’d like to compare that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
1987-88. There were a total of 13,310 student loans processed 
in this province. That’s a lot of people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That’s 12,000 more loans than when the NDP 
were in power, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now I don’t know, when 
you put 12,000 over 506, there’s a heck of a big difference 
there. And when you put 33,685,619 compared to — what was 
that figure again? — 314,597, I would say that’s a heck of a 
difference. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, those 
are interest-free loans during the course of the student’s tenure 
in that particular learning institution. And those loans are also 
interest-free for six months upon graduation. So I think that 
when we’re talking about accessibility, which we are today in 
this motion, it’s important that we do compare those types of 
figures, because it shows the number of people that not only 
have an interest in education, but people that are having access 
to the system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was another point brought up during 
the comments from the member from Saskatoon South that I 
also would like to bring out and they were comparison. He was 
talking about scholarships. And the figures that I have, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, show for the period 1981-82 in this province 
to our two universities, there was $1.8 million in scholarships 
awarded. In 1988-89, there was $6.1 million in scholarships. 
And I, too, would find that a very significant increase, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it makes me wonder at the comments from the members 
opposite, if they’re being straight with the people of 
Saskatchewan when they talk about these things, because these 
are millions of dollars that we’re talking about. And the 
comparisons are there; they’re public knowledge, and they’re 
there for everyone to see. And I guess I would say to the public 
of Saskatchewan today, I’ll leave you to judge as to who’s 
telling us the  

straight story in this area. 
 
Back to accessibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I said, I’m not a 
trained educator and I’m not one who’s worked within the 
educational system. I’ve been a student at all three levels in our 
province. I was proud of the education which I received, and I 
think it certainly did things for me in going on in my life as a 
farmer, as a business man, and I would hope as a politician. 
 
I think it’s especially important for rural Saskatchewan that 
accessibility be improved, and I think it’s especially important 
as we do get into new technologies that things like our regional 
colleges, our SIAST, our technical schools be improved, that 
opportunities that haven’t been there in the past be expanded 
upon. And I’d like to think that the changes that the Minister of 
Education has brought about in those areas are only going to 
bear fruit in the future, because we have moved away from 
some of the things which I suppose a buoyant economy in the 
’70s allowed us to play around with, to the realization that if we 
are going to spend money on education, it has to be targeted, 
that it has to reach the maximum number of people, and that the 
benefits down the road have to be applicable to the economy in 
which we are going to live. 
 
And I think of myself when I travelled from south of Moose 
Jaw, Saskatchewan, to the U of S in 1970. That was a . . . it 
seemed to me like a long ways to go. You come off the farm, 
and you’re not totally prepared for some of the experiences 
there. And I’m just happy today that at my technical institute in 
Moose Jaw, the opportunity for some university level classes 
are going to be offered; that places like the North West 
Regional College in North Battleford are going to offer 
full-time, first-year university classes; that we’re looking into 
the area of television in the educational area, because I think it’s 
important that those of us who left school for a while in the 
pursuit of our degrees perhaps can now use this medium to 
further that education, to continue on the process so that you 
don’t stop entirely, that you keep looking at ways to better 
yourself, to get those degrees, those diplomas which may help 
you in the future. 
 
And I can understand how members opposite, who are basically 
from the two larger cities or some of the other cities in our 
province, can have the attitude that they have, and they don’t 
see the larger picture out there. But I’m sure that the member 
from Athabasca can appreciate some of the things that . . . 
educational opportunities that haven’t been available to people 
in his particular part of the world. And I think, realistically, the 
only way that we’re going to get to some of those areas is to use 
the technology that has come along today and that we’ve got to 
develop and build upon. We have to develop the software and 
the know-how to go into an isolated community and use that 
satellite system that’s there, that cable system, patch into it and 
give people the opportunity to learn those things that they 
haven’t had before. 
 
And I would like to see the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 
regional college concept and that technical college area can be 
expanded so that people will have the ability to interact, if you 
will, with a campus situation, and also in their local community 
in their local home, because it is  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

881 
 
 

important for people who are doing the same thing, who are 
taking the same types of education to get together and discuss 
common problems, if you will. 
 
And I look forward to the day when some of these technological 
advances will allow people in, say, Riverhurst, Saskatchewan, 
to talk over the television, if you will, or by telephone and 
computer with a guy in Buffalo Narrows. And they’re both 
doing the same mechanical, technological course, or they’re 
both studying botany or whatever happens to be applicable to 
their area, and they can trade this information back and forth. 
And I think we’re on the right track. It’s going to take time. It’s 
going to take commitment. It’s going to take money to see that 
these things come to fruition. 
 
I think it’s also important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we think 
about long-term opportunity in education and where the people 
who graduate are going to. This will come back into the whole 
area of accessibility, because I think the members opposite 
during the 1970s felt that you simply absorbed every other 
graduate in Saskatchewan into government. And that may be 
fine and dandy, because government certainly is a good area to 
expand your horizons on in certain areas, and it certainly 
provides well-paying jobs. 
 
But it doesn’t get to the root of the diversification problem that 
this province has lived with since it came into confederation. 
We have to develop industries and value-added products in this 
province that can take us through the humps and the valleys of a 
resource-based economy. And that means that we’re going to 
have to educate people and train them in areas that are going to 
fit into that diversification and that value-added area, because it 
simply isn’t acceptable, I believe, to the taxpayer of this 
province to simply say that we’ll take all our graduates into 
government. 
 
We as taxpayers have to pay those salaries. We’re the people 
that are responsible for the education portion of our tax dollar, 
so it’s only realistic that if we’re going to graduate people, if 
we’re going to train them in areas, that we also look at where 
those jobs are going to be. 
 
And I don’t care if that’s in producing noodles from durum 
wheat that formerly were produced in Hong Kong or Japan, 
because you’re going to need someone that’s fairly well 
educated to run the computers and to run the newest types of 
equipment that are going to be needed in that type of 
processing. 
 
I don’t care if it’s people that work at the NewGrade upgrader 
here in Regina who need to know some of the newest 
technological information available in order to make a facility 
like that run, or the new one that’ll be built in Lloydminster. 
 
(1545) 
 
And also it’s going to be students who will graduate and will 
know how to operate the new Shand power project at Estevan 
and some of the top-class technology that’s going to go along 
with that facility, and some of the irrigation systems that are 
being built in our province on Lake Diefenbaker and on 
Rafferty dam, because these are  

irrigation systems run with computerized pumps, pressurized 
delivery systems. 
 
High technology farming and agriculture today, the production 
of food, all of those things are going to require students that 
have that basis. And I don’t think that we necessarily have to do 
all of that at the new agricultural college at the U of S, although 
in talking to Dr. Kristjanson last week on that particular facility, 
he’s very proud of the things which are going to tie into that 
college from the private sector from the people doing research. 
And that, I think, is why so many people in the private sector all 
over Saskatchewan, indeed western Canada, have seen fit to 
contribute large sums of money to that college, because they see 
the production of food and the new technologies that will come 
out of that agricultural college to be absolutely fundamental to 
the well-being of this province and the people who live here. 
 
So as we go along in this process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not 
everyone will have to move to Regina or Saskatoon to get that 
good quality education. We’re going to use our SCAN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network) network. 
We are going to educate our people. 
 
And I would like to think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we diversify 
and as Mother Nature blesses the farm economy in this 
province, that the Minister of Finance next year in his budget 
will be able to come back with a further increase in the area of 
education, as he has done in the last four budgets; and that that 
further increase will be targeted, that it will go to people all 
across our province, not in just particular cities or sectors; and 
that we as a province, by having this commitment to our youth 
and our children, will have educators, will have trustees, will 
have university professors and administrators who are ready to 
take up the challenges that are coming in that 21st century. 
 
And I would just like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I would 
like to amend the motion presented by the member from 
Nutana: 
 

 That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and 
that the following be substituted to read: 
 
 That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for increasing the accessibility of education for 
Saskatchewan’s young people through the implementation of 
programs such as distance education and SCAN. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Does the member have a seconder? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll second it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion will be seconded by the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter debate on  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

882 
 
 

this question and particularly on this debate. The question here, 
Mr. Speaker, is what is happening to education and which 
direction has this government taken education in this province? 
And you don’t have to go very far, Mr. Speaker, beyond the 
walls of the confines of this building to find out. When you talk 
to anybody, whether they’re going to school, whether they have 
somebody going to school as a member of their family, or 
whether it’s somebody that’s working in our education system, 
be it in the public education system or be it in the university 
education system or in the technical education system — and 
they will tell you that since this government took charge in 
1982, particularly in the last four years, that education and their 
commitment to education has declined, and education is getting 
to be in tough shape, in very tough shape. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me just outline, and I 
want to outline very briefly how this concept of education and 
what is happening to education in this province, how it fits into 
this government’s agenda of privatization. I want to tell you 
that, Mr. Speaker. This government has decided that they’ve got 
one main thing to do: they want to privatize everything in this 
country, everything in this province. Now they’re making their 
moves economically to do so, and they’re also making some 
moves in education to do so, Mr. Speaker, and that, I believe, 
we’ve got to take very strong exception to and we’ve got to 
bring to a stop. And the way to bring it to a stop is to recognize, 
first of all, exactly what it is that this government is doing and 
what they’re trying to do in education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at Maggie Thatcher’s plan, which is 
what this government is following — Maggie Thatcher’s plan 
for education — she has set it up in her country so that the 
public education system in Great Britain was discredited, totally 
discredited. And as a result, after setting that up, as a result 
she’s setting it up so that she would give taxpayers’ money 
directly to the people to administer for whichever way they 
wanted to go. It might work, and when they do that, that means 
that the public system, the public education system is destroyed. 
 
Now in Great Britain, where you’ve got a small concentration 
of people, that might, at some time, that might work. It might 
work, Mr. Speaker. But in a place like Saskatchewan, where 
we’ve got a sparse population, the agenda of privatization, and 
particularly the agenda of privatization of education, just simply 
cannot work, and we must not allow it to work. 
 
There’s one way to make sure that it doesn’t work, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is to be sure that our publicly funded 
educational system is very well funded; to make sure that the 
funding that our school boards get does not continue to decline. 
 
If you take a look at the record of this government over the last 
four years, you will notice that the amount that this government 
is contributing to the revenues of the public’s education system 
in Saskatchewan is decreasing. It has decreased from 
approximately the 60 per cent level to  

about the 50 per cent level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as a result of that, the school boards under this 
government have been really pressured. They’ve cut, they’ve 
slashed, they’ve had to cut programs. We know right here in 
Regina that there are six schools that have had to close. And 
that happened, why? As a result of the cut-backs provincially, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When that happens, Mr. Speaker, when you have to cut back, 
when you increase your class load, when this happens, whether 
it’s at the university level or at the public school system level, 
people start asking questions. What’s happened? Why is this 
decreasing? They start asking the question, why is my child not 
getting the education that I’m expecting him to get? 
 
So when they ask this question, they’re looking for an answer 
because they expect that things should continue to move in the 
opposite direction. They expect that things should be 
improving, that their children should be getting an education 
that’s increasing in its popularity and in its quality. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the educational professionals in the province 
have the capability of delivering a quality program. But they 
will not be able to do that and they cannot deliver a quality 
program if class sizes continue to increase, if school boards 
continue to have to cut their resources and to increase the 
pupil-teacher ratios. That just can’t happen. 
 
School boards have one other alternative, and that is to raise the 
property taxes. And we know what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan and to the pressure that’s put on property taxes. 
There’s a limit. There’s only one place that this can come from, 
and that is that this government has got to reverse its priorities 
so that it does not continue to cut its transportation or to 
increase the pupil-teacher ratio and thus continue to discredit 
the system. 
 
(1600) 
 
Immediately . . . if this continues, Mr. Speaker, what’ll happen 
is parents will ultimately look at the system, examine it, and 
say, well look, we can no longer support that kind of system 
and will start to pull the children out of it or to criticize it. 
 
So we see the flow, and that’s exactly the flow that Maggie 
Thatcher used in Great Britain. Now in Great Britain it may be 
not so difficult to take your child from a school in one end of a 
city and move it to another because their population is rather 
dense. But when you look at Saskatchewan, what do you do? 
What do you do if you have to close down a school in Luseland, 
or people lose their faith in the school at Luseland or in some 
other small town like in Shellbrook? What do they do? What do 
those people do? 
 
We have to work together, Mr. Speaker, to keep our public 
education system intact and to make sure that it’s got good, 
high quality. And there’s one way to do that — and I tell the 
Minister of Education — one way to do that. Get back to your 
cabinet and make sure that the amount of the grants that the 
school board gets, gets back up to  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

883 
 
 

that 60 per cent. 
 
I move this debate adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate not adjourned. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can 
understand why the members of the NDP opposition want this 
motion to come to a quick end, because what we’ve have heard 
here this afternoon has been nothing but NDP hypocrisy. 
 
I want to indicate to you that I listened, and I listened well when 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon South . . . I 
want to indicate that I was very surprised that they would move 
such a motion and have so little to say. I want to indicate to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that as I listened, I heard nothing of any new 
type of content that I have not heard in this legislature now for 
the last six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that those speeches are gathering a lot of 
dust or they’re using an abundance of moth-balls to keep the 
rotting of these speeches in order. I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I listened, and I listened to the members, the NDP 
opposition, talk about numbers, and their figures that they’ve 
been throwing out to the public and across the floor to us here 
in the legislature just don’t seem to add up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand members of the NDP opposition saying, well these 
high school young people and university young people are 
leaving the province in hordes, and then all of a sudden I hear 
the members opposite, the member from Saskatoon South, 
where he had indicated that there was 9 to 10,000 students 
leaving Saskatchewan to get educated somewhere else because 
they couldn’t get into the universities. And then a few minutes 
later he indicated, well there was 500 students that couldn’t get 
into the universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m suggesting that these members have not — 
have not — any idea of the types of statements that they’re 
making as they’re speaking on the floor of the legislature. I 
want to say to you that they apparently just will pick a number 
and throw it out and hope — hope — that the people out in the 
broadcast world, watching the broadcast will pick up with these 
numbers and believe them. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re talking 
about young people, when we’re talking about the vision in this 
province, when we talk about the energies that these young 
people have and the optimism these young people have, I want 
to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the only people that fear the fact 
of these young people wanting to advance into the educational 
upgrading skills, whether it be through a technical or a 
professional way, that the only people that fear this particular 
type of advancement that we’ve seen in this province are the 
NDP opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposition are the people that are afraid 
that these young people, these young students will be able to 
carry on with the type of free opportunity, the  

free thinking that they are now entitled to throughout the 
educational system. That they are able to take their energies and 
expand and let them go, and not only go to accept what is being 
preached to them across a class-room or something, but allow 
the students now, allow them to challenge the system, allow 
them to ask questions of the system, allow them to expand into 
the system. 
 
That’s a vision, Mr. Speaker, that we’re allowing our young 
students today. And I’ll tell you, these young people out there 
are prepared to pick up and take on these kinds of challenges. 
They’re not afraid, Mr. Speaker, they’re not afraid of the 
challenges that we’re heading into in the 21st century. 
 
The NDP opposition are the ones that are afraid. They’re the 
ones that are afraid because they know they won’t have a 
thumbs-on on these free-thinking young people. They won’t be 
able to control the free-thinking of these young people, because 
these young people are excited, they’re adventurous, and 
they’re going to go out and they’re going to seek all the 
opportunities. And this is what the government’s challenges are, 
Mr. Speaker. The government’s challenges are to open the 
doors for these young people, to give them the opportunity, the 
opportunity to expand and question and go and ask questions 
and explore the unknown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you something. If we as a government, if 
we as a government would have had the mentality of the NDP 
when they were in government, I will tell you that . . . talk 
about an educational problem in this province, I will tell you, 
we would have a disaster. We’d have an immediate disaster. 
 
Even the teachers themselves are excited about the young 
students we have today in this province. They’re excited about 
the fact that these young students are prepared to take on these 
challenges. Well I can take you back into my community, and 
these young people are now being counselled. They’re asking, 
what can we do, what levels can we go into, and what . . . and 
they’re asking the teachers to give them some guidance and 
counselling, things that they’ve never had before out in a small 
rural community. They never had the counselling out there. 
They never had this guidance. The teachers weren’t able to give 
it to them because they did not have the time, they did not have 
the qualifications. And we’ve expanded into that type of 
qualification, and we’ve expanded into that type of an 
educational system for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We all know, as the member from Saskatoon Nutana had 
alluded to before, through his advancement as a teacher himself, 
that he was a principal and he advanced and advanced and 
advanced in his teaching career and then became a high school 
counsellor, back years ago. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not now happening just in the larger 
major cities, it is happening in the smaller rural Saskatchewan. I 
want to indicate to you too that when the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana and the member from Saskatoon South had 
elaborated on the fact of importing and exporting students out 
of this province, and that we were exporting them out and then 
importing them back in, well, Mr. Speaker, I for one would be 
the last person to  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

884 
 
 

stand in this Assembly and say that we’re going to close the 
border; we’re not going to let you out and we’re not going to let 
you in. That is exactly what the NDP opposition is saying. 
They’re saying they’re going to close the borders to the 
students. They’re going to keep it here; they’re going to keep 
the students here. They’re not going to allow them to leave 
anywhere. They’re not going to allow any new people into this 
province or anything else. This is just the way it’s going to be, 
just a border little province. 
 
Well we’ve suffered under that type of mentality back in the 
’70s when they were government. We suffered, and that’s why 
they’re not government today. The young people didn’t want 
that. They wanted a new vision; they wanted the vision to 
expand. They wanted a vision to be able to carry forth, 
diversify, and have jobs to go to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you, when you and I were 
young fellows just graduating from school, you know, I can 
take you back just that many years ago. And it’s not all that 
long ago; it isn’t all that long ago. And I want to tell you 
something. When we got out of school, when we left school we 
could choose a job. We could choose a job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the NDP were in power, when the NDP came to power, 
they took that choice away on the people. They took that choice 
away on the young people for choosing a job. They drove 
companies out of this province, Mr. Speaker; they drove 
industry out of this province; they would not stay here to 
expand. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, we are correcting that 
today. But I want to say that back in the late . . . the ’70s and the 
early ’80s and the years like that, the job was choosing the 
person. The job was choosing the person. And there were 
people having to take jobs they weren’t really even interested 
in, because they wanted to stay here in Saskatchewan. They 
wanted to make their home in Saskatchewan; they wanted to 
stay close to their families; they wanted to keep what I call the 
real family unit together. 
 
And where were the NDP, Mr. Speaker, on this? The NDP were 
taking the dollars from the glory days when potash and oil and 
everything was at a high. They were taking those dollars, and 
what families were they investing in? I will tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, the families the NDP were investing in were the 
family of Crown corporations. That’s the families that they 
were talking about. 
 
I can remember for month after month, year after year, ads 
across the TV screens about the family of Crown corporations 
working for you. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you 
that as I was a young fellow and I was looking for work and 
expanding my career in life and careers in life, and I want to 
indicate to you that that family of Crown corporations didn’t 
help me too much. It didn’t help the taxpayers of this province 
too much, because I’ll tell you what it did to them — it drove 
this province into disparity. It put this province where they 
should have been in a real positive black situation, into a deficit 
situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that the members opposite  

when they talk about, when they talk about students and they 
talk about the opportunity for students, why they should get 
right on their back hind legs and they should agree with us. 
They should agree with us about the fact that public 
participation is one of the greatest things that we can all agree 
to in this Assembly, that we can all agree to in this Assembly, 
because, Mr. Speaker, it gives us that opportunity to diversify, 
to once again introduce a life to our young people, our young 
people in this province to be able to choose the jobs again, not 
the jobs choose the people. 
 
(1615) 
 
Well as I said, the member from Saskatoon Nutana and 
Saskatoon South, they stood in this Assembly and they said we 
said . . . or they said we did nothing, we did nothing. I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s just in my home paper, 
Lloydminster Booster. I want to indicate to you before I get into 
that, and I’m just going to lay this out for an example because 
it’s a small enough example for everybody to absorb. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that under the NDP administration, 
under two or three different elections, and as it worked in health 
care as well, as I spoke earlier — but I know I can’t get into that 
area under this motion, but it happened the same in education, 
in the facilities. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that as there would be an 
election come along and the need for school facilities were cited 
as a major problem in the constituency, all of a sudden the 
MLA for that area — he was . . . the last one was even a 
minister of Highways — and they’d come along and they would 
promise whatever the people wanted to hear. If they wanted to 
hear about a new school, well yes, okay, we’re going to promise 
you a new school, and after the election’s all over, well we’ll 
just get at it and build you that school. 
 
Well I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that it was about 
. . . and I’ll give you a good example. The Battle River School 
Division in my particular riding, when I took over in 1982, we 
were in facilities, as far as facilities were concerned, as far as 
upgrading, and that’s the renovations and rebuilding of just 
school facilities, we were about 20 years behind — 20 years 
behind. 
 
And that’s not me saying that. That’s not me saying that, Mr. 
Speaker. I am repeating what was said. I am repeating what was 
being said. It was the members of the school boards, and the 
members opposite are a little excited for hearing this. And I can 
understand. They should be; well they should be. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that it was the 
members of the NDP opposition in the days of the high price in 
potash, in oil, and good revenues coming into this province. 
Where did they invest? They invested in the buy-out of potash 
mines — didn’t create any more new jobs, didn’t expand for all 
our new students coming out of the high schools or the 
universities or the technical institutions, didn’t expand in that. 
Those jobs were already there. But they spent all that money in 
there. They didn’t build those schools for the Battle River 
School Division. They absolutely didn’t build them. 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

885 
 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, like I said, the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana and Saskatoon South said, well this government’s done 
nothing. And that little Battle River School Division that I just 
am drawing to your attention, Mr. Speaker, I want to give you 
an outline of the amount of schools that we built in that little 
school division since 1982, since we’ve taken government. 
 
There was Marsden, Saskatchewan, in the Battle River School 
Division got a school. Neilburg, Saskatchewan, just down the 
line from Marsden got a school. Lone Rock, Saskatchewan, got 
a school. Lashburn, Saskatchewan, had gotten a school. 
Maidstone, Saskatchewan, had gotten a school. And this is all in 
this little Battle River School Division. And I’m still not 
finished. Hillmond, Saskatchewan, got a school. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And cuts teachers. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — And I want to indicate to you . . . oh and the 
member opposite says, and cuts teachers. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m going to indicate to you that . . . the member opposite said 
something about a teacher cut. We don’t as a government, cut 
teachers, Mr. Speaker. We don’t cut teachers. I want to clear 
that to all the people watching. And I hope the word gets out, 
because every time a member of the NDP opposition gets up 
and says that the government’s cut a teacher, that’s absolutely 
not true — absolutely not true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, schoolteacher cuts or anything like that, because 
there’s no children for them to teach, or students . . . young 
people for them to teach. They’re the people that make the 
decision. It’s done at the local level. It’s a local autonomy out 
there and, Mr. Speaker, the local people of those various school 
divisions, they make those particular decisions, not government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I gave you that as an example for a facility 
building, and that was just one little school division. But I want 
to indicate to you also that I have a couple of school divisions, a 
separate and a public school division in the city of 
Lloydminster. And as the members should all know — well, 
maybe they don’t because they don’t very much visit 
Lloydminster, although they should. It’s a great place to visit. 
 
And I want to indicate to them that if they would travel around 
to the school facilities, if they would travel around to the school 
facilities in there, well, Mr. Speaker, this is what I want to 
indicate to you is that we, since 1982 to now, have had 
construction on the Queen Elizabeth, Father Gorman, St. Mary, 
Winston Churchill, E.S. Laird schools, the comprehensive high 
school, Mr. Speaker. And it’s still continuing — St. Thomas. 
It’s just continuing. 
 
And you see, Mr. Speaker, it’s because of our government’s 
commitment to Saskatchewan, government’s commitment to 
the vision of this province — the vision for diversifying, for 
creating jobs, for the young people to stay home and participate. 
 
Our particular area, Mr. Speaker, is a great beneficiary of these 
programs. With heavy oil, agriculture, we have probably one of 
the most lucrative parts of the province  

up in my particular area, and it’s growing. Mr. Speaker, I have 
not . . . Although maybe some of the other parts of the province 
have suffered to some great demise because of the droughts and 
the grasshoppers and the floods and the low economic . . . or the 
prices in the various commodities in the agricultural products, 
etc., I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve been 
fortunate. We’ve been fortunate and I think, as you would come 
down to my riding and visit with my people, you would pick 
that up very quickly that my people in my particular riding do 
consider themselves very, very, very fortunate. And that has 
rubbed off on the young people. 
 
And I want to get into an area here, Mr. Speaker, is where, 
when you’re talking about young people and you talk about 
commitment and government commitment to education, I want 
to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that this government has taken 
it upon themselves to make education one of its priorities, top 
priorities. And we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, through the rough 
times, through the hard times, through the bad economic times. 
And I’m going to tell you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh 
yes, and the NDP make fun of this also. They say, the seven 
long, mean, lean years for the Tories. Well I agree. I will agree 
to that to the point where yes, and the real people out there 
understand what the government had to go through the 
economic turn-down, world economic turn-down. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that we committed ourselves to 
the education system in this province through these economic 
downturns because we said as a government that we refused, we 
refused to partake in a recession, we refused to take part in 
these disasters that were facing us, because we have to surge 
ahead, Mr. Speaker. We can’t quit. We can’t let our young 
people down. That’s what it’s about. 
 
It’s not about you and I, Mr. Speaker. Our lives are half — in 
the average life of man — are almost half over. I don’t think 
that for one moment that you and I are thinking about anything 
in a greed type sort of way. We are trying here, Mr. Speaker, to 
share, to share what we’ve enjoyed as our . . . when we were 
young and growing into the age we’re at now. 
 
And as we go on further into our life and into retirement, we’re 
looking for security, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re asking, for 
security, but we’re asking that in a round about way. We’re 
asking our young people to take our place to give them the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to expand and diversify and make 
lots of money, make profit. Because the more opportunity we 
give our young people through education, it allows them, Mr. 
Speaker, to support the government and therefore support us in 
all our other social programs and in the security of our seniors 
in this province. 
 
And we’re all going to be there. And we’re all going to go 
through it, and our children’s children are going to carry it 
through, but we have to give them some hope and we have to 
give them a vision. And, Mr. Speaker, I for one would be the 
last, would be the last one to agree with that type of mentality 
that comes from the NDP opposition. 
 
As I said, the NDP had many, many years of revenues  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

886 
 
 

flowing into . . . of high revenues flowing into this government 
. . . into their government. But as I want to say, they refuse to 
share it, they refuse to share it with the real people, with the 
youth in this province. 
 
When the members opposite talked about the exportation of 
young people from this province, I want to indicate to the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon South, they 
ought to think back to when they were government. They ought 
to think back to the fact that under their administration this 
province had never, ever, ever in its entire history ever reached 
a million in population, Mr. Speaker. Never in its whole 
entirety, ever reached a million in population. 
 
And I want to indicate to you today, and I’m pleased to be able 
to tell everyone, and remind the members of the NDP 
opposition, that it is under this administration, under a 
Progressive Conservative government, under our leader, under 
our diversification programs and our public participation 
programs, that through all these programs that we have 
introduced to this great province of ours, that it has led to the 
fact that the young people are being able to obtain jobs and stay 
home and stay close to the real family, stay home and look after 
grandpa and grandma and visit them. And live close to mom 
and dad and bring their families up to where their kids know 
what a grandparent is or a great-grandparent is. That’s what it’s 
all about. 
 
And I want to say to you that although, although the NDP 
opposition wish not to hear this, that it’s true. That’s what it’s 
about; it’s about a vision to keeping people together. 
 
(1630) 
 
I can go back to the time — and I’ve stated this in the House, 
I’ve stated this in the House a few years back — I can 
remember when my two older sisters had . . . when the NDP 
were in government, my two older sisters and brother-in-law 
eventually ended up in Florida, in the U.S., and they’re still 
there to this day because they made their homes there while 
they were in government. 
 
And I can remember my mother indicating to me at that time 
when she was still alive, she said to me, she said, not just to me 
but to the rest of the family — we were at a Sunday dinner — 
she said, you know, she said, the family will never probably as 
long as I’m alive ever really be together again. And you know, 
she didn’t know how true those words were, because, Mr. 
Speaker, when the family was together again, it was because of 
the fact that we were laying her to rest. She had passed away, 
and that’s when the family was together again, but she wasn’t 
able to participate in any types of conversations with her family. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that the member from Saskatoon 
South should know this well because he’s kind of related to our 
family and he should know that, when he was in the NDP 
government and a cabinet minister, that my family didn’t take 
too kindly to him. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re talking 
about the assistance to students, and when we’re talking about 
the fact that the opposition members had  

questioned the amount of dollars that were involved in student 
loans in the province here, I want to indicate to you that so be it 
that they brought the point to the floor of this legislature today, 
but I could not understand why they would even want to get 
into the point of student loans. 
 
Because we well know, Mr. Speaker, that they certainly weren’t 
one . . . they were one to introduce student loans, I guess, if you 
will, in some small fashion. But instead of forging forward with 
student loans in this province, they kind of thought, oh my 
gosh, what did we get ourselves into here? This could be a 
costly ordeal. And knowing that they weren’t wanting to 
expand into the fact of furthering and allowing the education to 
enhance in this province, they kind of withdrew from this 
particular program. 
 
So I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that when it came to the 
student loan program, Mr. Speaker, instead of forging forward 
like I said, they pulled back. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at a few hundred student 
loans under their administration versus our somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 13 to 14,000 student loans in the province 
today, I want to indicate to you that we have done a tremendous 
job. And I’m not here going to also state that we’re finished 
with the student loan program and that’s our numbers or 
whatever. Mr. Speaker, I am hoping that our government, 
through the luck of the world economics and the revenues 
coming in through our natural resources and our taxation 
programs here in the province, will allow us to expand into the 
form of student loans so that everyone that is in dire need of a 
student loans will be able to take advantage of it. 
 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, in regards to a university, 
and as the member from Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon 
South had alluded to, that the students did not have the 
opportunity to get into the universities, into our universities, and 
that they needed a great degree of high percentages, high 
averages, to be able to get into various different formats of 
education. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that upon that there is no doubt 
that there are levels of percentages that people have to meet to 
get into various university programs, because there are a high 
level and a high amount of established and well-educated young 
people and competing for those places in those class-rooms. 
And I want to indicate to you, just on that basis, that the 
challenges, that the challenges that we’ve seen and our 
government is having to have to accept is just exactly that. 
Those students have released their energies and have gotten 
their heads into their books, and the knowledge that they’ve 
gained through our educational system is just unlimited. And 
the amount of students that are high achievers throughout our 
education system is just phenomenal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we probably couldn’t have built enough 
class-rooms at the University of Regina or the University of 
Saskatoon to be able to accommodate all these students. It 
would have been virtually impossible. But what we’ve done 
instead, as a government, we’ve said to our community colleges 
and our regional colleges and our community colleges, we will 
allow you now to teach first year university, second year 
university. 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

887 
 
 

And I want to give you a little history of Lakeland College in 
Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. Lakeland College is now doing 
just exactly that; they’re teaching the first and second year arts. 
Yes, they are. The members opposite ought to come and they 
ought to visit Lakeland College. They’re very proud, they’re 
very proud of that fact, to be able to take it upon themselves 
now to offer these courses, and not only the fact that they’re 
able to offer those courses, but the young people are just 
delighted to be able to take them there. 
 
And I’ll give you an example of why. The example of why I 
want to say that these students are happy about the fact they can 
go to Lakeland College close to their community is basically 
because they’ve graduated from grade 12, but maybe I just am 
not ready to leave home. Maybe mom and dad just cannot 
afford to send me to Saskatoon or Regina. And maybe I don’t 
want to burden myself with a heavy student loan. 
 
And these are various things that young people are thinking 
about today. They are responsible, economically responsible 
young people. And they’re learning this from our . . . at an 
earlier age, through their high school years, through their grade 
school years. And I want to say that it really gives me great 
pleasure, it gives me great pleasure in being able to hear these 
young people when they talk like this. 
 
The creative type of spirit out there that these young people 
have and are able to obtain by being able to stay home and take 
advantage of these courses is phenomenal, because it gives 
them an opportunity to grow with the families a bit more, to 
have a different family view, because there’s no longer maybe 
under the thumb of mom and dad from a K to 12 system, as 
now they’ve graduated, they’ve become a young adult, they’ve 
hit an age where they can do a lot of things very legally under 
an age system that we seem to have adopted as governments 
and everything else, and they seem to be able to expand from 
that and to grow from that, and yet they’re still able to take 
advantage of home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at what this government has offered 
the young people over the years and expansion of educational 
programs, the creative thinking and computer literacy, I want to 
indicate to you that we’ve made milestones — milestones in the 
expansion of our facilities and equipment. 
 
And that was one thing I could not understand from the NDP 
opposition, when they indicated here today that we have 
education facilities in this province that don’t have any 
equipment. Well, Mr. Speaker, that to me is impossible. Even if 
they had a teacher, they are equipped with a teacher. I don’t 
think for one moment that I would have to stop there; I don’t 
think for one moment I would have stop there, but it just was 
ironic that they would even make mention of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know of any — any — any school that has 
a lack of equipment, that has not had the introduction of 
computers or languages, various different innovative programs 
and scientific programs and equipment, and everything else. 
And I want to say to you, the members  

opposite, the members opposite don’t talk about these kinds of 
things. They don’t talk about, they don’t talk about the 
programs that had put all this equipment into place and where 
the funding had come from. And, Mr. Speaker, they don’t talk 
about these things because it’s not only government that’s 
getting involved in it any longer, but it is private, private 
people, private organizations that are getting involved as well 
because they’re so intrigued with the expansion and the 
freedom of the educational system here in the province. 
 
Our computer-assisted learning and remedial help, student 
counselling services, there’s all sorts of different programs that 
we’ve introduced, Mr. Speaker, and programs for our native 
students. And when the members opposite had raised the fact 
that we had done nothing for native students, I want to indicate 
and give them an example. I want to give them an example of 
the brand-new education facility that was built at Poundmaker 
Reserve in my riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people have an enormously beautiful facility 
at Little Pine and Poundmaker Reserve, and they can share that 
facility, and it’s a huge facility, a modern, most modern facility 
with all, with all types of equipment and learning abilities that 
are introduced to those particular people. 
 
So when we’re talking about the accessibility for learning for 
the native people and they say which we aren’t offering, I take 
that point to task because it’s absolutely not true. 
 
Again, the members opposite, they seem to get a little upset and 
have to chirp from their seats continually, and they try to throw 
a guy off on the track that I’m trying to make here. But I want 
to . . . the track that I want to stay on here. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, is our commitment to 
education can be spelled out in such items as the 841 million 
that will be spent in 1989-90 to ensure that Saskatchewan 
citizens have access to the top quality basic schooling and skills 
and training and other opportunities to learn. I want to say, $841 
million is not chicken feed. And I know that every one of the 
members opposite would have wished, would have wished that 
they were now on this side of the House and being able to brag 
about those kinds of dollars that have been invested into the 
educational fund. 
 
(1645) 
 
I want to say that with those kinds of dollars and commitment, 
we’re not at all finished. There is so much more room for 
expansion. And I’m going to say, and I’ll give the members 
opposite this commitment: that as the years go by and as they 
rot in opposition or disappear from sitting on the opposition 
benches, eventually that as they are out and living in the real 
world out there and can get their heads around the real issues 
and see what is happening around them, that they will see that 
what they’ve said in this legislature is not at all accurate to what 
is happening in the real world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education spending for the 1989-90 will  
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

888 
 
 

mean an increase of $13 million in operating grants for school 
divisions and an increase of 6 million for teachers’ pensions and 
benefits. The government realizes that teachers are important to 
the development of our young people, and our students must 
continue to be taught by a high quality teaching staff. This 
government has ensured that this requirement has been met by 
providing an attractive pay and benefit package to teachers. 
 
Added to this, Mr. Speaker, over $14.5 million is being 
allocated from the educational development fund for special 
program improvements such as computer technology and 
resource materials, and 4 million will be provided for the 
continued expansion of the core curriculum program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1989 and 1990, almost 115 million will be 
provided in operating grants to our two universities, and almost 
70 million will go to the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I have read out these numbers, I have 
read them out because they’re actual numbers and they can pick 
them from the blue books. I want to indicate to you that when 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon South had 
stood in this Assembly and said it was cut, cut, cut . . . well, Mr. 
Speaker, when I look in, about $400 million in expenditure 
under an NDP government administration when they were in 
power during the good years, during the high revenues that they 
took into the coffers as they were government and didn’t spend, 
I want to indicate to you that $400 million under them versus 
$841 million in six short years, six short years, we’ve doubled 
what they’ve spent in their 40 years that they brag as having 
control of the administration in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they ought to be ashamed. They 
ought to be ashamed for the fact of standing in this Assembly, 
standing and making an accusation that this government has cut 
expenditures. A calculator just can’t make that kind of a 
mistake from 400 million to $841 million. I don’t care how you 
punch it, those dollars are being spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a colleague of theirs says, where is the white cane. 
And he’s right, he should ask that as he walked by me, behind 
. . . says where is the white cane. That’s right. They do have the 
blinders on, Mr. Speaker, and they all ought to have a white 
cane. 
 
But I just wanted to make that point because I can’t leave that 
unsaid because of the fact that they were talking about major 
cuts. And I want to indicate to you also, and I will give you 
some more numbers if you care to write them down. 
 
A further $24 million will be allocated towards skill training 
and distance education programs delivered through our regional 
college system and SIAST. The amount this government 
provides in student financial assistance has also been risen this 
year, and I had spoken about that a little earlier where there was 
approximately 13 to 14,000 students that had been provided 
with student loans. And it almost came out to . . . I don’t believe 
I mentioned the total in dollars, but it came out to about  

$34 million. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that as well, the 
government also recognizes that some students have greater 
financial needs. And we take a good, hard, serious look at that 
because there are more unfortunate people out there than others, 
and we have definitely tried to address the problem, and we will 
continue to address it. 
 
But I want to say that with the introduction, with the 
introduction of these various programs and everything else, I 
failed to bring to the members’ opposite attention, and it just 
triggered . . . that getting back onto just . . . and I wanted to 
make reference to this because I want it on record that when 
we’ve allowed the university classes to be taught through the 
community colleges and regional institutions throughout the 
province and allowed the enhancement for the students to be 
able to take advantage of that and live at home, etc., I want to 
also indicate to you that it had broadened it even further than 
that; it had opened this access to everyone — adults, everyone, 
the parents. 
 
And I for one know that this program had definitely been taken 
advantage of, and I want to congratulate the staff out in my 
particular region, at Lakeland College, because not only do they 
work from the nine till four or five, or whatever their day hours 
are, but they’ve also rallied around the administration, with the 
administration, to be able to introduce these programs in the 
evening, Mr. Speaker, in the evening, for people that had jobs 
and were working out in the work-force and couldn’t attend 
during day classes. So this was another — just on the side — 
benefit to everyone out in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the . . . and I’m going to read into the record 
also that since that special incentive program was introduced in 
1986, over 8,500 single parents, natives, and people with 
disabilities have benefitted by receiving over $22 million in 
forgiveable provincial loans to help them enhance their 
particular needs. And again they chirp from their seats, you 
know, they don’t care to hear these numbers. But it was $22 
million and it’s a lot of money — it’s a lot of money. 
 
In 1989-90 budget our $45 million will be made available for 
the student assistance, and that would be up $11 million, Mr. 
Speaker. So, you know, when you look at the accusations the 
member that moved this motion, and had indicated in the cut 
program that she was trying to convince the people of the 
province in her remarks with, was just ludicrous. 
 
In 1988 a total of 250 university classes were made available, 
and they were made available to 33 communities throughout 
Saskatchewan. And we’ve already discussed that, Mr. Speaker, 
as to what it did for our young people and what it did for our 
families, and single parents, and natives, and everyone could 
have that wanted to take advantage of a higher and a 
professional education. 
 
And I take pride in our technical institutions, and I want to 
congratulate the administrations and the staffs in our technical 
institutions for the quality of education they’re offering our 
trades people in this province. 
  



 
April 18, 1989 

 

889 
 
 

I want to say that our standards, Mr. Speaker, are shown just 
through the National Building Code, for an example. Much of 
what you see in the National Building Code that is now being 
adopted by all provinces in Canada are . . . a lot of those various 
regulations were adopted here in Saskatchewan. And I think 
that just shows the quality that our people have put into the 
trades program in this province, and indeed has taken it upon 
themselves to introduce it to all other provinces across this 
country. And I think that goes along with our inspection staffs 
as well, and everything else. 
 
So you know, when you look at the type of contribution at our 
administration levels and our teaching levels and our skills and 
our young people, I want to indicate to you that all these people, 
all these people ought to be highly congratulated because we’re 
second to none. And I don’t mind the members of the NDP 
opposition saying that there are some students leaving our 
province. I would tell you, Mr. Speaker, that a good degree of 
these students, yes, in some aspect, may want to leave the 
province, but that’s of their free choice, and that’s because they 
are contributing to other parts of the country, but they also sell 
Saskatchewan when they leave this province, because, Mr. 
Speaker, you can send . . . or you can have a student leave 
Saskatchewan, but you can’t take Saskatchewan out of that 
student. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I want to indicate to you that our Minister of 
Education has been keeping up with the times, and I want to 
congratulate him, I want to congratulate him on the 
Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network. 
 
I think this is going to service all communities in our province 
to a degree that is very, very hard to maybe grasp now, but I 
would think that in two, three, four years time, we’re going to 
be able to really kind of sit back and assess this and know that 
what we’re doing here today is definitely what the future will 
. . . that what we’re doing here today is what is going to be the 
future. 
 
And I want to say this much, I want to say that, Mr. Speaker, 
that although there is, there’s so much that a person could put 
around education and speak on in education that I think the 
young people in this province, I really think that they really 
know and they really feel that our Premier and this government 
has a vision, believes in them, believes in the youth in this 
province, and that we’re going to not let them down. We’re 
going to continue. 
 
And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that . . . oh, there is so 
much more that I could say in this matter, but I would like to 
move we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s motion to adjourn debate is out 
of order. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


