





























































Hansard: July 28, 1989


July 28, 1989 
 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 
Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker, and good morning to all members. 
 
We are this morning engaged in what can only be described as a very historic debate in 
the province of Saskatchewan, the debate over the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I think in another sense we are creating some history 
this morning in that I would . . . my guess is that this is the very first occasion when the 
people of Saskatchewan have been able to enjoy legislative debates as they enjoy their 
corn flakes. 
 
This is an historic occasion, Mr. Speaker, and it is a good morning because debate is 
flourishing in this province, that this legislature is open to legislators to present their 
views, and in the course of this day it is my hope that a wide variety of views will be 
presented around this debate, that the people of Saskatchewan might be fully informed by 
the comments of their legislators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are debating the reorganization . . . a Bill entitled the reorganization of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which might better be entitled a Bill . . . an Act 
to allow for the private participation in a public asset, an asset owned entirely by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I left Moose Jaw this morning to come into Regina, as I passed by 
many of my neighbours’ homes, I thought to myself, now just, I wonder just how many 
of my neighbours and constituents got up this morning and said to themselves, well I 
hope my government in Regina gets busy and sells off the potash mines. I wonder if that 
was the first thought on the minds of many people this morning as they got up this 
morning. 
 



Did they get up, Mr. Speaker, out of bed and say to themselves gee, I hope my 
government in Regina gets busy and gets those potash mines sold off? They find that that 
seems to be the number one agenda . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Perhaps at 8:05 in the morning we could start on a little 
quieter note and just allow the hon. member to proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, I just wonder how many of my 
friends and neighbours in the city of Moose Jaw, how many people across the province 
got out of bed this morning and I said, well I hope my government gets busy today and 
privatizes the potash industry, sells off our potash assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I bet . . . I would hunch that very, very few, if any Saskatchewan people this 
morning see as their number one priority for government the sell-off of the potash mines. 
Mr. Speaker, I hunch that there are very, very few people in this province who see 
privatization of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) as the major issue facing 
them, the major issue that their government should be involved with. 
 
Now I would expect, Mr. Speaker, this morning that a goodly number of people in 
Saskatchewan are happy to hear that at long, long last there is some word of a drought 
payment coming, happy to see that the wrangling between the province and the federal 
government over this drought payment has somehow been resolved. Mr. Speaker, I 
expect they’re happy about that news but not concerned, not concerned about Bill 20, an 
Act to sell off the potash corporation. 
 
I’m sure of it, Mr. Speaker, that four or five thousand people in this province are very 
anxious this day to know what’s going to happen in Alberta regarding their investments 
in Principal Trust. But, Mr. Speaker, I think you would be hard pressed, hard pressed to 
find anyone this morning who is sitting at their breakfast table saying to themselves and 
saying to one another around the table, well wouldn’t it be wonderful if the Government 
of Saskatchewan today got busy and got rid of our potash mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and yet we come into this House, we come into this House this morning on 
extended hours to do the business of the people of Saskatchewan, and the government 
opposite once again introduces Bill 20, Bill 20. 
 
Now what does that tell you, Mr. Speaker? It tells you that for members opposite the 
most important agenda is privatization — not to worry about investors in Principal Trust; 
not to worry about the people that are out looking for a job today; not to worry about 
those people who are facing a small business bankruptcy or farm foreclosure; not to be 
concerned about the interest rate policy of the federal government. 
 



No, the most important agenda of this government today, at 8 in the morning, is to sell off 
the potash mines of Saskatchewan. So we come to this House, we come into this House 
and the order of business today, again, is Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and let us be very clear, let us be very clear, Mr. Speaker, it is the 
government opposite who sets the agenda in this House. It is the government opposite 
who sets the agenda, who decides what is the priority issue on any given day of 
legislative sitting. And so we come today and we find again the priority of the 
government, the priority of this group of men and women, is privatization. 
 
Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I think that signals a government that is entirely out of 
touch, entirely out of touch with reality, with the realities facing Saskatchewan people 
this morning; a government that’s entirely out of touch, whose main agenda item is to sell 
off our potash mines. They say that’s the most important thing in Saskatchewan today, 
this Friday morning. That signals to me, Mr. Speaker, a government that is completely, 
completely out of touch — completely out of touch. 
 
I wish, Mr. Speaker, members opposite would speak to some of their constituents and 
hear what the reality in the province is today, because I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t want to see their government tying up the time of their legislature 
privatizing, privatizing, privatizing. And, Mr. Speaker, you know full well that that has 
been the major agenda item in this session. We’ve seen very, very little else; very, very 
little else except privatization, privatization, privatization. It’s a government that’s out of 
touch, Mr. Speaker, and it’s apparent again this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night in my opening remarks I tried to establish that for Bill 20, the Bill 
before us this morning again, this government has no mandate, has no mandate to 
introduce this kind of legislation simply because, simply because it was not presented to 
the people of Saskatchewan in the last election. In fact just the opposite, we did have 
ministers of the Crown going around saying, no, no, Crown corporations aren’t for sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tried to establish that this government has no mandate for this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we observed last night in the debate how this government seems to have had 
a change of heart regarding the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; how in fact 
consistently since they took responsibility for the management of the potash corporation, 
consistently the government opposite has upheld the potash corporation as an extremely 
valuable resource, a resource with great prospects for the future. And yet now we see the 
Premier of the province trying to justify the sell-off of this resource by describing it as an 
albatross. 
 
And so somehow we’ve had a change of heart, even from as recently as the most recent 
annual report, a report that notes we’ve this year, from the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, earned well over $100 million in profit. Now the government wants to 



make the people of Saskatchewan believe that that means it’s an albatross, for some 
reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this morning as I travelled from Moose Jaw I passed by the Kalium 
potash mine. And I’m reminded again of the value of that resource. And I see men and 
women at work at Kalium. Mr. Speaker, I see how that resource contributes to the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’m reminded again how that resource can contribute and will 
contribute, and not just for tens of years, but for hundreds and thousands of years, 
contribute to the feeding of the world’s people, this tremendously valuable resource. We 
are reminded by it each time we pass one of the mines in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m going to have to intervene. We’re all aware that this 
debate no doubt will go on for some time, and I think hon. members will just have to 
contain themselves. We can’t have interruptions all day, and you’ll just have to do the 
best you can under the circumstances and allow hon. members who are on their feet to 
continue with their remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, in driving to Regina this 
morning, I passed by the Kalium mine, and I’m reminded again of this valuable resource 
that exists in such abundance beneath the prairie soil of Saskatchewan, and how that 
resource will play a role for generations to come, for generations to come, in the feeding 
of the world’s people. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what makes this Bill so significant. That’s 
what makes this Bill so significant. 
 
We are talking about the most significant mineral resource in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the very core of this debate is who will control and who will benefit 
from that resource in the many, many, many years that it will continue to be developed 
and will continue to play a part in feeding the people of this world — that’s the core 
question of the debate: who will control and who will benefit from this God-given 
resource to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know and as al members in this House will know that we as a 
province fought hard in this century. We fought hard to earn the right to control our 
mineral assets. Now you will know that in 1905 when this province became a part of the 
Confederation we were not granted that right. We were not granted the control of our 
own resources as had been other provinces in the initial Confederation in 1867. We were 
not granted that control in 1905 and our parents and grandparents in this province fought 
extremely hard to achieve that control for the people of Saskatchewan. They fought for 
the control of our resources between 1905, and it wasn’t until 1930 or the 1930s that a 
change was made . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’31. 
 
(0815) 



 
Mr. Calvert: — . . . awarding control of our resources — and the Deputy Premier just 
reminds me it was 1931 — that control of our mineral resources was put into the hands of 
Saskatchewan people. That was a hard-fought fight, Mr. Speaker. And that control is 
again issue of debate, because this government opposite wants to sacrifice, through this 
Bill, wants to sacrifice that control to foreign interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is inconceivable to many of us, that a right that we fought so hard to 
win — and we can go through the events of the 1970s when again that battle was waged 
— and yet now we have a government that’s willing to simply give it away, to simply 
give away the control — and with the control of course goes the benefit — of that vast 
mineral resource that rests beneath the soil of Saskatchewan. 
 
And again I was reminded of it this morning as I passed by the Kalium mine. I saw the 
men and women going to work there to develop that resource for the benefit of the 
hungry in this world, Mr. Speaker. Because that’s what this resource does; it helps to feed 
the hungry in this world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent some time last night asking the House and myself, where does this 
idea come from? Where does the idea come from to sell off this resource, to sacrifice this 
control? It is not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Margaret Thatcher and Madsen Pirie, of course. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well now the Minister of Education just filled in the blank. He says it 
comes from Margaret Thatcher and Madsen Pirie, of course. 
 
So we’re happy to see now that the Minister of Education just filled in the blank. He says 
it comes from Margaret Thatcher and Madsen Pirie, of course. 
 
So we’re happy to see now that the Minister of Education is finally convinced of the 
argument that I was making last night, that this is not a made-in-Saskatchewan policy, 
this is not a made-in-Saskatchewan priority; it’s an imported policy and an imported 
priority, primarily, as the Minister of Education so rightly points out, from the 
government of Margaret Thatcher in Great Britain. 
 
What has happened in this province, Mr. Speaker, we used to take some pride in 
developing policy and program and philosophy that was made in Saskatchewan, that was 
pioneered in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we used to not so many years ago be leaders in 
the world, leaders in the world. Now we’re simply followers. And this government has 
chosen to be a follower of the government of Great Britain, the policies and the priorities 
of one Margaret Thatcher in Great Britain. 
 
Well I’m not equipped to comment thoroughly on the results of privatization in Margaret 
Thatcher’s Great Britain, but we are well equipped now to comment on the policies of the 



privatization initiatives of this government because we’ve seen lots of them. We’ve seen 
lots of them. In almost every case it’s been an unmitigated disaster. 
 
This imported policy from Margaret Thatcher’s Great Britain simply does not work in 
Saskatchewan. It simply does not work. It has no connection either to our history, to the 
make-up of our people; it is simply not working. It does not work to take this policy of 
privatization, put it into Saskatchewan, and it results in Bills like this. It results in a Bill 
like Bill 20 that wants to sell off our potash corporation and sacrifice, and thereby 
sacrifice control, and thereby sacrifice the benefits to out-of-province individuals, out-of-
province companies, and likely out-of-province nations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I ask why would any duly elected government of Saskatchewan, elected by the 
people of Saskatchewan, choose, rather than a made-in-Saskatchewan policy, choose to 
import a foreign doctrine and inflict it on the people who gave them the right to govern? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I simply do not understand that, nor do most people in this province. Most 
people simply cannot understand why a government duly elected in Saskatchewan would 
look to Great Britain, to a Conservative government in Great Britain for its policy. It 
indicates a vacuum, Mr. Speaker; it indicates a vacuum in thinking, in philosophy, in 
policy on the part of the government when they have to go to Margaret Thatcher for all of 
their ideas; when they have to go to her and hire her advisers to come into the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did you get medicare from? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, the minister shouts from his seat, and he had some opportunity in 
this debate and said very, very little. So, Mr. Speaker, those were some of the issues that I 
tried to introduce last night in some introductory comments to this Bill. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to look very closely at one of the arguments, one of the 
few arguments that has been introduced into this debate by the government. Their 
argument is, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve heard it not only in regard to the potash industry; 
I’ve heard it also used in regard to, for instance, the sodium sulphate industry in the 
province when the Sask Mineral privatization took place. This argument is a consistent 
argument of the government when they’re dealing with a mineral resource. 
 
They would argue, Mr. Speaker, that you don’t need to own the resource, either to control 
it or to reap the benefits. They argue you don’t need to own because what you can do or 
what you can use are other levers of government, primarily royalties and taxes and 
regulation. The argument is we can still reap the great benefit from the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan — which they admit is a great benefit; their own annual 
reports admit that — and their argument is that you can reap equal benefit by simply 
using the tools of royalty and taxation and regulation. Mr. Speaker, in my view that 
argument is simply bunk, it’s simply bunk — on two fronts, on two fronts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let us understand, let us understand with a Crown corporation like the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan or like Sask Minerals used to be, they exist in the province 



on an equal footing with the private corporations — on an equal footing, an equal player. 
No special privilege, Mr. Speaker, which means that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Sask Minerals, any like public resource company is obliged to pay to the 
Government of Saskatchewan exactly the same in royalties, in taxation. A public 
corporation like the potash corporation, like Sask Minerals, like every other corporation 
in the market, in the field, is required to follow all of the same regulations. 
 
And so the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan throughout its history, like IMC 
(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation), and like Kalium, Cominco, have duly 
paid their fair share of royalties and taxes; they’ve followed the same regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difference is the dividends paid. The dividends paid from Kalium, of 
course, go to the shareholders of Kalium. The dividends paid from the operations at 
Esterhazy and IMC, understandably they go to the shareholders of IMC. The dividends of 
the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation have gone to the people of Saskatchewan, the 
shareholders, the owners, the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the difference, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the difference. There’s no difference in the amount of royalty paid. Like 
every other corporation, the potash corporation has paid its fair share of royalties and 
taxation. The difference is, Mr. Speaker, we have also as a people received the dividends, 
and this government has been exceptionally good at pulling dividends out of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, and dividends out of other Crown corporations, for 
instance SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a people have benefitted from those dividends. We have benefitted in 
terms of the construction of roads in this province, in the construction of hospitals, in the 
construction of schools, in the programs offered to the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
all benefitted from those dividends. Now what this government wants to do is to take 
those dividends and transfer them to some foreign country, perhaps the Government of 
South Korea — I understand the Premier was in South Korea looking for a buyer; 
perhaps to the Government of India — I understand he was in India. 
 
So I don’t understand, you see, this argument, Mr. Speaker, that says that somehow we 
can tax and collect royalties and somehow still come out even, because no matter what, 
we are going to lose those dividends. And how does it make any sense at all that 
dividends which are now coming to the people of Saskatchewan should go to the people 
of India. I simply can’t understand that kind of thinking. 
 
Why would we sacrifice dividends which now come in the hundreds and millions of 
dollars to the people of Saskatchewan, why would we turn those dividends over to the 
Government of Japan, or to some corporation headquartered in Chicago? Is there any 
sense to that, Mr. Speaker? So, yes, the government will collect royalties, and yes, the 
government will collect taxes, and yes, the government will regulate. In fact that’s what 
we’re doing. And the potash corporation, and later in my remarks I’ll want to point out 
precisely how much the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has paid in terms of those 
royalties and dividends and taxation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so when the government 
argues that they . . . 



 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Member for Weyburn and the member for Regina North 
West are carrying on their own separate debate. I’d like to once more draw their attention 
to the fact that the member from Moose Jaw South has the floor, and let’s respect that 
position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And so I would argue that the argument put 
forward by the government that somehow we can attain the same financial benefits from 
the corporation through royalty and taxation is simply a bogus argument, because for sure 
we are going to lose the dividends. The dividends understandably would go to whoever 
owns the corporation. And this Bill proposes to take the ownership of the corporation 
from the people of Saskatchewan into primarily out-of-province and out-of-Canada 
investors. So on that score the argument carries very little weight with me. But on another 
score, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that we have been there. We have tried that 
route. There’s nothing new about a privatized potash corporation; nothing new about a 
privatized potash industry in Saskatchewan. We have been there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now perhaps members opposite use Henry Ford’s dictum which was to say that history is 
bunk. But, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, they ought to think more closely about the other 
dictum which says that if you haven’t learned the lessons of history, if you haven’t 
learned from the mistakes in history, then you’re bound to repeat them — doomed to 
repeat them. That’s what they’re about to do; they’re about to take us back. This is not 
forward-looking kind of legislation. This is regressive; this takes us back. It moves back 
faster than any one of us would want to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a — yesterday on the CBC, on the CBC radio, the Morning 
Edition, the program on CBC radio — there was a segment on privatization focused very 
closely on the privatization of potash. I found it to be a very, very helpful documentary as 
the CBC interviewers travelled across the province and spoke to university students and 
spoke to a group of primarily farming people in a café in Biggar. 
 
The only exception I took to the whole program was a little comment made by the 
commentator when he described privatization as the Premier’s bold, new initiative. He 
described it as a bold, new initiative, and then of course, when he went about asking the 
people of the province what they thought of this bold, new initiative, he received an 
earful. I’m not sure if you heard the program, Mr. Speaker, but he certainly received an 
earful about this bold, new initiative. 
 
What it is, it is nothing, it is nothing like a bold, new initiative. It’s a retreat; it’s a retreat 
to those days of — in our most recent experience in this province — of the 1960s and 
early 1970s. You see, the government opposite argues that we can achieve all the same 
benefits through royalty and taxation. 
 



Well you see, Mr. Speaker, we’ve tried that route, and not just a government of one 
political stripe. The government of Ross Thatcher, the Liberal free enterprise government 
of Ross Thatcher — of which the current Minister of Finance was a member — you see, 
that government tried the route of taxation and royalties to achieve benefit from this 
resource for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(0830) 
 
When our government, the New Democratic Party government, was elected in 1971, we 
tried that route; we sincerely tried that route, and, Mr. Speaker, it just didn’t work. And 
no more will it work today. It just won’t work. 
 
If I can, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to spend a moment reviewing some of those events of 
the 1960s and ’70s, because if we don’t learn from history, then we’re bound doomed to 
repeat the mistakes. 
 
Now the history tells us that in the 1960s we were getting peanuts, peanuts from the 
private potash industry in return for our resource. In the 1960s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to have to bring to the attention of the hon. member that the 
history of the development of the potash industry in Saskatchewan has been reviewed 
several times, and he’s going to have to be careful on how he addresses that issue. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I will take care, Mr. Speaker, to address the issue carefully. It is 
important to my argument, and I think to make my argument credible to members 
opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan, it is important to make my argument 
credible that I would just simply make wild accusations that somehow this didn’t work in 
the 1960s. So I want to use some specific illustrations from the 1960s and 1970s to 
illustrate my argument, and I’ll appreciate your guidance if I cross the bound. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, in the 1960s we were getting something like a two 
and a half per cent royalty, which can only be described as peanuts on this extremely 
valuable resource. And of course the private potash companies of the time were 
prospering, and understandably so. We were only getting two and a half per cent in terms 
of a royalty for our resource, and as I indicated earlier, we fought hard, fought hard in the 
early days of this century to ensure that that resource and the benefits of the resource did 
come to the people of Saskatchewan. When we were trying to regulate with royalties and 
taxation in 1960s, early 70s, we were getting something like two and a half per cent on a 
royalty. 
 
And in addition to that, there was just . . . the industry just operated as it saw fit. And so 
we saw that situation where to try and grab into a growing market, the potash industry, 
the private potash industry in the province, it went almost berserk in terms of expanding 
production. That’s back in the 1960s when the whole operation was privatized. And we 
were getting something like two and a half per cent in royalty, and we had an industry 



here in the province that tried to maximize their own profits, which I guess is fair enough, 
and went almost berserk in expanding production capability. 
 
I mean, that was the view shared by the then premier, Ross Thatcher. Again, not a New 
Democrat by any means — a Liberal free-enterpriser. He took a look at what this industry 
was doing in the province and he said, and I quote this, Mr. Speaker, from the late 
premier. He said, quote, referring to the private potash industry in Saskatchewan, what 
they were doing, he said: 
 

Seldom in the economic annals of Canada have we seen such responsible 
companies get into such an economic mess. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the goal of the private potash industry in the 1960s and 1970s, and fair 
enough, was to maximize their own profit with little or no concern to the implications to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to the industry generally. When the potash industry is 
privatized, when there is no public player in the field, what did we see? We saw an 
industry that went berserk. And so, as members well know, the response of the then 
Liberal government was to introduce a prorationing situation to get this private industry 
under control in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then in 1971 the Thatcher government was defeated. I point out primarily 
around a sell-off of a certain pulp mill in Prince Albert, was an extremely important part 
of that campaign. They were defeated on it. 
 
In 1971, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party came to government in this province 
and we sincerely . . . And I wasn’t part of government at that time; I’m reading this from 
the historical records. But, Mr. Speaker, at that time we sincerely attempted to work with 
the potash, the privatized, the private potash industry in Saskatchewan, where the 
ownership was almost entirely, if not entirely, out of the province. 
 
We as a government sincerely tried to work with that industry, sincerely tried to follow 
the route that the government now proposes, that we have a private industry in the 
province and that we just simply try and regulate and collect royalties and taxation. We 
did maintain the prorationing of the Thatcher years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1974 the world potash price went up, and in an attempt to secure a fair 
share of the revenues of the potash industry for the people of Saskatchewan, our 
philosophy being that these resources do belong, potash does belong, not to anyone else, 
but the people of Saskatchewan . . . Mr. Speaker, we wanted for the people of 
Saskatchewan in 1974 to reap some of this bonanza of the industry, and therefore we 
introduced what we call the potash reserve tax. 
 
Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, with this privatized potash industry in the province? 
What happened? Well they simply refused to pay. They refused to pay. They refused to 
disclose financial information on which the tax could be collected. They refused to 



provide to government the regular production reports, profit statements. They just simply 
refused. 
 
So here we were, Mr. Speaker, in a situation which the government now wants to 
duplicate in the future. They want to take this situation that we experienced throughout 
the 1960s when royalties were extremely low and potash companies in the province just 
did what they pleased in terms of production until they created what Ross Thatcher called 
was an economic mess. When the government of Allan Blakeney attempted to reap a fair 
share of the resource for the people of Saskatchewan with a new taxation in 1974, what 
happened? Well the private industry said, no, we’re simply not going to pay. 
 
Now I don’t know who of us as an individual citizen in the province could say that today 
when the Minister of Finance adds a new tax on. We can’t go to the lottery kiosk and say, 
no, I’m not going to pay my tax. But that’s precisely what the potash industry in this 
province did. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I argue in this debate this morning that this notion of achieving the 
benefits for the people of Saskatchewan through simply having regulation and taxation 
and no window into the industry and no presence in the industry in our province just 
doesn’t work. It just doesn’t work. It failed miserably in the 1970s under our government 
— a government that would. I submit, have more commitment to playing hardball with 
the potash industry than the government opposite would. 
 
Even with our government committed, a government committed to getting a fair return 
for the people of Saskatchewan, even with a government of New Democrats in place, it 
just didn’t work. The potash corporations of Saskatchewan, the private companies of 
Saskatchewan refused to pay, refused to pay. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the reaction then of the Blakeney government, as is well known, was to 
move a portion of the potash industry into the public domain, into public ownership, Mr. 
Speaker. And we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the hon. member please read to himself and not to 
the House. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was trying to hear 
what the member opposite was reading. I thought it might be a contribution to the debate, 
but apparently it wasn’t, and I’m glad that you’ve seen fit to ask him to stop reading out 
loud, although perhaps that’s the only way he can get through his reading is to read out 
loud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that I’m trying to make in this stage of my remarks and in the 
debate is that the government opposite says we just don’t need the public ownership, we 
don’t need the people of Saskatchewan to be a part of this extremely important industry 
in our province because we can reap all the same benefits through royalties and taxation. 
 



Well, Mr. Speaker, the argument in my view just doesn’t hold water for the two points 
that I’ve tried to make. One, the public corporation pays an equal amount of revenue in 
terms of royalty and taxation to the province, but in addition it pays dividends. We’re 
going to lose the dividends. Secondly, we’ve been there. We’ve tried this route. 
Successive governments in Saskatchewan have tried the route and it hasn’t worked. It 
hasn’t worked. 
 
If members opposite can stand in this debate and explain how it can work with this new 
legislation, I invite them to do so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the member 
from Yorkton asks me to sit down and he’ll be glad to get up and explain it. In fact I will, 
at some point, be sitting down and perhaps someone can note down on a piece of paper 
that the member from Yorkton is anxious to stand up and to get into the debate. 
 
There’s a parallel here, Mr. Speaker, that we might want to draw between the sell-off of 
the potash mines, a mineral resource, and the sell-off of some coal-mines in this province. 
Maybe the minister can . . . or now the member can explain that to us, why it’s advisable 
to sell resources to out-of-province owners so that they can reap the benefit. Maybe he’ll 
want to explain that in terms of his coal-mine sell-off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so the argument that says that you can attain the same benefits for the 
people of Saskatchewan through royalty and taxation in my view just doesn’t hold any 
water. We’ve been there, and this government now wants to take us back there, wants to 
take us back to when all of the potash industry in Saskatchewan was in private hands. 
That’s where they want to take us, to take us back. It should not be described as a bold 
new initiative; it should be described as a retreat to past times. When the people of 
Saskatchewan took control of a portion of that resource, when they took control of the 
destiny of the resource, now that, Mr. Speaker, was a bold new initiative — bold new 
initiative — pioneering across the world, as Saskatchewan has done in past and will do 
again, Mr. Speaker, and will do again when this group of men and women are no longer 
government. 
 
But what they want to do in Bill No. 20, in this sell-off of our potash corporation, what 
they want to do is take us right back, right back to where we were, right back to where we 
were, Mr. Speaker, and that’s unacceptable. That’s unacceptable to me, and I’m sure to 
members of this caucus, and I am sure to the vast majority of the people of 
Saskatchewan, because on this we are agreed, on this we are agreed, myself and members 
of this caucus and the vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan, on this we are agreed. 
 
That resource, that potash that is beneath the soil in Saskatchewan belongs to the people 
of this province. That is our constitutional right that we fought hard to get. That potash 
belongs to us and therefore the benefits from that potash should accrue to us. That’s our 
position, Mr. Speaker, that a fair share of the resource from Saskatchewan soil ought to 
accrue to the people of Saskatchewan who own the resource, who own the resource. I 
mean, no one, no one, no one with some sanity would own a valuable resource and 
simply want to give it away. And again we’re talking about a resource that’s a valuable 
resource, not for one generation but for generations and generations. And yet we have 



here before us a Bill that wants to do just that — wants to take a valuable resource and 
somehow give the benefit away to others. 
 
(0845) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not understand that; I do not understand that. And the position of New 
Democrats and the position of the vast majority of Saskatchewan people is that that 
resource and the benefits of that resource ought to accrue, first of all, to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it can accrue to the people of Saskatchewan through both royalty and 
taxation, through a mixed industry, and through dividends paid to the shareholders, to the 
people of Saskatchewan, from a publicly-owned potash industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that we review some of the financial statistics that 
come from the annual reports of the potash industry, the broad-based potash industry, the 
entire industry in Saskatchewan, as well as looking at some of the facts and the figures 
from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have had a potash industry in Saskatchewan from about the mid-1960s when the 
technology was finally accomplished that we could mine the potash. And so from the 
1960s, the mid-1960s until today, the late ’80s, we have had a potash industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The industry was first established under the Liberal regime of Ross Thatcher in the 
1960s. It prospered during the 1970s. It has remained a strong and vibrant contributor to 
the Saskatchewan economy throughout the 1980s. And it will, Mr. Speaker, it will 
continue to do that for years and years and years, generations to come. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair that we should look at how much of the benefit of 
this resource and of this industry has accrued to people of Saskatchewan since its early 
days. And at this point I am looking at the industry totals — not simply the potash 
corporation, but at the industry totals. 
 
And so if we go back to the period of the Liberal government in the province under Ross 
Thatcher, if we look at the years from 1965 to 1971 when the free enterprise Liberal 
government was in office in Saskatchewan, when the industry was privatized, entirely in 
private hands, and when the government of the day felt that the benefit could be achieved 
through royalty and taxation, well, Mr. Speaker, in those years, ’65 to ’71, five to six 
years, the royalties and taxes that accrued to the province of Saskatchewan from the 
potash industry totalled $15.7 million — 15 million, $16 million. That was the benefit 
that accrued to the people of Saskatchewan directly in terms of the financial contribution 
to the treasury of Saskatchewan from the industry — $15 million in a period of six years, 
five to six years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we jump to the next decade and look at a period of five to six years, 
and we take the five to six years between 1976 and 1981 and now, Mr. Speaker, we have 
in Saskatchewan a New Democratic Party government and we have a publicly owned 



potash corporation as one of the players in the market-place. If we look at that five-year 
period we find that royalties and taxes paid to the provincial government in that five-year 
period, Mr. Speaker, amounted to $985 million. Compare that, compare that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the five years of the Liberal, the last five years of the Liberal government in this 
province, through its policy of royalty and taxation and an entirely private potash industry 
in the province, the people of Saskatchewan received to their treasury, through royalties 
and taxation, a totally of $15.7 million — not even $16 million. In a five-year period 
under a New Democratic Party government, with a publicly-owned potash corporation in 
the field, that total was $985 million. The difference, Mr. Speaker, is something like $970 
million. That’s the difference, in an equal period of time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not hard to figure out that the people of Saskatchewan were 
benefitting to the tune of $985 million. That money was coming into the provincial 
treasury. That money was keeping taxes low, individual taxes low in this province. That 
money, that $985 million that we collected in royalties and taxation was paying for things 
like medicare and parks and education. 
 
Now the Liberal free enterprise government with the private potash industry collected 
$16 million. In a five-year period we were able to collect $985 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can move into the new regime of the Tory government in 1982 to 
1986. Now what did we collect in royalties and taxation in those years? Well, whereas we 
were collecting 985 million — this is just royalties and taxation — the Tory government 
in a similar period of time collected 274 million. And somehow it took a drastic drop. 
The contribution from the industry through royalty and taxation to the treasury of 
Saskatchewan somehow too a drastic drop about 1982. Now that . . . I guess that begs 
explanation. The only explanation I can give it is that somehow the management 
changed, the management of the province and the management of the potash corporation. 
 
We recovered, on an equal number of years, the New Democratic Party government in 
this province recovered $711 million more than has been recovered by this government 
from the same resource in the same period of time. Now, Mr. Speaker, you see this is the 
government that says that they can get the benefit from the resource through royalty and 
taxation. That’s their argument. They say they can do that. Well their own track record 
says they can’t. We were able to — and this is from the industry total — we were able to 
achieve a total of $985 million in royalties and taxation in a five-year period. This 
government, it’s best effort was to produce a revenue of $274 million. 
 
They want us to believe that in future somehow they can achieve the same benefits 
through royalty and taxation as was being returned to the province of Saskatchewan in 
the years of the 1970s. Well that just stretches credibility, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
important to note, too, that we’re not here talking about . . . when we’re talking the 
industry total, we’re not talking about a difference . . . Now they may want to explain the 
difference in saying, well look, you were selling a lot more potash in the 1970s than we 



were in the 1980s, and that’s why you were able to get more in terms of royalty and 
taxation. 
 
Well that’s simply not accurate, Mr. Speaker. It’s important to note, I think, that between 
the years 1977 and 1981 there were 32,682 million tonnes sold. Now the figure for the 
period ’82 to ’86 was 31,000. So we’re talking really, in essence, a difference of about a 
thousand or 1,300. The production sold, Mr. Speaker, was essentially the same — some 
small decline in the 1980s, some very small decline, but not enough to account for a 
decline in royalty and taxation of $711 million. The only thing that changed, therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, was the government. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member has gone over the details of that era. It’s a repetition of 
another member’s arguments, and I believe he should move on. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Thank you for your guidance. 
 
Then I think it is important, just in summary, to note that under a New Democratic Party 
government, royalties and taxation flowed to the treasury, and under a Progressive 
Conservative government that seemed to dry up extremely on production totals that were 
very close to the same and on price that was very close to the same, the price of the 
product. And there I’m talking about the industry total. 
 
It’s important, I think, in this debate — of course it’s important — to look very closely at 
the performance of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan itself, because that’s the 
corporation we’re essentially debating here, and that’s the corporation that this 
government wants to give away, saying somehow that we can achieve the same benefits 
in some other form. So I think it is extremely important that we consider very closely the 
performance of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in its years. 
 
And maybe I can just summarize, Mr. Speaker, and then I’ll want to refer to some more 
detailed figures. But if we take 1976, which was the first year of the operation of the 
potash corporation in Saskatchewan, the company paid a million dollars — a million 
dollars — in royalties and taxation. In the first year of operation, that company alone — 
and it’s just in its embryonic stage — the first year paid a million dollars in royalties and 
taxation to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And on top of that, the company generated for itself a profit of half a million dollars. In 
the initial embryonic year the company paid a million dollars to the treasury of 
Saskatchewan and earned for itself a profit of a half million. 
 
We go to 1977. In that year the potash corporation paid to the treasury of Saskatchewan, 
and through that treasury therefore to the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, that 
corporation, the potash corporation, paid in 1977 $16 million — $16 million — in 
royalties and taxation. Taxes and royalties paid $16 million. And in 1977 the profit of the 
corporation was $1.1 million. That’s still in its early stage. It’s now paying 16 million, its 
second year of operation, 16 million royalties and taxation, and the profits were 1.1. 



 
In 1978 the corporation paid to the people of Saskatchewan, our company, our potash 
company paid to we, the people of Saskatchewan, $35 million in royalties and taxation — 
$35 million royalty and taxation, and that year made a profit of 25, 25 million. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, that is an extremely impressive record for a very young company 
competing head-on with some very experienced companies in the business. And that says 
a great deal, that says a great deal about Saskatchewan people, about what Saskatchewan 
people can do. They can move into a market-place like that and in three years be turning 
a profit of $25 million head to head — head to head, Mr. Speaker, with the private potash 
companies that have been in the province and been in the market-place for years. 
 
We go to 1979, the potash corporation paid $58 million royalties and taxation to the 
people of Saskatchewan through the provincial treasury. And in that year, Mr. Speaker, 
the profits of the company, the profits of the company in 1979 — $78 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a phenomenal story of a company coming into the resource market — 
this is a phenomenal story: a half million dollars in its very first year, a million dollar 
profit the next year, $25 million the next, a $78 million profit in its fourth year of 
existence. And it’s very appropriate to note in this debate that this is all money — all 
money — that is coming from outside the bounds, outside of the boundaries of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The potash mine, we market outside the province of Saskatchewan, and every dollar of 
profit that we’ve earned has come into this province from out of province. Every dollar 
that has gone into the provincial treasury is a dollar that we’ve earned somewhere out 
there in the world market-place, be it in America, in China, or India. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a phenomenal story; in anybody’s books, this is a phenomenal story. 
 
But we come now to 1981, 1980 and 1981, and listen to this, listen to this, Mr. Speaker; 
in 1980, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan paid to the people of Saskatchewan, 
with royalties and taxation, $90 million — $90 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member from Wilkie doesn’t seem to find these figures very interesting. He should 
find these figures very interesting because this $90 million that the potash corporation 
paid in 1980 perhaps built a road in his constituency, or perhaps helped fund the hospital 
in his town. He should take some interest in this money because he’s going to have to 
explain to his constituents where precisely he intends to get this money that was accruing 
to the people of Saskatchewan when he sold the whole industry off. 
 
I’ll await his remarks in this debate. I’ll await his remarks in this debate to explain to this 
House and to explain to his constituents precisely where he intends to replace this money. 
How does he intend to replace this money that accrues to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
He’s got two choices. He can continue to run up his debt which now stands something 
like $13 billion. He’s run that up in seven years. Or I guess he can follow the other 
traditional Tory route and that’s to tax people, to tax individuals. I mean, that’s what 



we’ve seen so far in this whole privatization debate. That’s the theory of the government 
— you give away the resource revenue, you give away the resources, and you’ve got to 
make the money up somewhere. 
 
(0900) 
 
So what do they do? Well then we come up with wonderful schemes like used car taxes, 
used car taxes. We come up with wonderful schemes like lottery taxes to try and replace 
the money that they’re going to lose. Flat taxes. I mean, it goes on and on and on. 
 
And at the same time we just go on borrowing and borrowing and borrowing, getting 
ourselves into deeper and deeper debt with the bond dealers in New York and London 
and Zurich and Tokyo and who knows where else. And at the same time we’re losing 
services and programs. 
 
Now the member from Wilkie wants into the debate, and that’s fair enough. That’s 
entirely appropriate. And so on my list now is the member from Yorkton who wants into 
the debate. And I hope somebody in marking this down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
apologize. The member from Regina South is next. So if somebody would please note 
that down, the member from Regina South will be following me in the debate, and then I 
take it the member from Wilkie and the member from Yorkton will want to get into it at a 
later point. 
 
So in 1980, Mr. Speaker, we received as a province $90 million in taxes and royalties 
from the potash corporation, and that year, Mr. Speaker, that year the profits of PCS 
totalled $167 million. That company in 1980, our company, the company that we own, 
that we should take much pride in, the company that we own, in 1980 had a profit of 
$167 million. 
 
And that should make any shareholder rejoice, and it should make any person in the 
province of Saskatchewan so proud, so proud of their company, so proud of the people, 
the Saskatchewan people that were managing the company to achieve this kind of record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in 1981 . . . Mr. Speaker, I forgot a very important thing. In 
1980 the potash corporation was in a position where it could pay, it could pay in addition 
to the royalties and taxation, in 1980 it was in a position where it now could pay a 
dividend, a dividend to the people of the province, the shareholders of the company, the 
owners of the company. They were in a position in 1980 to pay a dividend. And do you 
know how much that dividend was, Mr. Speaker? Do you know how much it was? Fifty 
million dollars — $50 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Calvert: — Its first dividend paid in four years, Mr. Speaker. In four short years the 
company was in a position with its equity, it could pay a dividend to its shareholders of 
$50 million in addition to the 90 million paid in royalties and taxation. So that year alone 
the people of Saskatchewan, from the potash corporation, earned $140 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, do you have any idea how much can be done for the public good with 
$140 million? Mr. Speaker, do you understand how many hungry children in the province 
today we could feed? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Each member will have the opportunity to participate in 
the debate. If several members attempt to participate at the same time, of course we’re not 
going to have orderly debate, as I’ve indicated earlier. And therefore, I once more ask for 
the co-operation of members to allow this debate to proceed in an orderly fashion. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Let me move on to the year 1981. In 
1981, the royalties and taxation paid by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to the 
people of Saskatchewan, through their treasury, they paid $71 million in 1981. The 
profits that year, the profits that year of this proud Saskatchewan company were 141 
million. That year it made $141 million, 1981. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? Again in 1981 the company was in a good position 
to pay a dividend to its shareholders, and again we received — we the shareholders, we 
the owners, we the people of Saskatchewan — received a dividend of another $50 
million. Now that, Mr. Speaker, in two short years from the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, with dividends paid over and above the royalties and taxation required by 
law. Over and above the royalties and taxation, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
paid to the people of Saskatchewan — to we, the people — 100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that represents, yes, that represents $100 for every man, woman, and child 
in the province — every man, woman, and child in the province at the same time. And at 
the same time, we were steadily paying off the debt so that by the end of 1981 the debt in 
the corporation was down to something like $88 million. 
 
That’s a phenomenal story, Mr. Speaker. In anybody’s books, that has to be a 
phenomenal story. A corporation who enters the industry in 1976, in its embryonic stage, 
and by 1980 and ’81 is able to pay to its shareholders $100 million — $100 million in 
profit, $100 million in dividend. And of course we know, or we should all know in this 
room what $100 million can do for people because that’s what these dividends do — they 
do for people, they do for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They provide surgical wards. They provide cancer clinics. These dividends provide parks. 
These dividends provide schools for our kids. These dividends provide roads that we can 
drive on. These kind of dividends provide support payments when farming people are in 
trouble. That’s what these dividends can do. 
 



They take revenues from our resource and put them in the hands of Saskatchewan people 
where they’re needed, and not, Mr. Speaker, and not into the hands of the corporate 
friends of the Tory Party, or into the hands of some foreign government. 
 
That’s what this Bill wants to do, Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 20. It wants to take these 
kind of dividends and pay them not to the people of Saskatchewan, not to the people’s 
treasury. They want to take these dividends and pay them to foreign governments so that, 
I guess, foreign governments can do for their people. Or they want to take these dividends 
and give them to investors from Toronto or New York or Chicago or Minneapolis so that 
those shareholders and investors can do for their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it makes no sense. We have a corporation here in the province that, I mean, 
in the first five years of its existence pays millions, hundreds of millions of dollars in 
terms of royalties and taxation to the people, and in addition can pay a hundred million 
dollars in dividends. Now, Mr. Speaker, I remind you that in those six years between 
1976 and 1982 those were six straight years of profit — six straight years. 
 
And it’s not just, Mr. Speaker, we oughtn’t to just think it’s the provision of money to the 
treasury that is the only contribution of the potash corporation to life in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important to note that during those same six years when the 
company was contributing so generously to the people of Saskatchewan financially, it’s 
important to note that Saskatchewan people were being employed by that company as 
they are today, not in as great number today as they were then, that’s for sure. 
 
But I note, Mr. Speaker, at the initial outset of the corporation, there were 1,164 
employees. By 1982 the corporation had grown to employ 2,267 employees — 2,267 
Saskatchewan men and women had found meaningful employment through the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Now that is no small contribution to the life of our 
province and to the life of a number of relatively small communities in our province who 
benefit very directly from 2,267 jobs in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the company was a phenomenal success. A company that could grow from 
employing 1,164 people at the outset, to employing 2,267 people by 1982. That’s a 
phenomenal growth, and no one, no one should underestimate the role of that 
employment in Saskatchewan’s life and in the life of those communities where the mines 
are located. 
 
No one should underestimate that because, you see, when you’ve got 2,267 people 
working, bringing home a good wage, that money, that wage that’s being brought home 
goes into those small communities. That money is spent on Main Street; it’s spent in the 
grocery stores; it’s spent in the hardware stores; it’s spent in the hotels. That money 
immediately has a multiplier effect. We all know that. Just as we know when jobs are cut 
back, there is just the opposite effect. The effects are felt on Main Street, Saskatchewan 
right away. 
 



By 1982, we had 2,267 people working for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
That’s a major, major contribution to the economy of Saskatchewan, not just to the 
treasury of the government, which obviously it was a major contributor, but also to the 
economy of Saskatchewan and Main Street Saskatchewan, downtown Saskatchewan, to 
the small-business community. And of course the effect goes on, the effect goes on into 
the larger centres in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we saw, I mean, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . we saw in those years very low 
unemployment rates in this province. We saw people working. We saw people being able 
to buy their homes. We saw people being able to stay in Saskatchewan and make a future. 
So contrary to what we see today because now after this privatization mania that we’ve 
encountered primarily in the last two or three years, what do we see? We don’t see people 
finding work in Saskatchewan; we find people fleeing the province, fleeing the province 
to work elsewhere. 
 
A neighbour of ours, this very week, is seriously considering moving with his family and 
his children, moving to British Columbia in search of work. Mr. Speaker, when the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was employing 2,267 people, there were jobs in this 
province, and people could find their future here and they could look forward to life here. 
We didn’t see this kind of exodus from the province. We didn’t see these 13,000 people 
leaving in the first six months of this year alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of PCS in the late 1970s to 1982 can only be described as 
phenomenal. And as I pointed out earlier, by 1982 the debt in the corporation was down 
to $88 million. And just by the way, Mr. Speaker, to be clear about this, the debt wasn’t 
held in New York — it was not held in New York as the Minister of Finance seems to 
want to indicate. Now fair enough, he’s piled debt on the corporation, no doubt about 
that. And he went to New York and he’s got a bunch of the money out of New York. But 
let’s be absolutely clear that prior to 1982 the debt on the corporation was $88 million, 
and I don’t think a dollar of that debt was held in New York. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite now want to describe a corporation . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, thank you. I take it now that the member from 
Melville wants to get into the debate and we’ll look forward to his contributions. I’ll 
welcome his contribution to the debate if he wants to show precisely where the debt was 
held prior to 1982. Let him do that in this House, from his feet, not from his seat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well sit down. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well now the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd who . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is that by 1982 the potash 
corporation — and no one can dispute this; it’s straight from the annual reports, it’s 
straight from the audited annual reports — the debt in the potash corporation was $88 



million, and had returned to the people of Saskatchewan, already, $100 million dividend 
in addition to the hundreds of millions of dollars of royalty and taxation. 
 
And in addition to that, we saw over 2,000, well over 2,000 people employed, and we 
saw, Mr. Speaker, of course, we saw a head office for the very first time, a head office of 
a major corporation located right here in Saskatchewan. Right in Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan we saw, as my colleague from Regina pointed out last night at some 
length, we saw world class — world class, to use the Premier’s phrase — research and 
development going on around the industry, and we saw it going on right here in the 
province. 
 
(0915) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t see that. We didn’t see a head office here in Saskatchewan. 
We didn’t see Saskatchewan people chairing the boards and presiding over a potash 
company. We didn’t see head offices here. We didn’t see research and development 
going on in Saskatchewan when the whole industry was in private hands; we didn’t see 
that. 
 
We saw it when the people of Saskatchewan took their share of the industry. When we, 
the people of this province, entered the field then we saw dividends coming to the 
treasury. We saw people employed. We saw a head office in Saskatchewan. We saw 
research and development taking place right here in the province — not in Chicago, not 
in Minneapolis, but right here in Saskatchewan. We saw Saskatchewan university 
graduates finding extremely meaningful employment and opportunities, jobs right here at 
home. 
 
Now they want with this Bill No. 20 to take us back, to take us back to when the whole 
industry is owned by private sector. They want to walk us right back to that situation 
where there’s no head offices in Saskatchewan, where there’s no research and 
development going on in Saskatchewan, when there’s no dividends from the industry 
being paid to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They want to take us right back. And if their record in privatization is an example — and 
it must be an example; it’s all we can judge the government on its record — if their 
record in privatization holds true, and there’s no reason to suspect it won’t, we’re not 
going to see an increase in employment. We’re going to see a decrease in employment 
because with their privatization issues . . . You look at Saskoil, you look at SaskMinerals. 
What have we seen? We’ve seen the loss of jobs. 
 
Now we’ve already seen this government in its management of the industry severely cut 
back the jobs available through PCS, and I think it’s important that we look at some of 
those figures as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just to move from this point. It cannot be argued that PCS was not a phenomenal 
success story in the years 1976 to 1982. I just don’t think anyone could credibly argue 



that that was not a phenomenal success. And if members opposite want to try, I invite 
them to do so. I invite them to do so. 
 
Now the minister is interested to hear some of the figures, the actual figures that come 
from the annual reports. This is a compilation, Mr. Speaker, of the annual reports of the 
potash corporation from 1976 to 1978. And I think I’ve dealt at sufficient length with 
figures regarding 1976 to 1982, although one area I did not identify which I think it’s 
very important to identify is the market share, because the success of a corporation like 
PCS of course depends entirely or almost entirely on market shares. If you can’t gain a 
share of the market, you’re just not going to be a player in the field. 
 
So if I can, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to go back and review some of those years. The first 
year of operation, that embryonic year, the PCS, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, was able to achieve 1 per cent of the market share. We were a very small 
player, a very small player in that first year. 
 
By 1977 our market share had increased to 13 per cent; by 1978 the market share for 
PCS, the Canadian market, was 31 per cent; by 1979 it had climbed to 36 per cent; by 
1980 to 38 per cent. Mr. Speaker, by 1981 we were at 37 per cent. And now again, 
evidence of a phenomenal success story for a new player on the field. 
 
Going head to head against the private firms our company, our potash resource company 
was able in four short years, Mr. Speaker, to gain 38 per cent of the market share. Now 
that cannot be underestimated or understated. That’s a very significant record for a new 
company to develop 38 per cent of the market share. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, then we look to the years following 1981 — ’82, ’83, 
’84, ’85, ’86, ’87, and of course the latest figures we have are the 1988 figures from the 
’88 annual report. Now it is important to note that something happened in 1982 because 
our market share immediately fell off. The market share in 1982 fell from 37 per cent of 
the market share to 32 per cent of the market share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Weyburn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Would the Hon. member permit a question about market share 
between the 1981 and ’82 market years, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Would the hon. member entertain a question? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the minister direct his question to his own 
minister responsible for this corporation. If he has some questions about the management 
of his corporation, he ought not to direct them at us, he ought to direct them at the people 
who’ve been responsible for the management. 
 



Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the market share declined from 37 to 32 per 
cent. Now that . . . Mr. Speaker, these figures come from the annual reports, from the 
annual reports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member misinterpreted what I 
wanted to ask him. I’ll even accept his figures for purposes of the question, but I would 
like him to answer a question about those figures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member from Weyburn has asked if the hon. member will 
entertain a question. That request was in the bounds of the rules. It’s up to the member 
from Moose Jaw South to decide. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Speaker, I will not. In this . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Weyburn is so anxious to almost, almost on the quarter hour to interrupt the debate — 
and it really doesn’t matter who is involved in the debate — almost on the quarter hour he 
thinks it’s important that he should interrupt the debate. We went through this last night, 
and nauseam, with the member . . . the Minister of Education, who, if he isn’t talking 
from his seat, is interrupting the proceedings. Now there’s ample opportunity for this 
minister to make his point in the debate. There will be ample opportunity. Will he stand 
and speak in this debate? Well it remains to be seen. Well he nods his head, so that’s 
another one we can put on the list to expect — the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point of order is with respect to 
relevancy. For days and days now I have listened to the members of the opposition speak 
with respect to the members of the government entering the debate. Of course the 
members of the government can only enter the debate when the members of the 
opposition sit down. I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that such references in their speeches 
are not relevant, are out of order, and they should cease and desist from speaking about 
and at the members of the government when their topic is irrelevant. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we’ve reached the limit on this particular point. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reference to government speakers . . . I’ve 
listened to the member from Melville. The reference to government speakers, I think, is 
relevant because this debate started April 20, and a total of three MLAs, government 
MLAs, have joined this debate, and that’s just not acceptable. This is supposed to be a 
debating forum to some extent. We would welcome their input into this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Melville has raised an issue; the member from Regina 
North has responded. The point of order is not a point of order that he has raised. 
However, perhaps if debate between members across the floor would cease, we wouldn’t 
have this issue arising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m anxious to address these facts and 
figures and not to engage in dialogue with the ministers across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the figures that are taken from the annual reports, the 
audited figures from the annual reports beginning in the year 1982 — and I remind you in 
1981 royalties and taxation from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan paid to the 
treasury of Saskatchewan was $70 million. Now in 1982 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve also been listening to the hon. member closely, and by and large 
he’s been within the bounds of the rules. I believe he’s now slowly beginning to repeat 
himself, and I wish to bring that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the figures now, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
conscious to describe figures that I have no previously talked about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the revenues to the province, to the people of Saskatchewan through 
royalties and taxation from the potash corporation throughout, from 1982 on, have ranged 
15 million, 10 million in 1983, 17 million in 1984, 10 million in 1985, 13 million in 
1986. And again I compare . . . you know, those figures are a fraction of the royalties and 
dividends that were being paid during the late ’70s and early ’80s. 
 
The minister from Swift Current, now she’s anxious to enter the debate. She talks about 
the price of potash. Well, Mr. Speaker, she can correct me if I’m wrong, but the 
information that I have indicates that the average price for potash ’77 to ’81 was 109.50 
— $109.50. 
 
Now we’re talking ’82 to ’86, the average price $106 — a three dollar difference. Now 
that’s a small difference — a three dollar difference — 109 to 106. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister will have ample opportunity, if she wants to, to challenge 
these figures and debate them. We look forward to that. The information that I have 
indicates that the price ’77 to ’81 was 109, and ’82 to ’86 was 106. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
what we’ve seen then is a decline since 1982 in the royalties and taxation paid to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we also note from the annual report figures is that the net income of 
the corporation, which would be the profit, the profit, Mr. Speaker, the profit picture 
takes a significant turn after 1982, so that in 1982 the profit totalled $1 million. Well over 
$100 million the year before, in fact 142; now in 1982 it’s a $1 million. Then in 1983 for 
the very first time in the corporation’s history, for the very first time it loses money — it 
loses $18 million. That’s 1983; that’s the first time it lost money, in 1983. 
 
But what is strange about 1982 and 1983? In 1982 when the corporation, when its profit 
was $1 million, the new managers, the government opposite, came along and took from 
the corporation $50 million in a dividend. Now they were making money that year, they 
made 1 million, but the government came along and took $50 million dollar dividend. 



 
Now in 1983 when the corporation lost money, lost $18 million, what happened? Well 
the Government of Saskatchewan, the new managers, the Tory Government of 
Saskatchewan, came along and they took $62 million from the company in dividends. 
Now does that make any business sense, Mr. Speaker? 
 
An Hon. Member: — So what? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well now the member from Wascana says, so what. I’ll tell you so what 
— you’re bankrupting the company. When a company is losing money, that’s not the 
time to withdraw dividends in massive amounts. In two years you people took $112 
million in dividends out of a company in the same period of time that lost a total of 17 
million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member from Wascana thinks that makes 
good business sense. 
 
Now in terms of the management provided by a New Democratic Party government . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The government opposite seems to think it makes good 
business sense that when a company’s losing money that you should rob it of dividends. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t pretend to have any more business acumen than most people 
in this province, perhaps less than some, for sure, but it just . . . again, it does not make 
sense to me that when a company is in some financial difficulty — and we could discuss 
the reasons for that difficulty, but obviously there was some difficulty in 1983 — it lost 
$18 million. 
 
Well along came the Government of Saskatchewan and took from it $62 million. Now 
why would anybody do that unless they were all of a sudden already this early in their 
administration desperate for cash? Already they were becoming cash starved, so they 
look around and saw they could take $62 million in 1983 from the potash corporation; in 
1982 they took $50 million — 112 million in two years to accomplish the goals of their 
government because they were, frankly, blowing it on the other front, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(0930) 
 
As we carry on, in 1984 the company rebounded somewhat and earned again a profit of 
$25 million. Again the government came along and took a dividend, this time 12 million, 
and again $25 million profit compared to 167 and $142 million profit in the ’70s. But 
then, Mr. Speaker, the tragedy begins that in 1985, 1986, and 1987, in those three 
consecutive years the company lost money — $69 million, $103 million, $21 million. 
And it wasn’t until last year, as we’ve pointed out earlier, that the company now, even 
under their management, has earned $106 million profit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what the people of Saskatchewan are asking themselves is this. 
We had a Crown corporation that in its first six years of operation never failed to make a 
profit; a Crown corporation that paid hundreds of millions of dollars in royalties and 
taxation to the people of Saskatchewan; a Crown corporation that paid $100 million in 
dividends to the people of Saskatchewan. All of a sudden things go wrong. All of a 



sudden things go wrong and this company starts losing money and the debt starts piling 
up and piling up. And they say to themselves, Mr. Speaker, well what happened — what 
happened? 
 
Well the truth of the matter is the administration changed. That what we have is a new 
administration, a new management of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a new 
administration that finds themselves in a very, very peculiar situation, because these are 
the men and women who fought tooth and nail, tooth and nail to prevent the formation of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. This group of men and women, for some of 
whom their entire, I think, political existence revolved around opposing the public 
ownership of the potash industry. Now this group of men and women find them in charge 
of it. Now as someone else has pointed out, we’ve got Colonel Saunders in charge of the 
chicken coop. So what happens? What happens, we get new management and the 
company starts to decline and the debt starts going up. That’s what happened. 
 
Now the people of Saskatchewan say to themselves, if I owned a business and I hired a 
manager, appointed a manager to attend to that business, and that manager simply started 
to ruin my business by pulling out dividends when they shouldn’t be pulled out, by 
heaping up the debt and so and so on, by shutting down some of my assets, destroying 
and essentially destroying my best efforts at marketing — if that kind of management 
came in, what would I do as a shareholder? Well I’ll tell you what I’d do. I wouldn’t sell 
the company, I’d get rid of the management. I would get rid of the managers. 
 
That’s, Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan are saying when they view the 
potash corporation, because they know what a phenomenal success story it was prior to 
this government’s management. They know what has happened since this government 
has been the managers, and they know that the only solution is to get rid of this 
government. That’s the solution. The solution is not to sell off the industry; the solution is 
to get rid of the current management. 
 
Now that’s what any reasonable person would do. Good grief, if we owned a small 
business on a Main Street in Saskatchewan and turned it over to somebody who drove the 
thing into the ground, you’d quick enough want to get rid of them. And that’s precisely 
what the people of Saskatchewan are saying about this government — we just need to get 
rid of the managers. That applies not just to the management of the potash corporation 
but it applies, Mr. Speaker, to the management of the entire financial affairs of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn in my remarks . . . and I listened with interest to the Deputy 
Premier when he made his intervention in this debate, and he, in his interventions, talked 
about Bill No. 20, the Act to reorganize the potash corporation. He addressed this Bill, 
primarily talking about Saskoil, and fair enough, Mr. Speaker. He wanted to draw a 
comparison of a privatization initiative to another privatization initiative. He did that in 
his remarks. He spoke at great length . . . not at great length, excuse me, that’s a mistake, 
Mr. Speaker. But in terms of his remarks, the bulk of those remarks were focused on 
Saskoil as an illustration of privatization. 



 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s fair enough. We certainly can’t believe what this 
government says, that’s for sure, and that’s been well documented. And the only thing 
that we can judge the government on is its record. And when we’re talking about the 
privatization of potash, then it’s reasonable, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to judge what 
will happen on the basis of what has happened in terms of privatization. 
 
The Deputy Premier did that in his remarks, and I thought that was fair enough. 
 
Now we’re, Mr. Speaker, here talking about the sell-off of a mineral resource. And so I 
think a very appropriate kind of comparison should be made with . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member from Wascana now wants into the debate, and I hope 
someone notes his name down as one who wants to get into the debate; the list is 
building. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you sit down so we can get caught up? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I will sit down in due course, Mr. Member, you can be sure, although 
you’re convincing me I should perhaps go a little longer. I think it’s fair, Mr. Speaker, to 
compare, as the Deputy Premier did, one privatization so that we can learn something 
about what’s going to happen here with potash, if in fact members do not change their 
mind, if in fact they persist in selling off this valuable resource. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am most well acquainted with the situation in terms of the 
privatization of Sask Minerals, and there are, I think, some similarities, and there are 
some differences. 
 
Now in terms of the potash corporation, a significant difference is that to sell off the 
potash corporation to out-of-province investors, it means that it must have legislation to 
do so. That’s why we’re debating this Bill. 
 
It requires legislation for this government to accomplish this sell-off of our potash 
corporation. No such legislation was required in terms of Sask Minerals. And so in the 
case of Sask Minerals, what happened was a secret deal negotiated behind closed doors 
and a quick sell-off of the resource and the industry to two out-of-province corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! We’re talking the dead of night. That goes with behind 
closed doors, in the dead of night. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Wascana suggests that it happened in the 
dead of night. Perhaps he’s right. What I do know is this, that the sale of Sask Minerals 
was accomplished in a deal negotiated by your government, a deal that was not publicly 
discussed for debate until it was finalized. The ink was on the agreement before any 
debate took place. 
 



Now that can’t happen here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That similarity cannot exist because 
this privatization, this sell-off of our potash company can only be accomplished through 
legislation. Now I suspect that the government opposite wishes it were not so. I suspect 
that the government opposite wishes they could have just got rid of our potash industry in 
the same way they got rid of Sask Minerals, without any public debate, just announced 
that the thing is a fait accompli. So in that regard it’s a significant difference. 
 
But if this thing every passes, and if we ever see our potash industry privatized, I predict 
that many of the results of the privatization will be the same as the results we’ve seen 
with the privatization of Sask Minerals. Now in the case of Sask Minerals, ownership 
now is entirely out of the province. The ownership and control is entirely out of the 
province. There can be no debate about that. The assets of Sask Minerals have now been 
sold to Kam-Kotia and Premier Cdn, two out-of-province companies. So the control of 
Sask Minerals is gone. 
 
Now the potash corporation — the minister wants me to talk about the potash 
corporation; fair enough. There is absolutely nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing in 
this legislation that ensures a share, one share, must be held in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, not one share must be held, according to this legislation, in Saskatchewan. Now 
I’m not saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not saying that for sure every share will be sold 
outside of Saskatchewan. There will be some Saskatchewan people. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would argue in this debate that control, that control will leave this province. 
 
Now this government wants to permit by this legislation that 45 per cent of the shares, 45 
per cent of the shares can be held by those who do not reside in Canada — not in 
Saskatchewan. Forty-five per cent of the shares can be held by people who do not reside 
in Canada. They can reside in South Korea, they can reside in Japan, they can reside in 
China, they can reside in India, they can reside in Chicago, Pittsburgh of the U.S.A., they 
can reside in Zurich — 45 per cent of the shares can be held there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that says that very, very easily control of the resource company can 
fall outside of the province of Saskatchewan. If you’ve got 45 per cent of the shares 
outside of the province, it’s not difficult to put together enough of those shares to control 
the industry. Again, you don’t need to be a financial wizard to figure that out. It doesn’t 
take wizardry to know that if 45 per cent of the shares can exist beyond the borders of 
Canada, you can, without much difficulty, get control of the company. Now that leaves 
55 per cent of the shares available within Canada, but not restricted to Saskatchewan, but 
within Canada. 
 
So very likely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll see what has happened in Saskoil — shares 
soon gravitate to the financial centres. That’s understandable. Everybody knows that. 
That’s not . . . shouldn’t be a surprise that shares will very soon gravitate to the financial 
centre of Canada, which is downtown Ontario, on Bay Street, Toronto. 
 



That would not surprise anybody to see that happen. If 55 per cent of the shares are to be 
sold in Canada, it shouldn’t surprise anyone to know that very quickly, because that’s . . . 
I mean, history just demonstrates it, that the shares will end up in downtown Toronto. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we will see is what we have seen with the privatization 
of Sask Minerals — control and ownership of our resource, our company, lifted, lifted 
from the people of Saskatchewan and deposited somewhere else. And of course with the 
control, with the ownership, goes all the benefit — all the benefit. 
 
So all those dividends, those hundreds of millions of dollars in dividends that were paid 
to the treasury of Saskatchewan, that the dividends that this government took as well, will 
no longer accrue here; they will accrue to shareholders beyond the borders. It could easily 
mean that 45 per cent of all those dividends will be leaving the country — 45 per cent of 
those dividends could be leaving the country. 
 
If we took the years ’80 and ’81, when the company paid a hundred million dollars in 
dividends, if we’re saying that 45 per cent is held outside the country, well that’s $45 
million gone — gone — from the Saskatchewan economy into someone else’s economy, 
be it the Government of India or shareholders in Japan or Chicago or wherever. 
 
In that way, the privatization of the potash industry, I think, will parallel what we’ve seen 
happen out at . . . with the privatization of Sask Minerals — control and benefit leaves the 
province. 
 
Now again, I point out that Sask Minerals, like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
Sask Minerals paid royalties, taxes, and dividends, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and dividends. 
And we recognize that the Sask Minerals corporation is very small, is very small when 
compared to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Sask Minerals is a small company. 
But this little company, this little Sask Minerals — and it was developing a resource in 
Saskatchewan, a resource belonging to the people of Saskatchewan, constitutional right 
— this little company was able to pay $40 million, $40 million in revenues, in dividends, 
in profits to the people of Saskatchewan — $40 million from this little Sask Minerals. 
 
Well it’s gone now. Now the dividends go to Toronto, now the dividends go to Montreal, 
and I suspect there are very, very few shareholders who live in Saskatchewan, in Premier 
Cdn or Kam-Kotia. So you know the benefit of our resource is now being transferred 
right from the salt flats out there at Chaplin, right from there down to downtown Toronto. 
 
Now in terms of potash, the proposal is to take the revenue from the resource — zip! — 
from our earth to the bankers in Japan, and shareholders, and the government. 
 
(0945) 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you feel about your employees’ profit-sharing? 
 



Mr. Calvert: — Now the minister wants me to talk about profit-sharing. I don’t know if 
the minister has visited with any of the employees — and I certainly have — but, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, he likes to talk about . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member from Regina Wascana to 
allow the member from Moose Jaw South to continue his debate. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the member raises the issue of 
profit-sharing, and I think that’s an appropriate issue to raise in terms of a privatization 
debate. And you bet I’m in favour of profit-sharing. I’m in favour of sharing the profits of 
potash with the people of Saskatchewan, I tell you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And I am not, I am not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in favour of sharing the 
profits of the resource of Saskatchewan with the Government of India or the Government 
of China or the Government of Japan or investors in Chicago or wherever. I’m in favour 
of those profits being shared with all the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I in fact do see wisdom in profit-sharing in an 
identified company. 
 
The government also seems to like to involve itself in profit-sharing. It likes to involve 
itself in the profits of others through taxation. It’s heavily involved in sharing the profits 
of individuals in this province with its taxation policies, grabbing as much as it can from 
the hip-pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers. So I guess we believe in profit-sharing; we 
just put a different light on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So what we had in Sask Minerals was a small resource company developing a resource 
that belonged to Saskatchewan people, employing people, and that was part of the reason 
that Sask Minerals was begun. It was an employment creation because young men and 
women were coming home from the war in the mid and late ’40s and that was an effort to 
employ some of those people. Sask Minerals, like the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, an important employer. 
 
Now what happened with privatization? That’s a fair question to ask. Employment is 
important. It’s extremely important in our province. Well we’ve seen job loss; we have 
seen job loss out at Sask Minerals. There are fewer people working there today than there 
were when it was a publicly held company. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I extrapolate that to the potash industry. A privatized potash 
industry very likely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will employ fewer people than does the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. You see the bottom line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
difference here, the bottom line for the private owner is profit. That’s understood. We 



understand that; everyone understands it. The bottom line for the private company is to 
return a profit to their shareholders. 
 
Their bottom line is not to consider social good, not to consider the good of the 
community in the province in which they operate. That’s not their first priority. Their first 
priority is profit. That’s fair enough. 
 
Contrast that to a publicly owned company whose first priority is to serve the people who 
own the company, i.e., the people of the province. And you get quite a little different set 
of values, Mr. Deputy Speaker, quite a different set of values and therefore quite a 
different kind of management and organization, so that employee concerns and 
consistency in employment becomes a major issue for the corporation, and not just a 
minor issue that can be excused because of the need for greater profit. So with Sask 
Minerals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen job loss. We’ve seen job loss at Chaplin, and I 
predict that that’s a fairly decent guide to suggest that we’re going to see job loss if in 
fact this government gets away with privatizing our potash industry. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can look at other privatizations and we can see some of the same 
things happening — job loss, loss of revenue to the province, and I think it will be 
important, as the people of Saskatchewan consider this Bill, that they review the activities 
of this government in privatization, what has been accomplished, and what has gone so 
drastically wrong, to know what we can expect from this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to move on because I think it is important as well for us to be 
very seriously concerned, because obviously we’re going to lose some revenues. If we 
privatize potash we’re going to lose revenues. I mean, that’s just patently obvious. A 
company that in two years, ’80 and ’81, paid a $50 million dividend to the treasury won’t 
be paying that dividend any more, and I think it’s extremely obvious that we’re gong to 
lose some of that resource, some of that revenue, and we need to consider what that 
money is doing, and we need to be considering: well, how is it going to be made up? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to digress for a moment, and I don’t want members 
opposite to jump up on their feet right away. I want to link this very closely with the 
debate under hand. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I arrived home last night I had a note 
on my counter from a constituent of mine, a significant constituent of mine, actually — 
my wife. And it was good news, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I’m just going to tell you 
what was on the note; nothing private here. 
 
On the note it said, mark on your calendar — referring to me — mark on your calendar 
Greenwater, December 27 to 30. That’s what the note said. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
don’t know if you have ever travelled to Greenwater Provincial Park. If you haven’t, I 
recommend it; it’s a marvellous park. 
 
I knew it, I knew it . . . I knew he’d be on his feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Weyburn . . . 
 



The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker, under rule 25(2). I would fail to 
see the relevance of (a) a note from the hon. member’s wife about a vacation in 
Greenwater Park, December 27 to 30, when the item before the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is Bill No. 20 relative to the potash debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Are you speaking to the point of order? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to the point of order. It’s been 
common courtesy in this Assembly for a long, long time that when a member says he’s 
going to relate it to the subject under discussion, he’s given the courtesy of the time to 
relate it. The member has had about five or 10 seconds to attempt to relate it, and the 
member for Weyburn is on his feet. I suggest that a suitable amount of time should be 
given to the member to relate to the subject under discussion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve listened to the point of order. I’ve listened to 
the points made by the member from Saskatoon Westmount. I’ve been sitting here 
listening to the debate. I will have to say, though, that the member from Moose Jaw South 
did indeed indicate he wanted a minute to bring his point into play, and I find the point of 
order not well taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I sincerely say that I’m going to relate this 
very directly to the Bill under debate as very quickly as I can. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you have ever visited Greenwater Park you will know that within 
the bounds of that park there are a number of log cabins, beautiful log cabins placed in 
that park for the enjoyment and the benefit of Saskatchewan families. And I can say as 
one who has more or less regularly had an opportunity to spend a few days each year in 
one of those log cabins, that it’s a marvellous facility, marvellous facility, and it’s 
reasonably priced. It’s an opportunity where families can be together at a reasonable 
price. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in those log cabins, and if members opposite have visited 
them they will know this as well, on the mantelpiece of the fireplace, there’s a little 
plaque. And the little plaque in those cabins indicate that those log cabins have been 
provided with revenues from Saskatchewan resource, that those cabins were provided 
with revenue from Saskatchewan resources. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, primarily, primarily they were provided with revenues from 
uranium, potash, oil. 
 
We’re here debating a Bill that says we’re going to lose those kind of revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. Do you see, with that kind of revenue we can provide park space, we can 



provide park space for people. With revenues from potash, from dividends being paid by 
the potash industry, we can provide park space for people. We can provide the kind of 
thing that you find in Greenwater park and elsewhere all over our province. opportunities 
for families, opportunities for families. We can provide for people and we can provide for 
children, with revenue from potash. 
 
Now why would we want to give that revenue up? Why would we want to do that? I 
simply do not understand, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Cut Knife-Lloyd, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can’t seem to grasp the argument. It’s a simple 
argument. We have had revenues from potash. I mean, you people, your government have 
taken millions and millions of dollars in dividends out of potash. Do you deny that? 
You’ve taken millions of dollars out of potash. Do you deny that? Do you deny that you 
have taken millions of dollars out of potash? 
 
Well the fact of the matter is you have, as we did. We did it when the company was 
strong; you did it when the company was in trouble. We made profits and from those 
profits took dividends. The dividends that accrued to the people of Saskatchewan could 
be used for the people of Saskatchewan to be used to create park facilities, for one — 
park facilities that I’ve enjoyed, my family has enjoyed; park facilities that hundreds and 
hundreds of Saskatchewan people have enjoyed, reasonable park facilities. 
 
Now why would we want to sacrifice that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why would we want to 
give that up? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here the estimates of spending of this government for the current 
year. Now let’s just say . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Several times this morning the member from Cut Knife-
Lloydminster has been reading something. I’m not sure whether he’s repractising his 
speech or what. But I wonder whether or not you could bring him to order. 
 
There seems to be a direct attempt by members of the government side to make a 
mockery of this important debate that is going on here. This is a historic debate, not 
unlike the pipeline debate back in the 1950s, or the debate that went on in 1975-76 on the 
issue of potash. And I think the intent, the political intent of this government is to make a 
mockery of the debate. 
 
And the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd persists in reading some document from his desk. 
And I’d ask the Deputy Speaker, who I know has been watching as well and listening to 
the second debate going on from his seat, that he would rule on that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 



Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Speaking to the point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 
opposite raise questions about members of this side of the House speaking while the hon. 
member from Moose Jaw South drolls on. Over the past 100 days, anybody that’s been in 
this House knows that any volume of noise coming out of this House clearly comes from 
that side. 
 
The hon. member from Regina Elphinstone talks about this historic debate about the 
pipeline debate. In the pipeline debate the galleries of the media were full with media 
people. Today and in the last several days or several weeks the media has not even 
attended the debate and that’s how much they put on this as how historic it is. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve listened to the point of order and the rebuttal. I do 
find, however, and I bring it to the attention of all members of the House, that there has 
been over the last period of days a significant amount of interaction between members. 
And I ask all members to co-operate and allow the member from Moose Jaw South to 
continue his speech. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this point in the debate the argument that I’m 
trying to bring to the debate is simply this. The potash corporation has shown by its 
history, its potential to contribute vast numbers of dollars to the provincial treasury, to 
contribute hundreds of millions of dollars in dividends to the people of Saskatchewan 
through their provincial treasury. When we were government, contributed $100 million. 
This government itself has taken from the potash corporation well over $100 million in 
dividends. And it’s with that money earned by the resource, money that if it’s privatized 
we just don’t have any more. No one can say that we will have it because it’ll be gone to 
the new owners, the new shareholders. I’m here just talking about dividends. 
 
What we can do for the benefit of Saskatchewan people with that money is the point at 
hand. My first illustration was to say that we can build park space. We can build the kind 
of cabins that were built up at Greenwater with resource revenue. 
 
(1000) 
 
Now it’s . . . yes, before perhaps I leave the Greenwater situation, it’s my understanding, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they too shall be privatized along the way. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m trying to make the case that dividends from resources, dividends from the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan can play a phenomenal role in the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now I have the estimates here, Mr. Speaker, for instance, in this year. In the year 1989 
and ’90 the government has budgeted $67 million, $67.6 million for school construction, 
school construction, $67 million. You see, with $100 million in dividends from the 
potash corporation, we could double, we can double almost the number of schools that 
are built. We can take resource from potash, from the potash corporation dividends, and 
build schools. That makes good sense to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



I look in the estimates and I note that the entire budget, the entire budget for the 
Department of the Environment, the whole budget for the whole department is $11 
million — $11 million. In two years, ’80-81, we received $100 million in dividends from 
the potash corporation. That’s 10 times what we spend on the Department of the 
Environment in the province. You know, we could almost have 10 times the work being 
done in the environment, through the Department of the Environment, with that kind of 
money. 
 
On and on it can go, Mr. Speaker. The whole budget for the Department of Highways this 
year is $123 million, all the work we’re doing in Highways. If we look in the Department 
of Health — I turn up the Department of Health — special care services in the province 
now, that’s $200 million we’re spending. That’s a lot of money, but half of that, half of 
that money that we spend for special care needs in our province, appeared in the treasury 
from two years of dividends from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The question is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this money is not available to the Government of 
Saskatchewan, where will it come from? The needs are as real today, if not more real, 
than they were last year or the year before that, and before that. The demands on 
government for health care and education are higher. 
 
We have now in this province the new factor of having to pay interest on the public debt 
that will be a burden on governments for many, many years to come. How, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are we going to meet those challenges if we do not have the revenues of our 
resources, and particularly the revenues from potash? Because, as has been clearly 
identified in this debate, it is a resource unlike any other in this province. It’s a resource 
that we can count on for hundreds of years. 
 
Why, why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we know the future is going to demand of 
government greater financial commitments to health care and to education, when we 
know that a $4 billion operating debt is going to have to be paid off some day? We 
simply can’t carry this debt burden for ever. And each year now we’re paying something 
in the neighbourhood of 400 million, $390 million every year just to pay the interest 
payments in the debt that’s been created by this government. Every year it costs us $390 
million just to pay interest payments. How are we going to do that, Mr. Speaker, if we 
don’t have the kind of resources for the Government of Saskatchewan that can come from 
a publicly owned corporation like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well again I say there are very few, there are very few options for a government. If we 
sacrifice this source of revenue, if we sacrifice resource revenue, then precisely, Mr. 
Speaker, where do we get the money to provide the services for the people of 
Saskatchewan, to provide the health care and to provide the parks and to provide the 
kinds of services that government needs to provide for people? 
 
Where does the money come from if you don’t have the resource revenues? And 
obviously this government’s not willing to get it through royalties and taxation. And now 
they want to give up the dividends. So where do we get the money? 



 
Well there’s essentially two choices. You can go to the bankers in New York or the 
bankers in Zurich or the bankers in Tokyo and try and borrow some more. I think that’s 
becoming harder and harder for this government, given the financial situation. You can 
borrow your way, I suppose, through it, which is what this government has done since 
1982, or you can tax individuals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has tended to use a combination of both borrowing 
and increasing taxes on individuals. But, Mr. Speaker, I submit that that well is soon to 
run dry. It is not going to be possible for this government or any future government to be 
taxing people at a greater level than they’re now being taxed. People have reached the 
limit, Mr. Speaker. People have reached the limit on what they can contribute through 
taxation to the operations of this government. 
 
Since they came to power, just think of the number of taxes they’ve heaped on. Flat tax 
— that novel, wonderful idea that we’ve got in Saskatchewan that doesn’t exist anywhere 
else, this wonderful flat tax that’s gone up and up and up. That’s right. We’ve got a sales 
tax in the province that’s gone up. I mean, the commitment was made that it was going to 
disappear, but in fact it’s gone up to 7 per cent. We’ve had, you know, novel taxes in the 
province — novel taxes — the used car tax. 
 
And you see all of these taxes trying to replace revenues that have been lost from the 
resource sector. When you lose the revenues from the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, they must be made up, and the options are limited. So this government has 
chosen: one, to debt finance; and two, to tax. And so we’ve seen this long list of taxes. 
We have a new one now trying to replace lost revenues from resource. We’ve got this 
new tax called the lottery tax, a tax on charities and lottery players. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question needs to be answered. If we are willing to sacrifice this kind of 
revenue, then, Mr. Speaker, where is it going to come from? Where is it going to come 
from? We either borrow it or we tax it, neither of which, neither of those two options, I 
think, are appropriate any more. We are way too far in debt already — way too far in debt 
already, and people are being taxed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I want to ask the member from Cut Knife-
Lloydminster to co-operate. And while there is a certain amount of interaction permitted, 
I think the hon. member is going perhaps beyond the bounds of what’s normally 
acceptable, and I ask him to co-operate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to conclude that point, the question is 
simply this. Where does the money come from to do the things that a government must 
do and the things that government wants to do? For the quality of life of the people of 
Saskatchewan, where will the money come from if we sacrifice this kind of source of 
revenue for the future and for all time, Mr. Speaker. 



 
Now that’s a question, that’s a question that people in Saskatchewan are asking, and 
they’re not getting clear answers from their government. And I think it’s appropriate in 
this debate that I should bring to the debate the kind of things that I believe the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying and the kind of things that I know people of Saskatchewan are 
saying, having said them to me. 
 
This legislation must be judged in the public eye and it is being judged in the public eye, 
as is the government, as is their entire privatization initiative. They are being judged in 
the public eye. And the verdict, Mr. Speaker, is not good on behalf of this initiative or on 
behalf of the government. 
 
And there are a number of questions that the people of Saskatchewan have about what 
their government is doing, privatizing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, not the 
least of which is, why is this their main agenda item? Why is this the first thing they want 
to put on the agenda day after day after day after day after day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well there are a variety of ways to judge public opinion, to test public opinion, to know 
what the people of our province are thinking. One of those ways of course is the polling 
technique. Now rarely, Mr. Speaker, has a national polling firm focused entirely on 
Saskatchewan to do a poll. That doesn’t happen very often. But it happened, Mr. Speaker, 
in light of this government’s privatization initiatives. 
 
Now that’s one thing this government has generated, is some national interest, and that’s 
for sure. We get headlines and articles in the Toronto newspapers and we get national 
pollsters coming to Saskatchewan. They’re generating headlines, that’s for sure, Mr. 
Speaker, and giving us national attention. 
 
Well all members are, I think, aware of a poll that was done in this province in early May, 
a poll that was testing privatization, a poll that was testing opinion about the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. It’s one way, Mr. Speaker, to test what the people of the 
province think. 
 
I don’t want to at length go through this poll. I think most members are aware of its 
results; it was conducted by Angus Reid. It polled 806 Saskatchewan residents. It, 
according to Mr. Reid, reflected the geographic distribution of Saskatchewan’s 
population. A very specific question was asked in the poll about the very Bill that we’re 
now debating, about the Bill to privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. The 
Angus Reid poll asks: what about the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan — do you support or oppose that policy decision. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that was the question put to 806 Saskatchewan residents by a national 
pollster. The response are as follows. Those who support the privatization of potash, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, those who support that policy decision are 28 per 
cent. Twenty-eight per cent of people of Saskatchewan support what the government’s 
doing, according to the Angus Reid poll. 



 
And, Mr. Speaker, that poll was taken way back in early May, essentially before the 
debate around the issue had started. And I suspect if the poll was taken today that figure 
of support would be lower because people are coming to understand what’s at stake here. 
And I suspect if that poll were taken today, that 28 per cent would be lower. 
 
But even when it was just sort of an idea, the people of Saskatchewan, less than one-third 
of the people of Saskatchewan support what the government wanted to do in selling off 
our potash industry. And as we well know, the opposition to their other privatization 
initiatives was even a higher opposition. But in terms of the specific question on potash, 
28 per cent, that’s all they’ve got for support for what they’re doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that I find interestingly translates approximately to their support as a 
political party, understandably, understandably. That’s the kind of support they have now 
as a political party in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a government that seems to be bent on pushing this privatization in 
spite of — in spite of — the opinion of the people of Saskatchewan. Now the Angus Reid 
poll is not the only polling that’s done in the province, and that’s for sure, and I think 
we’re all well aware that this government, from it’s beginning, has existed by polling, by 
checking out public opinion. 
 
And I am confident they have been polling these past number of weeks and months to 
find out what the people think about their legislation. And I’m just as confident that their 
polls are telling them the people are not happy; that the people are not happy with what 
they’re doing; that the people of Saskatchewan think this is a mistake; that it’s a poor 
choice of direction for a government to be following; that it’s a tragedy that we’ll be 
selling off this valuable resource. I’m sure, I’m sure their polling is telling them that. 
 
So I am left only to conclude, Mr. Speaker, then, that what we have here is a government 
that no longer cares about the opinion of Saskatchewan people. It no longer cares about 
public opinion, that in spite of what the people think, well they’re prepared to go ahead 
and do this. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that again makes little or no sense to me because, you know, it’s not 
that many months or years to the next provincial election. Now why would a government 
be so arrogant as to so go against the tide of public opinion on this issue? It can only 
indicate . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, relative to polling, would the hon. member permit a 
question? And perhaps the question would be, Mr. Speaker, that would he share with us 
the polls . . . 
 
(1015) 
 



The Speaker: — Order, order. I don’t believe the hon. member can state the question first. 
He may ask if the hon. member will entertain a question, then we’ll get the response from 
the member from Moose Jaw South. 
 
Will you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are . . . If the minister is interested in poll results, he only needs to 
read the Leader-Post. I mean, there’s no . . . these are not . . . there’s nothing secret about 
these poll results. If he wants poll results, let him read the Leader-Post, the May 3 
edition. 
 
Here it is, plain and simple, the Angus Reid poll, a nationally conducted poll in the 
province of Saskatchewan says that 28 per cent, only 28 per cent of the people of the 
province support what these people are doing. And I don’t understand that, a government 
that’s soon drawing near to a need to be re-elected. Why would they so blatantly, 
blatantly go against the feelings and the opinions of the people of the province they’re 
supposed to represent? It can only be described as arrogance, as a government that is so 
completely out of touch, and a government that has simply gone way too far in this 
privatization agenda of theirs, way too far. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, polling is one thing. I mean . . . that’s one . . . My colleague asks what 
the number opposed again were. The opposed to the privatization of potash was 50 per 
cent. Fifty per cent of those polled, exactly half, were firm, firm, firm in their opposition 
to what the government was doing, and 21 per cent of the people polled were not sure at 
that point. Twenty-one per cent were not sure. Now I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that if this 
poll were taken today that those folks who were not sure in May would be sure now, 
because they’ve seen what this government intends to do. They’ve seen that this 
government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you would bring to order the Minister 
of Education and the minister for piratization, who both seem to be very sensitive about 
the comments being made, and interruptive . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I appreciate the member from Moose Jaw North’s concern 
about interruptions. However, I also do feel that if we raise points of order each time a 
member opens his mouth we’re going to have a lot of points of order from both sides of 
the House. However, having said that it is in order to once more remind the hon. 



members not to interrupt the speaker each time you disagree with something he says. I 
must say that you, too, will have the opportunity to put your views on record. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this poll that was conducted in May is clearly one 
illustration of the way people of Saskatchewan feel. And I was just, I think to fill out the 
picture, and I should have done that initially, to fill out the picture — the polling 
indicated that 28 per cent of the people, just 28 per ;cent, less than a third of the people of 
Saskatchewan support what the government’s doing. A full 50 per cent of the people, half 
of the population of Saskatchewan are firmly opposed to what the government is doing. 
And at that time, 21 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan were not sure, were not sure 
about this potash privatization. 
 
But my prediction, my hunch, Mr. Speaker, is if the poll were taken today the 21 who 
were unsure in early May, I tell you, that figure would be a lot smaller now because now 
the people of Saskatchewan know, now they know that the government intends to let this 
resource, to let this corporation slip into foreign hands. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are not happy with the thought of their resource, their resource, which 
returns dividends and revenues to them, beginning to return dividends to other nations. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the hon. member, and as I said 
earlier, by and large he’s done a good job of his speech. However, the last while, perhaps 
because he has spoken a considerable length of time, he’s beginning to repeat himself, 
and I wish to bring that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your intervention, Mr. Speaker, 
polling is one way to judge public opinion. Now as an individual I’m not prone to trust 
polls. I just have a thing about that. I’d sooner trust my own conversations . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I think the Minister of Education agrees with me. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
sooner trust talking to people; I’d sooner trust talking to people face to face. I’d sooner 
trust meeting people downtown, meeting people in a service club that I belong to, 
meeting people door-to-door, as we all do, go door-to-door and meet our constituents and 
speak to them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or when you’re shopping at the Co-op. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Sure, when you’re shopping at the Co-op. That’s the public opinion that 
I’m more comfortable with than polling results. So I want to report to the debate today 
and to the House what people are saying that I talk to, that I talk to. 
 
One, they are saying, Mr. Speaker — and I think the government should listen if they’re 
concerned about their future as a political party and as a government they ought to listen 
to this — people of Saskatchewan are saying, all across the province wherever I’ve been, 
that this government has gone too far. That’s what they’re saying. They’re saying, yes, 
we wanted a change in ’82, fair enough, and the people got a change. 
 



Now they’ve seen the change and they say they’ve gone too far; they’ve gone too far in 
this privatization mania; they’ve gone too far in selling off the resources that we own. 
And with the potash Bill they’ve simply gone too far, and therefore it’s time . . . Mr. 
Speaker, they’re saying, therefore it’s time for a change again; it’s time for a change. 
 
They’re saying this, Mr. Speaker, and I think these are valid points and valid questions 
that should be dealt with by government members opposite. If privatization is so good, 
like, if the sell-off of the potash corporation is sort of the crown jewel of the privatization 
efforts thus far, if privatization is so good — people are asking this — then how come my 
taxes have gone up? They want to know that. Like, how come if privatization is so good 
that my taxes have gone up? And how come if we’re selling off the assets of our 
province, if we’re selling off the assets, how come, people ask, that the deficit continues 
to grow? Like, how can it be that we are selling off the assets and yet at the same time the 
debt continues to climb? 
 
The people are asking, you know, if privatization is so good how come my taxes have 
gone up; how come I’ve seen all these additional taxes put on me? If privatization is 
working, why is the deficit still climbing? If privatization is working, why are the 
services that I enjoy and expect and appreciate from government, why are they declining? 
Now that’s a question that people are asking. 
 
Now if, Mr. Speaker — people are asking these questions — if the privatization of the 
potash company is such a good idea, if it can prove, as the government says it will, why 
are people leaving the province? Like, why are people leaving the province? People are 
asking that. If selling off the potash corporation is supposed to build for us a new and 
marvellous future, then why are people leaving the province? Why are people not 
accepting that vision? 
 
In a year and a half we’ve seen 45,000 people who don’t believe the argument that the 
privatization of potash or anything else . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Four and a half years. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Four and a half years, Mr. Speaker, 45,000 in four and a half years have 
left the province, net loss. Mr. Speaker, those people are not accepting the argument that 
somehow privatization is going to build this new future for them in Saskatchewan. That’s 
obvious. They’re voting with their feet; they’re leaving. 
 
These are the questions, and they’re decent questions. Like, if privatization is so good, 
why do we have unemployment at 10 and 11 per cent? I mean, why do we have one in 11 
people out of work in the province? Why do we have a situation where our phone bills 
and power bills have gone up and up and up; bankruptcies up and up and up; housing 
starts down, down, down; welfare recipients up? 
 



If this policy of privatization, if this policy of selling off the potash industry is so good, 
then why are all these other things occurring? Now that’s a matter that the government 
opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have to ask the hon. member from Regina Wascana to 
contain himself. He too will have the opportunity to speak. We can’t have an orderly 
debate if we’re going to have constant interruptions. And I’m sure that when your turn 
comes to speak you wouldn’t appreciate it if you were interrupted continuously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m at this point in the discussion attempting to 
bring to the discussion, not simply my own concerns and questions, but questions and 
concerns that I, as an MLA, as a citizen of the province, have heard others raise. I’ve 
identified two of them, and there are others. 
 
Another question that’s very commonly asked, and I think deserves a response, but the 
people are not getting it. The question is simply this: now why should I be asked to buy 
shares in something I already own? You see, people understand that that’s a rather 
strange proposition, that a government would come to them and say, now look, this is 
your company, you are the owners; no one can deny that, but we want you to buy shares. 
We want you to buy shares. People are asking that question, and it’s a good question. 
Why should I be buying shares in a company that I already own? I cannot provide an 
answer to that, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s nonsensical — it’s nonsensical. 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is publicly owned; it’s owned by all of the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s not owned by the members opposite; it’s not owned by the 
government of the day. The government of the day are simply the appointed managers — 
just the stewards, just the administrators, just stewards, and that changes. 
 
What doesn’t change is the ownership, fundamentally, unless we get a government like 
this. The ownership of that resource and that corporation is held by the people of 
Saskatchewan. So I think it’s a reasonable question that people ask when they ask: why 
should I buy a share in something that I own? I hear that question quite often, Mr. 
Speaker, and members opposite perhaps in their remarks will want to address that 
question. 
 
There’s another question, Mr. Speaker, that’s very commonly asked about privatization 
and about the proposed privatization of the potash corporation. People are asking, very 
sincerely asking: we are selling these assets off; where is the money going? Where is the 
money going? 
 
They know that we have already sold a vast portion of forest land in this province to 
Weyerhaeuser, and a mill. They know that we’ve already sold off Saskoil, Sask Minerals, 
SaskCOMP. And they ask themselves, and rightly so, if we’re selling these assets off at 
this record rate, just where is the money going? Because obviously, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 



showing up in a reduction in the deficit, and I think obviously it’s not showing up in 
improvements to services, and obviously it’s not showing up in lower taxes or utility 
rates. So the question is, where’s the money going? 
 
I don’t have that answer, and I think it’s incumbent upon the government to explain that, 
because then the question becomes in regard to the potash corporation: where will the 
money go? Where will the money go if the potash corporation is sold? That’s a very 
significant issue because we’re not talking here about some 15 or $16 million, we’re 
talking about hundreds of millions of dollars. We should be talking about billions. And if 
we’re selling that resource, it’s a very significant question: where is the money to go to if 
the government is able to accomplish this sale and provide out of the sale hundreds of 
millions of dollars. I think it’s a very appropriate question to ask: where will that money 
go? 
 
Those kinds of questions, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of questions that the people are asking, 
the kind of feelings that they have, the opinions that they’re expressing, that the 
government’s gone too far and they’re left with many questions about the potash 
privatization and about privatization in general, Mr. Speaker, that has the people of 
Saskatchewan very, very uneasy, and understandably so, about what the government is 
doing — very uneasy. And it reflects, Mr. Speaker, it reflects in the people’s opinion of 
the government. 
 
This Bill is not by any means enhancing the status of the government or the Progressive 
Conservative Party in the minds of Saskatchewan voters. They have dozens and dozens 
of questions and dozens and dozens of fears. And each of the questions and each of the 
fears, in my judgement, are appropriately held. 
 
(1030) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have not in the course of my remarks touched at all, or at least 
very, very briefly, on the rationale that the government — or the reasons. Like, why is the 
government doing this? Because that’s, I think, again the bottom question that the people 
of Saskatchewan are asking. Why is the government undertaking this sell-off of the 
potash corporation? And because the contributions to the debate thus far from members 
opposite have been very limited, very limited, we have not been able to, I think, ascertain 
from the debate thus far the rationale for the selling off of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And it is a very good question, and it’s a question that needs to be 
responded to by the government opposite. 
 
I can suggest in the debate perhaps four reasons that I can see that the government might 
want to do this, that might motivate the government opposite to undertake this sell-off of 
our potash corporation, this privatization, this mania. 
 
One, Mr. Speaker, perhaps it is ideology. Perhaps it is just simple ideology that the 
Progressive Conservative Party government are so firmly committed, so firmly 
hidebound to an ideology that all of the economic arguments no longer need to apply, 



none of the social arguments, none of the public opinion arguments. But that if it’s simple 
ideology that is moving the government on this, an ideology which says every resource, 
every asset and every activity is better in the private sector, then I guess I can understand 
that, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the rationale. 
 
If we are here working on ideology as the momentum that carries privatization, an 
ideology that’s not made in Saskatchewan, but an ideology that’s imported, it may be that 
the government now is blinded by the ideology and that no argument, no public opinion, 
no common sense is going to change what they’re doing. Mr. Speaker, I would hope it is 
not so. I would hope it is not so. I would hope that we’re not simply hidebound by 
ideology across the way and that common sense could prevail, that common sense could 
prevail, and that we could see this legislation and some other privatization legislation just 
forgotten. 
 
I would hope that common sense could prevail among members opposite because I 
believe some members opposite do have a fair share of common sense, but it’s not being 
exercised because somehow the leadership seems to have bought the ideology. I would 
hope that common sense could prevail, could prevail again in our province, could prevail 
in this House, could prevail . . . and let’s just get onto the important issues facing the 
people of Saskatchewan and off of this privatization mania, this privatization of our 
potash industry mania. So it may be, Mr. Speaker, ideology. 
 
Secondly, and I hope again this is not true, but perhaps it is as The Globe and Mail 
suggested, perhaps it is revenge — perhaps it is revenge. And again, Mr. Speaker, just to 
refresh the memory of members of the House, The Globe and Mail editorial which talked 
about this potash privatization which began with the sentence, “Is this the Waterloo of 
socialism or the revenge of the nerds? Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps it is revenge, or 
perhaps that’s a part of the motivation of this government in wanting to sell off the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that the minister now responsible for the potash corporation fought, fought 
tooth and nail, that the people of Saskatchewan should not have a share, not have a share. 
And there may be a certain amount of revenge, revenge in what the government wants to 
do. They’re just saying to themselves, well the NDP did it and therefore it’s bad and 
therefore we’re going to undo it. It may be just that, Mr. Speaker. It may be that they 
want to take revenge on a former government. 
 
If that’s the motivation, Mr. Speaker, then again it’s a sad motivation. It does not take 
into account the needs of the people of Saskatchewan; it does not take into account the 
future of the people of Saskatchewan; it does not take into account the treasury of 
Saskatchewan. If revenge is a motivation, as suggested by The Globe and Mail in 
Toronto, that’s a sad motivation. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I would hope, I would sincerely hope that common sense could 
prevail, and let’s not operate a government on emotion. Let’s not operate a government 
simply tearing down because another government built up. I agree with what the Minister 



of Justice said in Moose Jaw in 1985; it makes no sense for one government to tear down 
what another government has built. And I would sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that this 
privatization of the potash industry is not simply revenge or even partially revenge. 
 
It may be ideology. Maybe that’s the motivation. Maybe it’s partially revenge, as The 
Globe and Mail suggests. Or, Mr. Speaker, and maybe this is more practical, maybe this 
is a way the government feels it can somehow begin to deal with its deficit problems. 
Now way back in 1985, the Conservative Party, in resolution, was talking about 
privatization and selling off Saskatchewan assets. And part of the motivation in the 
argument of the party was that the government needed some cash, and that one way to 
raise that kind of cash would be to sell off some assets. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that may well be one of the motivations of the government in selling 
off the assets of the people of Saskatchewan, what they are then trying to do, if that be the 
motivation. They understand the massive deficit they’re faced with; they understand the 
cash shortage. Everybody in the province I think understands that. And the sell-off, from 
their point of view, of resources and assets may be one way to try and deal with that cash 
shortage. But it’s not going to work. It simply can’t work. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why can’t it work? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, why can’t it work, my colleague from Regina asks. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have here figures provided by the Minister of Finance. Now these 
figures come up to . . . the figures that I have were the preliminary figures for 1988. Now 
the province’s . . . at the end of . . . or preliminary figures, the predictions for 1988, the 
unaudited predictions were that the province’s equity at the end of the year would be not 
a plus, Mr. Speaker, not a plus; the province’s equity would be a net debt of $2.5 billion. 
 
Now let’s understand what that means. That’s equity. This is not the total debt. This is the 
equity which, if I understand, Mr. Speaker, if my understanding is correct, equity is what 
you have left if you pay all of your debts. If you were to sell all of your assets and pay all 
of your debts, you would come up with what is your equity. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance’s own figures indicate that we could sell every asset, we 
could sell every asset owned by the people of Saskatchewan. I mean every STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) bus, I guess we could sell all the mines in our 
potash corporation, we could sell the whole works of SaskTel, we could sell all of 
SaskPower. I guess we could sell the Legislative Assembly building and rent it back. We 
could do that, Mr. Speaker, we could do that and we still would not have raised enough 
money to pay the debt. We would still be, if we sold every asset we own, be $2.5 billion 
in the hole. 
 
So a notion that says that somehow you can sell your way out of debt by selling off the 
assets of the province is foolishness. It just can’t work. And I don’t know of anybody in 
any event who would consider selling the home quarter to pay off debt. I don’t think 
anyone would consider that, and yet that may well be one of the motivations of the 



government in this privatization of potash, that they think somehow they can raise capital, 
that they can raise capital to meet their debt and their cash flow payments by selling off 
assets. Well it won’t work. It wouldn’t work in a family business, it wouldn’t work in a 
farm, and it won’t work for the government. 
 
Because I say again, they can sell every asset we own — every asset — and still not come 
up with enough money to pay the debt. Now that’s indicative, Mr. Speaker, that is truly 
indicative of the size of debt that has been heaped on the people of this province in the 
seven short years of this administration — seven long, lean years they are better 
described — long, lean years. That’s indicative . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s actually eight. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — My colleague reminded me it’s actually eight, Mr. Speaker, that is 
indicative of the debt that’s been heaped on the people of Saskatchewan. And selling off 
assets if not going to cure that problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I notice one of the members is 
using a telephone in the Assembly, and I’m not questioning whether or not that’s proper 
or not. But just for clarification, do the rules of the Assembly allow for cellular phones or 
for telephone equipment or minicomputers to be used in the Assembly? And I ask this 
because some of the members on this side of the House have been asking about bringing 
lap-top computers in to do work in the Assembly. 
 
And just so we’re consistent, if it is the rule of the Assembly that we’re allowing lap-top 
computers and cellular telephones into the Assembly and using them, I would just like 
that to be clear so that all members could have the same use. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s a fair question from the hon. member 
as to a general rule on these matters. It’s not electronic recording device and we should be 
aware of that. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Until we have some indication, either by way of a rules 
committee or some other mechanism, that these devices will be allowed in the House, 
then I believe that we should . . . Order, order. Then until that time, I believe we should 
assume that they’re not permitted and follow that rule. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am now, at this point, attempting to review what might be 
possible motivations for the government to engage in this, what I would describe as a 
mania of privatization, including now the sell-off of the potash corporation. I’m 
attempting to, in my own mind and in the debate, discover what could be the motivation 
and reasons for doing this. 
 



It may well be based on pure ideology, or it may be based on some old hang-up and 
emotion about revenge and getting back at the former government. I think there’s more 
credibility to the argument that there’s somehow a sense that you can sell assets to 
somehow buy your way out of debt. 
 
But I think the more likely scenario, Mr. Speaker, is this scenario. The government now 
realizes that within 12 to 18 months it is going to need to go to the people of 
Saskatchewan in an election. I think they understand that. They might have wanted to go 
earlier, but I think now they’ll want to go next year. In 12 to 18 months they know 
they’re going to have to go to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They also know that they are bankrupt, that there is nothing in the treasury, that they are 
bankrupt. And their style of course in going to the people has traditionally been, you go 
with some pretty rich election goodies. We’ve seen that in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, you see, that presents a problem because if you want to go into an election with 
election goodies, you need the opportunity to be able to fund those goodies. Now where 
can we get — the government asks itself — where can we get the kind of money that we 
need to fund the next election? Where are we going to find that kind of money? They sort 
of understand now they can’t get . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I must once more intervene. And as I said earlier, perhaps 
the hon. member is finding it rather difficult now not to be repetitive, but he is being 
repetitive, and I’m sure he knows that. I’d just like to ask him to try a little harder not to 
be. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yes, thank you. Thank you. I will try to be very 
focused, very focused. 
 
What I’m saying is that the fourth possible, in my mind, the fourth possible motivation 
for the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan would be a motivation that 
says we need to sell the potash corporation off now so that we can garner these several 
hundreds of millions of dollars into government hands that can then be spent in an 
election — in an election, as election goodies. 
 
(1045) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if that is in fact the motivation, I tell you, well it doesn’t work. And I 
think that is so short-sighted. Mr. Speaker, that’s so tragically short-sighted, that a 
government would sell this kind of a resource for a quick fix of cash that can be used for 
an election. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is so short-sighted. And if, members opposite, if that 
is any part of your motivation, I ask you to consider very carefully what you’re doing. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It was on that topic, sir, that I interrupted you, and I ask 
you not to continue along that vein because that was the issue that I interrupted you on. 
Go to a different argument if you can. 



 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I will move along. I will move along. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has been called to order a number 
of times on relevance and tedious repetition, not only of his own remarks but of remarks 
of other members of his party, Mr. Speaker. You have acknowledged points well made by 
members about that very point. You yourself have called him, while I’ve been sitting here 
this morning, two or three times relative to repetition. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would ask if you would not order then that this member be 
directed to discontinue his speech under rule 25(2), Mr. Speaker, because I don’t know 
how many times it would take that he has to be called to order if that . . . I think the 
evidence now is prima facie, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think it’s clear when the repetition of the minister, who has been 
on his feet probably five times today . . . I just say to you that if there’s anyone who’s 
tedious and repetitious in the House, it’s that minister who is continually on his feet 
interrupting our speakers on this side and making a mockery of a very important debate. 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, is that when the Speaker rises once or twice in a matter of a three-
hour speech, I think the indication is that the member is not being repetitious and tedious, 
and the fact is is that it’s an excellent speech. And I challenge any of the members 
opposite who are arriving late in the Assembly to get Hansard tomorrow and read the 
speech given by the member for Moose Jaw South, and what they will find is that it’s the 
most excellent speech that they will have heard in the debate so far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — As I have indicated to the hon. members earlier on one or two occasions 
that by and large throughout most of the morning the hon. member has been confining 
himself within the rules. However, in the last while, and as I indicated, perhaps because 
he has spoken at length and it becomes more difficult to not repeat oneself, he has begun 
to repeat himself. I will not ask him to sit down at this time; I will allow him to continue 
his speech, but I will also bring to his attention that he must be very careful not to repeat 
himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for your guidance in this debate. I 
can almost set my watch on the Minister of Education though. It was quarter to the hour; 
it was time. 
 



Mr. Speaker, then to move along to what is a relatively current development in this 
debate, and I think it is very appropriate to the debate, we have had delivered to the 
people of Saskatchewan a report, a report produced by the Institute of Saskatchewan 
Enterprise. Now this report would purport to give an assessment of the performance of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. That’s what the report would purport to do. It 
would purport also to give an independent, non-biased look at the potash corporation and 
how it has served the people of Saskatchewan, and what kind of a record it has, and so 
on. 
 
Now the author of the report, I understand, Mr. Speaker — and again members opposite 
can correct me if I’m wrong — the author of the report, I understand, is a Mr. Arthur 
Andersen, who I understand serves as an auditor for the private potash industry in the 
United States. I think that’s accurate, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Andersen is a representative 
and an employee of, or under contract to, the private potash companies of the United 
States. I think, specifically, that’s Kalium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not indicating that Mr. Andersen’s firm is not a reputable firm. I am 
indicating in this debate that Mr. Andersen has some interest in the private potash 
industry. I don’t think that’s any secret, just as the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise 
has some obvious interest in privatization. I don’t think that’s any secret to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We look at the institute here in Saskatchewan which commissioned this so-called 
independent study, and what do we have? Well we have people involved with that 
institute — the boss at Saskoil, Mr. Ted Renner. Now he’s part of this so-called, non-
biased institute. We have a Mr. Phillips, Roger Phillips from Ipsco, again a member of 
the institute, purported to be, Mr. Speaker, non-biased. Now I don’t know who in the 
province buys that. I really don’t know who in the province could buy that. 
 
So the institute itself, it brings forward a report that is very interesting, Mr. Speaker — a 
very interesting report — because as I look at the report and what the report finds, if I 
were the government opposite, I’d want to hide that report, I’d want to keep it from 
public understanding, because what the report shows, Mr. Speaker, is one thing. It shows 
that up until 1982, this was a world class, first-class corporation. Following 1982, it’s in 
big trouble. That’s what the report says. Those are the figures from the report. Those are 
the figures from Mr. Andersen’s report. 
 
Now of course, as has been pointed out by journalists and others, what the report does not 
take into account is the management of the corporation. It looks only at figures and, 
interestingly enough, bases all the figures in 1988 dollars and so on, but it misses a very 
significant issue, and that’s the management of the corporation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how you can judge a corporation and the performance of 
that corporation without looking at the management. I simply don’t know how that can 
be, particularly when, in reviewing the life of the corporation, you see something happen 



about 1982 where there’s a major, a major, major shift in the performance of the 
corporation. 
 
Now we have a report now public that doesn’t deal with one of the most significant 
questions, and that’s the question of management. And again, our submission to the 
people of Saskatchewan is that the problems that have existed in the potash corporation 
are not endemic to the corporation, not related to potash, but related to the management 
— to the management. 
 
And now we have a report that would indicate through its figures the very same thing that 
would, in my view, prove the case that we’re making. Because when you have figures 
pre-1982 that show a company that’s stable and growing and paying out dividends, and a 
company that after ’82 is beginning to lose because it’s somehow given up on its market 
share, well that becomes a question of management. 
 
And I think as our House Leader, the member from Elphinstone very appropriately 
pointed out to the press, if you’ve got a football team that’s in trouble, you don’t get rid 
of the team, you get rid of the management. You get rid of the coaches and the 
management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — If, Mr. Minister, if — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry — if, Mr. Speaker, the 
Andersen report indicates anything, if it indicates anything at all, it indicates we need a 
change of management in this province and we need it desperately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for me I guess this legislation and any piece of legislation 
comes down to a very final and fundamental test. There is a fundamental test that I would 
apply to this legislation, this Bill 20, to any piece of legislation that any government 
would bring forward. And my fundamental test is this, Mr. Speaker, it’s this: does this 
legislation add more to the wealth of those who already have much, or does it, Mr. 
Speaker, does it provide for the needs of those who have little? 
 
That’s a fundamental question for me. I apply that to every bit of legislation. Does it add 
to those who already have much, whether the much be financial resources or power or 
privilege; does it add to those who already have much? Or does it provide for those who 
have so little, whether the little is financial or whether the little is in terms of rights or 
power? That’s my fundamental test, Mr. Speaker, on this legislation, and in fact on any 
legislation. 
 
So I apply that then, Mr. Speaker, to Bill 20, to the Bill which would propose to sell off 
our potash corporation. What happens when I apply this test to this Bill? The Bill fails 
miserably; Mr. Speaker, this Bill fails miserably. 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Because this Bill, and indeed the entire privatization initiative of this 
government, this Bill does nothing but to put into the hands of a few, the wealth of the 
many. That’s what it does. It takes the wealth now shared by the people of this province, 
all of the people of this province, it takes this resource . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And the member from Wascana seems to think this is amusing, that his government 
should be taking resources owned, assets owned by the people of Saskatchewan, 
transferring those assets into the hands of a few, into the hands of the wealthy, into the 
hands of those people who don’t even live in our country. I guess he thinks that’s a good 
idea, and he will have his opportunity to defend it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation does not add to those who have little in our society. It takes 
from them, Mr. Speaker. It takes a resource that is theirs now and transfers that resource 
into the hands of a few — the wealthy, the rich — people that don’t live in our country 
even, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s just conceive of the situation when this legislation is passed and the corporation is 
about to be privatized and the shares are for sale. Who do you expect, Mr. Speaker, is 
going to be buying those shares? Do you expect it’s going to be the young farm family 
that are facing huge debt loads, maybe bankruptcy this year or next? Are they going to 
have cash to be out there buying shares in the potash corporation? Well I don’t think so. 
Is it going to be the person that works for minimum wage in the restaurants and the cafes 
and the hotel industry and the service industry? Are they going to have money? What 
about the person that’s working part time over at Superstore and trying to make a car 
payment and a house payment? Is the worker at Ipsco, is the worker at Ipsco — is the 
laid-off worker — is that worker going to have money to buy shares? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not only economic insanity, in my view it’s social insanity. It’s social 
insanity to take those resources which belong to all of the people — the assets belong to 
all of the people — and to transfer them holus-bolus into the hands of the few. I mean, 
it’s bound to happen, Mr. Speaker. It’s bound to happen. 
 
I mean, in the province now . . . I think the member form Regina yesterday said 
something like about 14 per cent, if I’m right, 14 per cent of Saskatchewan people invest 
in shares — 14 per cent of adults — we’re just talking about the adult population — 
invest in shares. Now that’s 14 per cent of our population that have the resources to 
invest. And I don’t begrudge them those resources. But understand, it’s 14 per cent . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they only control 1.6 per cent of the shares of Saskoil. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And 1.6 per cent of the shares of Saskoil, as my colleague points out. 
That’s what they control, 1.6 per cent of the shares of Saskoil. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



The Speaker: — It being 11 o’clock, the House stands recessed until 1 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 


