





























































Hansard: July 07, 1989


 

 

July 7/89 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Conference on Privatization 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister of privatization, and I see where the 
minister is planning to help some of his buddies at a so-called non-partisan gathering for the Institute for 
Saskatchewan Enterprise with their privatization conference next year, and he's going to be footing the Bill for 
those attending the party. And I was wondering if the minister could tell the Saskatchewan taxpayers today if this 
footing the Bill for some 2,000 people is not just kind of setting the stage for the provincial election campaign, 
and I'm wondering if the minister can tell us today how much is this little party going to cost the taxpayers to 
support your privatization moves. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: -- Mr. Speaker, certainly there is a conference planned for next year, about 2,000 people 
supposedly coming, from various countries in the world, here to Saskatchewan to discuss public participation. 
Certainly my department may look at hosting some type of function which is very . . . we do this often. I think 
we've done it with agribition, with the farm progress show. I think it just shows the spirit of Saskatchewan to host 
our guests when they come here, to have perhaps a little informal mixer or something of that nature. I don't know 
what that will cost, but certainly I can tell you we will be very vigilant upon it and we will put forth the best 
welcome to Saskatchewan that we possibly can. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well maybe we could also invite around 2,000 Saskatchewan people who don't have enough 
food to eat; they should be invited as well, Mr. Minister, if you're throwing a party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The headlines say that: "Saskatchewan to Pay for Privatization Party." And I'm wondering, Mr. 
Minister, if you can assure us today in this legislature that not one cent of Saskatchewan tax dollars is going into 
this bash to support your ill-fated plans for privatization in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: -- The member mentioned about Saskatchewan people in attendance. I'm sure there will be a 
large number of Saskatchewan people in attendance because there's a lot of interest in public participation in this 
province, and I think you'll see a good contingent of Saskatchewan people here. 
 
As I said previously, it will be our intention to perhaps host an informal or a get-together, a welcoming. It will be 
very stringently scrutinized, and I think this is what Saskatchewan should be doing. When you get 2,000 people 
coming from various countries of the world, I do not see anything wrong with having a little welcoming 
ceremony for them. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I would like to remind the hon. member that he direct his questions to the Chair. 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question. I'd like to ask the minister of privatization, Mr. Speaker, that 
obviously he won't tell us how much his little bash is going to cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, so let's deal 
with the agenda. We can see by the agenda the conference is sort of a Tory agenda for the future, with 
discussions on the privatization of health care, social services, recreation, culture, municipal transportation and 
public works. Can you give the people of Saskatchewan your assurance that the time around coming up to next 
election you'll not be deceitful as you were in the last election and come clean on your plans, and if you're going 
to privatize these services in Saskatchewan, tell the people of Saskatchewan before you try and bamboozle them 
with an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: -- Well again, Mr. Speaker, the member fails to understand . . . certainly it is not my convention 
or my conference at all. It's the Institute on Public Enterprise. It's an international conference, and I'm sure there 
are many people from Australia and New Zealand that will be attending from those governments, which I don't 
think you can really call a Tory bash. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- It certainly seems like . . . Mr. Speaker, a question through you to the minister of privatization, 
sir. To the minister, I would think that it would be disgraceful, and you should be ashamed to think that in the 
year 1990 you're going to have a birthday bash and you're also going to throw money for a privatization party for 
your friends to launch you into the next election campaign, when people in Saskatchewan go hungry and people 
are without jobs and people are leaving the province. You should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
Now instead of paying attention to this political agenda of yours, I'm wondering if you could come clean with the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. Instead of having a privatization party next May, maybe we can have it 
as a farewell party for the most ruthless government in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan will be proud to see that here in 
Saskatchewan, in the middle of Canada, a trend that is moving all around the world in various countries. More 
than 50 countries have chose to come here to one of the focal points where they see that things like employee 
buy-ins, things like WESTBRIDGE computer company coming from the 40th ranked company to the eighth in 
one year, new acquisitions, brand-new employee buy-ins, the Meadow Lake saw mill -- I can go on and on to tell 
you why people from around the world are pleased to come to Saskatchewan to discuss public participation and 
the initiatives that have been undertaken by this government, and I welcome them here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Political Contributions and Offshore Marketing 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the minister responsible for the potash corporation, I'd 
like to direct a question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, I have here a copy of Greenmarkets, which is a 
newsletter in respect to the fertilizer industry. And in that article it states in part: 
 

 There are numerous industry reports that firms seeking to sell fertilizer into India have been asked to make 
election contributions as a side condition to sales. 

 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: can you tell us whether or not Canpotex, one of the largest dealers in fertilizers to India, 
has been requested to pay any kickbacks or bribes to the Congress Party in India; and can you tell us how such an 
approach would have been handled? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: -- Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that they haven't asked me. And I can . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. The minister has been asked the question. There are two other members who have 
decided to ask each other questions simultaneously. Let us allow the minister, the Deputy Premier, to answer the 
original question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: -- I can also tell you, Mr. Speaker, while I have no day to day involvement in the operation of 
Canpotex, I would be very, very surprised, Mr. Speaker, that even if Canpotex were asked, that their response 
would be an absolute and flat no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- New question to the minister. The one good part of his answer is that he said he had no 
involvement. That gives us some confidence. 
 
Mr. Minister, according to Greenmarkets, one firm which has been approached, the firm has confirmed that such 
practices are going on and that contributions are sought, related to the tonnage sold to India. 
 
Mr. Minister, the position of your party is pretty clear, because we recall last February one Bruce Cameron, a PC 
Party official, wrote to Peter Matthews, the president of the party, requesting some kickbacks in respect to 
advertising firms that had done work. So there's some similarities between the two parties. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are concerned whether this practice is going on. And I ask you: will you 
undertake to have the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a major player in Canpotex, demand a full report of 
the offshore marketing and everything it knows about such practices in relation to sales to India? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: -- Mr. Speaker, I will ask the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to make such inquiries of 
Canpotex. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- A final question. And, Mr. Minister, will you report back indicating the findings in respect to that 
report, because the people of Saskatchewan totally lack confidence in your government to handle any of the 
affairs in respect to the affairs of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I've said that I would ask the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to 
inquire of Canpotex as to the existence of such practices, Mr. Speaker, and I will be happy to report, Mr. Speaker, 
to the House on the response of such inquiries. And in the absence of any evidence of such allegations, I will 
expect an apology from members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Payment of Crow Rate 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. 
Mr. Minister, according to spokesmen from the Prairie Pool, they're going to be heading for a show-down this 
year with the federal government on the method of payment problem that we're going to be looking at. The pool 
believes that the Crow benefit should be paid to the railroads, as it has been. The federal government says it 
should be paid to farmers. Your group over there has some half-baked idea that nobody's listening to. 
 
My question is this: Mr. Minister, will you today give the Prairie Pools, other farm organizations and farmers 
your commitment that you will support the method of payment to continue going to the railroads? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the debate relative to method of payment has been going on for some 
several years now. Various groups have at various times pointed out some deficiencies in the present method of 
payment. Several studies have been done to suggest that there may be some alternative methods that might 
remove some of the existing flaws as they relate to a disincentive to livestock feeding, a disincentive to food 
processing, those kinds of things. 
 
But the reality is, of course, Mr. Speaker, as of this day, at least as far as I am aware, no single study or no 
alternative method of payment enjoys a majority view of support by farmers across the province, or indeed 
farmers across western Canada, or indeed farmers across all of Canada. 
 
I think our government would support any plan, Mr. Speaker, that did enjoy that kind of majority support. At this 
point in time, I don't think we see one, but certainly we would support one that enjoys majority support, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if that minister knew anything about what he was talking about, he 
would know that the Prairie Pools handle 60 per cent of the grain going out of this province. If that isn't a 
majority, I don't know what is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- On every issue where there's a dispute between Saskatchewan farmers and the federal 
government, your government has lined up squarely behind Brian Mulroney. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if the method of payment is changed, that would mean an increase of 44 per cent in the 
freight rates or $7 million out of farmers' pockets. And eventually, if the payment goes to farmers, you know that 
it's potential that that payment will be lost altogether, costing $400 million to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
My question to you again is: if you don't have the courage to call an election so that we can provide leadership 
for the farmers in this province, will you let go of Brian Mulroney's hand now and stand up for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and say, yes, you will support the method of payment going to the railroads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, relative to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, what we do know about the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, in addition to what the hon. member has said, is that they are very much supportive of 
diversifying our agricultural economy. I think all of us have seen . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And, Mr. Speaker, that's very consistent with our Premier's efforts to diversify our 
economy, this government's effort to diversify our economy. We recognize that we've got to be something more 
than just drawers of water and hewers of wood. We've got to take the wheat and make something more out of it. 
We've got to take our resources like lumber and make something more out of it. 
 
The pool is very much of that same view. That's why, Mr. Speaker, the wheat pool has itself diversified. They've 
bought into Robin's Donuts. They want to get into food processing because they, too, recognize that that is the 
way of the future. We support that, Mr. Speaker, 'cause we are, too, interested in diversification. 
 
When I hear the hon. member harkening back to the days of the past it reminds me of 1982, pre-election 1982, 



 

 

where the minister of Agriculture then said, go in April and go on the Crow. That's part of the past, Mr. Speaker. 
We've got to look forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we all know that the federal government is trying to 
save money by cutting out just about everything they can cut out. We know that this policy of paying, if we pay . 
. . the method of payment to producers . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Having difficulty hearing the member from Humboldt, and ask for your 
co-operation. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, as I said, we all know the federal government is trying to save money, and we've 
seen evidence of that time and time again. 
 
But this policy, if you change the method of payment to the farmers, opens the door for cost-based freight rates. 
That means somebody in Meadow Lake will pay an awful lot more than somebody sitting on the main line. That's 
a very strong potential. 
 
We know it will accelerate branch line abandonment. We know that pressure from GATT (General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade), the free trade agreement, and from Quebec and Ontario to any payment to producers out here, 
there's pressure to get rid of it because they say it's unfair. 
 
My question to you is this: in light of all these facts, why do you continue, or what possesses you to continue 
going on with your blind-eyed ideology against the farmers of Saskatchewan who are the majority saying, pay the 
method of payment to the railroads; why do you continue to do this instead of going with the Saskatchewan 
farmers and saying, Brian Mulroney, this time you're wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we're all aware that going from the present system to a new system 
represents a challenge. There are concerns that have been identified . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. We're having a little difficulty hearing the member for Weyburn now, and I'd like to 
ask for the same co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, many studies and many farm groups have identified that if you were to go to 
a different system, it may present some new challenges or some new concerns. Similarly, the system that we have 
now, the status quo is not perfect. Many studies and many groups have identified that it too is flawed. 
 
The hon. member talks about some of the concerns if one was to move away from it. Others have made the case, 
and I think in spades, about a disincentive to livestock feeding; about how it really maybe doesn't do the best job 
in the present system as it could in terms of enabling us to diversify our economy, get into food processing, some 
of those kinds of things. 
 
So I would just suggest to him that he should take his ideological blinkers out, throw away the NFU (National 
Farmers Union) manual, that it becomes the Isley policy document on agriculture for the honourable group. If 
they have some good ideas, fine, but don't blindly be led by everything that's in that document. 
 
Let's look at how we can . . . and don't be a change resister. Let's look forward, Mr. Speaker. I think that's what 
the wheat pool wants to do; that's what the farmers across Saskatchewan want to to do. That doesn't mean to say 
that we jump blindly into any avenue without having researched it thoroughly. We will support what the farmers 



 

 

of this province will support. They support our Premier on things like deficiency payments, drought programs, 
production loans, and cash advances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, new question. If you're so sure of yourself, Mr. Minister, why don't you screw up 
your courage and call an election and we'll see who supports them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, my question is this. You say that there are some disincentives to livestock under the 
present system. Will you provide this House with information as to what the cost would be to the grain farmer as 
opposed to what the cost would be . . . saving to the livestock producer. 
 
Why do you not look at the whole picture instead of putting one group against the other. Why don't you look at 
the whole picture and say, the best method is to pay the railroads and there are other alternatives for the livestock 
producer to encourage production in this province. But why do you continue to try to separate the two and trade 
off $440 million that are going to grain producers for a small saving in the livestock sector. Why don't you go to 
the livestock people and say, here's an alternative? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I think if my memory serves me right and if you look at past history under former 
NDP ministers -- Mr. MacMurchy might come to mind -- their stated policy was that we ought to be a single 
wheat economy here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can assure you that this side of the legislature does look at the entire picture. When we came to office, Mr. 
Speaker, we noticed -- I guess it had gone unnoticed by the NDP -- that you could get a cash advance on grains, 
Mr. Speaker. You could get a cash advance on grains, but you couldn't get a cash advance if you produced calves 
or hogs. That to us seemed like an either/or situation where we had unfairness in two of our major agriculture 
sectors. 
 
This Premier and this Minister of Agriculture corrected that. We do have cash advances. We do have a more 
proactive irrigation program now. We are looking to diversify our agricultural economy. We are getting into 
biotechnology. Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of proactive agricultural policy that this government has. 
 
We have yet to see the NDP agriculture policy. The Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to give the Minister of Health an opportunity to stand on his feet and 
answer a question, rather than shouting from his seat throughout question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shortage of Occupational Therapists 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, you've been aware since late June that there are no longer any occupational 
therapists at the Children's Rehab Centre in Saskatoon. I believe you're aware of that, Mr. Minister. The 
Saskatchewan Cerebral Palsy Association, among others, has asked your government to take steps to correct this 
drastic situation. So far, Mr. Minister, you've done nothing. 
 



 

 

Please tell us what your policy is, if you have any, in order to take steps to correct this situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, we are aware of the lack of numbers of occupational therapists in this country; 
it's low. There is a short supply of occupational therapists and in fact physiotherapists across Canada, in this 
country. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- So, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the specific issue that the member raises, I can bring her 
back a report on the rehabilitation centre and the case that she refers to today, early part of next week. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you will know that the cerebral palsy association 
submitted a brief to the Murray commission in which they stated that there should be 14.5 occupational 
therapists. This comes about as a result of a 1986 study. Instead there were only three, but as of today there are 
none, Mr. Minister -- no occupational therapists there. 
 
Some 65 per cent of the patients at the rehab centre are receiving less than adequate care. This is a long-standing 
problem. It's more severe in Saskatchewan than many other provinces as a result of your government's policies. I 
ask you again: what are you going to do to correct this situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, while I acknowledge as I did in my previous answer, while I acknowledge the 
shortage of occupational therapists in Saskatchewan and across Canada -- there's no question there's a shortage in 
that area -- I'd say to the hon. member and to anybody watching, for young people to enter that profession is a 
good place to go. And they will be hired, and there are applications. We have subsidies, we have bursaries for 
people who take that particular profession -- take training in that profession, and so on. 
 
For the member over here, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the policies of this government as it relates to rehabilitation, 
let me just outline a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. One, right near us in the city of Regina where we sit today, the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre that they would not build -- that they would not build -- that they would not staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rehabilitation record of this government is an exemplary one. The record in terms of hiring the 
numbers of occupational therapists, physiotherapists to staff them is not at the level that we would like it or that 
anyone in Canada would like it, because we do not have enough people in this country to fill those fast-growing 
professions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are vigilant in attempting to hire these people. We are vigilant in addressing rehabilitation 
as we have done there in the area of rehabilitation for children, in the area of drugs and alcohol. You name the 
area of rehabilitation in health care, Mr. Speaker, this government has been there and active in it, and because of 
a shortage in that whole area that was left to us by that group over there who refused to build things like the 
Wascana Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre is suffering similar 
shortages of staff because of your lack of long-term strategic planning in the area of occupational therapy and 
other . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 



 

 

 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, occupational therapists have been asking for a school of 
occupational therapy in Saskatchewan for a long time, and so far you've refused to meet that request. The 
cerebral palsy association study recommended to your government that there be 23 physical therapists at the 
centre. It has five and a quarter, and their study recommends 14.5 speech therapists, and it has only 1.5. 
 
It's obvious, Mr. Minister, that the entire therapy aspect of this centre has been badly neglected. When is your 
government going to make this a priority and get these centres properly staffed, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member and to the House, there's no question that we 
need more occupational therapists. There is no question that we need that. And the reason we do is because of the 
emphasis we're placing on rehabilitation. A growing need in the whole delivery of health care is rehabilitation, 
whether it be for an ageing population or whether it be for the increasing and the right emphasis that's now being 
placed on rehabilitation of people injured from work, or handicapped people from whatever reason. There's no 
question that that's true. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member stands here and says that at the Wascana Rehab Centre that they're short of staff 
and that they could have more occupational therapists; I agree with that. But staff members at the Wascana Rehab 
Centre right today, and patients, long-term patients, will tell you how pleased they are with the centre, how 
pleased they are with the way in which they can carry on their work -- I'm talking about staff members now, Mr. 
Speaker -- and they'll also tell you of the days when they sat there in inadequate facilities and watched them build 
the T.C. Douglas Building right across the lawn from them while they had no centre for their rehabilitation needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 88 -- An Act respecting Custody of, Access to and Guardianship of Property of Children, Child Status 
and Parentage and Related Matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first first reading of a Bill respecting Custody of, Access to and 
Guardianship of Property of Children, Child Status and Parentage and Related Matters. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 89 -- An Act to amend The Department of Energy and Mines Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Department of Energy and Mines 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Abandonment of Passenger Service by VIA Rail 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I rise on a motion under rule 39, requesting leave 
with respect to a motion concerning the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Now I'd just like to remind the hon. members that the business of the House cannot 
proceed if there are constant interruptions. That's a very, very basic element of procedure in our House, and I 
think that while we have some heckling from time to time, these constant interruptions are not courteous and we 
should allow the member from Melville to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise under rule 39 seeking leave for a motion . . . and I'll give 
you the nature of the motion, Mr. Speaker. The motion is with respect to reports of the abandonment of rail 
passenger service in the entire province of Saskatchewan. The motion calls upon the federal minister and the 
Prime Minister to seek and hold public hearings prior to any such decision. 
 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this matter is an emergency; it's urgent and pressing. I submit that the members of the 
opposition have maintained this position for the last week or two, that it is now time for some agreement in this 
Assembly on this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I'd just like to remind the minister that at best we allow just a very few words as an 
introduction to the motion. I would like him to ask leave and put the motion that the House may decide whether 
or not they wish to proceed with the debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, you wish the actual wording of the motion then? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- With leave of course. The minister must ask for leave. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: --  
 

 That this Assembly expresses to the federal Minister of Transport, and to the Prime Minister, its grave concerns 
regarding recent reports recommending that VIA Rail abandon entirely rail service in this province; and further, 
that this Assembly urges the federal Minister of Transport to hold public hearings prior to making any 
decisions. 

 
I ask for leave to proceed with this motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the opposition for granting leave on this motion. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Unlike you a month ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is now quibbling from their seats about the nature of this 
motion. And, Mr. Speaker, I might say that this motion has, in addition to the proposals raised . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I realize it's Friday morning and I realize it's July and perhaps some members may 
rather be somewhere else, but we're here and the business of the House must proceed. And we can only proceed 
if hon. members co-operate. And I'm asking the hon. members once more to co-operate. The debate will go 
forward and all members will have the opportunity to speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was an attempt at reaching an agreement on the exact 
wording of this motion for the past two weeks, and there was much politicking on this topic. Finally, the 



 

 

government has decided that the motions presented were not not sufficient and that this motion, in addition to the 
requests for the Prime Minister and the Minister of Transport to reconsider their decision, this motion asks for 
public hearings to be held prior to any decision being made with respect to the loss of or change of passenger rail 
service in the province of Saskatchewan. The position that the government takes, and I'm sure the members of the 
opposition will agree, that public hearings are in order and that this motion should be passed unanimously in this 
Assembly. 
 
There's great reason for holding public hearings on this particular issue. There is a report now prepared. 
However, the situation we have in Saskatchewan, and in particular in my constituency of Melville, is that we do 
not have enough information to conduct a logical and reasonable debate on this particular topic of exactly how 
we should continue with passenger rail traffic in Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, certainly there is a concern about the mounting deficit of VIA Rail. However, there is also a widely held 
view in my constituency, and held by myself I might add, Mr. Speaker, that VIA Rail has been mismanaged over 
the past eight or 10 years, and therefore the deficits run up are not necessary, considering that the VIA Rail 
service could have been managed in a much better manner. 
 
Public hearings would give us some answers with respect to the Canada-wide implications of a loss of the 
national passenger service, with respect, first of all, to the effect of the loss of this service on the citizens of 
Canada, and weighing how much of a deficit would be in order to maintain such a service. 
 
In addition, there is tremendous tourist potential for a Canada-wide service. Tourists from other lands cannot see 
Canada while flying over it at 31,000 feet. Even on a clear day you can't see much of Canada from that altitude, 
Mr. Speaker. And so therefore, not only for the traffic and the passengers of Canada, but for the tourist potential, 
public hearings would be very useful to determine the foreign exchange that could be earned. And the foreign 
exchange potential should be weighed against any potential losses of VIA and any potential subsidy that a federal 
government might have to provide. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, public hearings would indicate to us what the actual passenger traffic is with respect to 
the province of Saskatchewan. The hearing would reveal to us the actual cost. The citizens of my constituency 
indicate to me -- and I might say, Mr. Speaker, they are the ones who drive these passenger trains, who operate 
them -- that these trains are operating substantially full. The best information we can gather is that the train across 
Saskatchewan is running at 68 per cent full. Surely a train that is running full on many occasions, and could have 
many more passengers if operated properly, should be able to break even or get very close to that. 
 
I will deal further with the proper operation of a VIA train with respect to some of the horror stories that my 
neighbours in the city of Melville have explained to me with respect to the operation of the VIA train under the 
management that the Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau put in place with respect to the operations of VIA. 
 
So then secondly we have to consider the effect on Saskatchewan with respect to the loss of passenger rail 
service. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, in particular a city like mine, the city of Melville, the impact has to be considered first 
of all with respect to the loss of passenger service. The city of Melville does not have bus service directly to 
Winnipeg. It does not have bus service directly to Saskatoon. Many communities along that route do not have 
service to those centres. 
 
At current, VIA Rail will not stop in the town of Ituna, Saskatchewan, with 800 citizens there, to pick up 
passengers, even on a telephone call to Winnipeg central dispatch, nor will the train stop to drop off a passenger. 
 
In addition, there are many occasions where the train has to pull out for freight and stop in Ituna, Saskatchewan, 
but you're not allowed to get off it or get on it. It seems to me that if you're going to run a railroad and not allow 



 

 

passengers to get off and on, that you are likely to run up a deficit. These are just a few instances of the problems 
with respect to the management of VIA Rail. And the problems go on and on. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the city of Melville, Mr. Speaker, many of our citizens have over the years earned 
passes, as part of their retirement package, to ride on VIA trains. These are paid for by the railroad, are part of 
their negotiated contracts over the years. And this, to abandon passenger traffic, would be an easy out for CN 
(Canadian National Railway) in the city of Melville to escape their obligations to honour the passes they have 
given to their employees over the years as part of their compensation package. 
 
This weighs very heavily on the senior citizens who formerly worked on the railroad, not only financially but 
with respect to direct links for them to visit their relatives in other parts of Canada, in particular British Columbia 
and Ontario. 
 
Lastly, and not leastly, with respect to the considerations of passenger traffic in the city of Melville, we have the 
situation of the loss of jobs in the city of Melville. Mr. Speaker, in my term of office I've been able to bring to the 
city of Melville in excess of 200 jobs, and it seems that whenever I bring a new job to the city of Melville, CN 
Rail sees fit to remove a job from the city of Melville. Here we now have VIA Rail looking at the same type of 
situation which would cost approximately 10 jobs in the city of Melville. 
 
Now the federal government spends money on job creation all over Canada, but they never seem to be able to 
spend any in the city of Melville. Now I know that it is the responsibility of the MP (member of parliament) to 
represent his area, but I might say, Mr. Speaker, that that duty has fallen upon myself as the MLA in many, many 
instances, and with a 20-year MP in opposition it is very difficult to get strong representation in your city such as 
in the city of Melville. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, the loss of jobs is a concern regardless of the kind of representation we've had 
federally. Regardless of the actions of CN and VIA over the years, it's incumbent upon representatives for 
Melville to impress upon CN, VIA and the federal government, the element of fairness, that we in the 
constituency of Melville and Yorkton should also feel part of Canada. And in the last 20 years you would hardly 
recognize in the constituency of Melville that you were part of Canada with respect to federal spending or any 
kind of federal benefits other than old age pensions and family allowances. I won't go on on this, Mr. Speaker. I 
don't want to lament the difficulties of having an opposition member represent you for 20 years, but I can say that 
the burden falls heavily upon the provincial representative. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, public hearings are in order with respect to getting to the facts of how VIA actually operates and 
why it loses so much money. For example, my neighbours who drive the VIA train can testify to the fact that the 
VIA train does not run at a speed that would get people across Canada in any kind of a reasonable time. They can 
drive the train much faster according to the ability of the track to handle the train. However, my neighbours who 
drive this train must slow down so they don't get ahead of schedule. Can you imagine running a railroad as slow 
as possible so that you don't get ahead of schedule! 
 
And VIA hasn't seen fit to compact the schedule so that the train could get across Canada probably a day sooner 
than it does. I've ridden on this train, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you that it turns out -- the turn-out is turning off 
the main track and waiting for another train to go by -- it turns out for every kind of minimal reason you can 
imagine. And then it runs rather slow so that it doesn't get to the station in Melville ahead of schedule and 
embarrass VIA Rail. So certainly management has to be reconsidered with respect to VIA Rail. 
 
The equipment -- I could go on for hours, and I won't, but the equipment is atrocious. It is antique and belongs in 
a museum. You can't expect a railroad to run with equipment of that nature. 
 



 

 

We do not know exactly who is receiving the subsidy with respect to the $600 million the federal government 
pays out. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the bulk of the subsidy has not gone to VIA Rail and to passenger service, it 
has gone to CN and CP for the use of their lines. 
 
There is a widely held view in the city of Melville, and I might say, Mr. Speaker, I also subscribe to that view, 
that the big beneficiary of the VIA Rail transition and the VIA Rail subsidy has been CN and CP, and that the 
loss in revenue, should the subsidy be cancelled or the passenger traffic be cancelled, will primarily fall upon CN 
and CP. 
 
I believe that if we have public hearings, Mr. Speaker, they will reveal that all of the profit that CN has made in 
the last eight years could be attributed to the money they received from VIA Rail. And therefore the management 
of CN also has to be considered with respect to subsidies of railroads and where the subsidy is actually going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public hearings will reveal exactly what the financial situation is with respect to VIA Rail and the 
charges that are being made against VIA Rail by CN and CP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion is very important, not only because it asks the Prime Minister and the Minister of 
Transport to consider maintaining passenger service in Saskatchewan, but also because it calls for public hearings 
so that the people, so that the Government of Saskatchewan, so that all of Canada can get the details of exactly 
how VIA Rail has been managed and how it could be managed. 
 
We have to consider alternatives. It is possible that schedules may have to be changed. It is possible that routes 
may have to be reduced with less service. Maybe we can only have a train every second day, but certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, we cannot simply sit down and say, that's it, there will be no train at all. It's possible that with newer 
equipment, better schedules, better management, more people will ride the train. It's possible that more tourists 
will ride the train. These possibilities must be examined. We submit, on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, that public hearings will clear the air and will give us the information so that educated and 
reasoned decisions can be made. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

 That this Assembly expresses to the federal Minister of Transport, and to the Prime Minister, its grave concerns 
regarding recent reports recommending that VIA Rail abandon entirely rail service in this province; and further, 
that this Assembly urges the federal Minister of Transport to hold public hearings prior to making any 
decisions. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my seat mate, the Minister of Transport, the member for Melfort. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's very much my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to join my 
seat mate and colleague, the member for Melville, in addressing this very important motion, Mr. Speaker. I do 
feel that since yesterday, in reviewing the motion that was put forth rather quickly yesterday, that MLAs on this 
side of the House have had an opportunity to review the proposed wording, and we, although are quite agreeable 
to the tone of yesterday's motion, we had some changes that I think more accurately and more clearly represent 
this government's true position on this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there are a couple of considerations here, a couple of major considerations, and I'd 
like to deal with both of them at length. And firstly, Mr. Speaker, is the hard, fast dollars that are associated with 
these types of decisions, and they are indeed significant. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, is rail service and its history and 
its future and the benefits to the people of Saskatchewan and indeed to the people of Canada that have to be 
looked at in the large geographic area like this country that we have, that stretches for many thousands of miles 
from east to west. 
 



 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that both of these areas deserve considerable attention and discussion and I'd . . . First, I'd like 
to talk about the money, Mr. Speaker. It is my understanding that VIA Rail was instituted about 12 years ago -- 
1977 if my information is correct. And, Mr. Speaker, since that time VIA Rail has certainly provided a reliable 
service to the taxpayers of this country in many respects. But, Mr. Speaker, it definitely has been a publicly 
subsidized form of transportation, and I might add, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion a heavily subsidized form of 
public transportation. 
 
In these last 12 years, Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that VIA Rail has absorbed more than $5 billion of taxpayers' 
money. I stress that, Mr. Speaker, that that is 5 billion, not 5 million or 500,000 or anything else, but $5 billion. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at that on an annual basis in the last few years, that translates into something in the 
order of $600 million per year. And, Mr. Speaker, to my way of thinking, and I believe to any reasonable person's 
way of thinking across this country, that is a considerable and significant number of dollars -- $600 million. What 
it translates to, Mr. Speaker, is probably something like $50 per person over this entire country and, Mr. Speaker, 
this issue has to be considered. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that across this country I believe that it is well-known and well-understood that this country is 
facing some severe financial pressures. We have heard all sorts of talk, and rightly so, about the deficit federally, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that all reasonable people say, hey, we have to look at that deficit; we 
have to examine all aspects, all aspects across government to look at how that deficit impacts on all of us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that it was fair and it was reasonable and very much justified that the federal 
government took a look at VIA Rail and said, hey, $600 million is a lot of money; let us examine whether or not 
this money is being spent in the most expeditious fashion. And, Mr. Speaker, there are those, there are those who 
disregard totally and completely the financial aspects of which I speak. And Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that for 
those people who disregard totally these financial matters, I say, Mr. Speaker, that is irresponsible. That is very 
irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I submit to you that when we talk about $600 million that goes into VIA Rail on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker, 
every reasonable person knows that that comes out of all of our pockets, Mr. Speaker. A portion of it comes out 
of your pocket; a portion of it comes out of every taxpayer's pocket across this country. So, Mr. Speaker, I say in 
the interests of taxpayers, in the interests of the deficit, in the interests of common sense, one has to look at $600 
million and the fact that it comes out of all of our pockets. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is only one part of the equation. I am not here to say that we should have a rail 
transportation system, a passenger rail transportation system across this country that has to pay its way, has to 
pay its way fully. I don't know that that's the position I would want to take. That, as well, would be a pretty hard 
and extreme and probably unjustified position to take. 
 
There is no question that a passenger rail service across this country has some very serious and significant 
benefits. Some of them can be measured in dollars; some of them can be measured in pride in the country; some 
of them can be measured in the aesthetics, in the tourism potential. In many, many areas this service has value. It 
definitely has value, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of people across this country who would 
agree. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it becomes a question again, again I suppose, of balance -- what is fair and reasonable and right 
for this country and for this province at this particular point in history and into the future. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the federal government in calling for, firstly, a five-year corporate business 
plan to be submitted -- I'd say that is responsible. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has called for 
not only a five-year corporate plan, but I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, they have as well called for a 20-year long-range 
plan for VIA Rail. That I understand, Mr. Speaker, will be -- that, Mr. Speaker, will be submitted to the federal 
cabinet and the federal minister, I would expect some time this month. 



 

 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm submitting to you that $600 million is a lot of money -- comes out of all of our pockets. The 
rail service definitely has many benefits to people across this country. But in light of both of those factors, calling 
for a five-year business plan, and in turn calling for a 20-year plan stretching out over the next 20 years, I think is 
just right for the people of Saskatchewan and right for the people of Canada to take a look down the road. Let us 
not be short-sighted, Mr. Speaker; let us look into the future and develop a comprehensive plan for what this 
transportation system should look like. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that within that plan you will find that many areas are looked at and addressed. I would 
say, Mr. Speaker, that within that plan I trust, I trust that levels of service, levels of service will be looked at. I 
would expect, Mr. Speaker, that the rates at which customers or passengers pay will be looked at. I would expect, 
Mr. Speaker, that internal management, internal management of that corporation would be looked at. Is it 
operating efficiently, or is it top-heavy in management, or is it top-heavy in other aspects of employees? Is it 
operating efficiently? Can we do a better job on behalf of the taxpayers and the passengers in providing that 
service? Are there alternatives to the present service? 
 
What I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, is the lowest cost alternative -- and I want to stress this, Mr. Speaker -- the lowest 
cost alternative would be the complete elimination of the service. I don't believe that that is fair nor reasonable, 
but that would be the lowest cost. Just blow it right away. 
 
The other end of it, Mr. Speaker, would be no, let us disregard the costs, let us disregard the $600 million per 
year and keep the status quo, keep it just as it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both of those are extreme positions. The status quo is too expensive, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, and 
this country cannot afford $600 million a year coming out of all of our pockets. That, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is 
not the position that I or this government would want to take. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the complete 
elimination of the service, the complete elimination of the service is another extreme position that I don't believe . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I'd like to call the hon. members to order and especially the member for Quill 
Lakes. I would ask him not to interrupt the speaker and not to cast reflections on the Chair from his seat. 
 
Order, order. And I also bring the member for Regina Elphinstone to order. I'm going to ask the member for 
Regina Elphinstone once more to cease and desist from speaking from his seat when the Speaker is on his feet. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate your intervention in calling members opposite to 
order. As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the lowest cost alternative would be the complete elimination of service. I 
don't believe that that is what I nor this government would stand for. 
 
The other alternative, Mr. Speaker, is the status quo. Put your head in the sand, totally disregard economics, 
totally disregard $600 million coming out of all of our pockets, and leave it as it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is some room for common ground here. I believe there is some room for reason, 
and that is a lesser cost alternative to present day service. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that upon consideration by 
the federal minister and his colleagues, I would trust, and I've made representations to this effect, that that would 
be the case, Mr. Speaker, that a lesser cost alternative would be found. 
 
I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that the public of Saskatchewan, the interested parties within Saskatchewan should 
have an opportunity for input. Mr. Speaker, I believe that their advice would be very well taken, Mr. Speaker, to 
listen to a number of interested parties within the province of Saskatchewan. And I say, Mr. Speaker, not partisan 



 

 

views, not partisan views at all, but views from the people of Saskatchewan who are genuinely interested in this 
country's future and this particular aspect of transportation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what this motion calls for, is to allow interested parties the option to come and express 
their opinion and perhaps hear all of the facts, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly don't have enough information 
myself. Mr. Speaker, I personally, and members on this side of the House, want to look at that five-year 
suggested plan that has been proposed. And I say only a suggested plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know virtually every member on this side of the House would want to view that report and have input in one 
way or the other. And I feel, Mr. Speaker, that that position is representative of the vast majority of people in 
Saskatchewan who would have interest in this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want you to know and I want members of the legislature to know that my information is that 
currently the northern remote regions, for instance, have a very good chance of surviving within this plan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, of course we know that that does affect many communities in Saskatchewan on the route that runs 
into Churchill, Manitoba, and through Hudson Bay and Kamsack and Canora and elsewhere. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that position has already been stated by the federal government -- that remote, 
remote area runs will remain. The other runs, Mr. Speaker, the jury is still out on them. What we're saying is 
there should be some public input. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to perhaps conclude by just stating that rail passenger service is part and parcel of this 
big thing that we call transportation. And, Mr. Speaker, my position is Minister of Highways and Transportation, 
and I have a vested interest, as do many members on this side of the House, in transportation, the transportation 
field in general. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we're talking of transportation, not only of passenger rail service. But I think we have to look 
at our highway system within the province of Saskatchewan -- an extra $10 million of real hard dollars put into 
our highway system this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to look at the bus transportation system across this province. We have the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company suffering heavy losses, can also be viewed as a public subsidy, Mr. Speaker, a public subsidy. It is a 
conscious decision by this government to keep the routes on STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) for 
the most part intact. Providing service to rural Saskatchewan is a firm commitment by this government. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is part and parcel of this big thing called transportation. 
 
I also say, Mr. Speaker, regarding bus service, we have made in the province of Saskatchewan the conscious 
decision to, as well, assist some private operators on routes that are not fully paying routes. And there is a public 
tender subsidy program that has retained many private bus line services to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I further add to this big thing called transportation the air aspect of transportation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I was very pleased to play a role in discussing with the Time Air Corporation on their movement into 
Saskatchewan and their take-over of Norcanair. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Time Air has certainly been a benefit to Saskatchewan. I believe they have improved service. 
They are having some difficulties right now with losing the postal run in northern Saskatchewan, but, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has assisted, this government has encouraged companies like Time Air to bring service 
into Saskatchewan. And this is just another part and parcel of this big thing that I call transportation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an important issue. It is part and parcel of an overall thrust of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, to pay close attention to transportation needs on behalf of all residents in Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that I and my colleague from the constituency of Melville have, as clearly as we could, 
today expressed the view of this government. I believe that this motion that we have on the order paper here 
today, Mr. Speaker, clearly, clearly gives the position of this government. I believe that the members opposite 
should agree with this position, but, Mr. Speaker, I will anxiously await members of the opposition and see 
whether or not, Mr. Speaker, and see whether or not, Mr. Speaker, they blindly take the totally irresponsible 
financial position that $600 million a year coming out of all of our pockets does not matter. 
 
Will they take that position, Mr. Speaker? That is the question that we have to ask. Will they take that position 
that $600 million per year coming out of all of our pockets as people across this country does not matter? Will 
they say that the status quo has to remain? I ask you that question, Mr. Speaker, and it will be interesting to see. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, will they say, will they say, blow the trains away? I doubt that. Or will they 
come to some common sense type of a position that says, indeed $600 million is a lot of money per year, but 
indeed there are benefits to passenger rail service in Saskatchewan, and the public of Saskatchewan should have 
the opportunity to have full input into a lesser cost alternative and full investigation of all of the facts, not of the 
political rhetoric, but all of the facts that will bring a common and reasonable decision on behalf of the federal 
government to this particular issue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to articulate this position to you and other members of the legislature 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, finally, finally, finally we've got this government in Saskatchewan aware of the 
fact that there may be some potentially destructive situation for Saskatchewan in what's happening in Ottawa. It's 
taken a long time to move them just to this position. 
 
I had an opportunity to meet with the Minister of Highways and Transportation briefly this morning, and we 
discussed what could be done on this resolution. I agree with the general thrust of most of what the member has 
put forward. As a matter of fact . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- As a matter of fact we worked out some agreement on part of the resolution. However, there 
are some parts of the resolution which leave the position of Saskatchewan not too clear, which we want to clarify. 
And as a consequence of that, Mr. Speaker, I will be offering an amendment towards the conclusion of my 
remarks today. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, that finally we've dragged this government into the Chamber to discuss VIA Rail. And the 
abandonment of VIA Rail, the proposed abandonment of VIA Rail has now sunk in to the members across the 
way, and we're beginning to discuss it. This is step number one, a very important step. 
 
It began, as far as I'm concerned, on June 7, Mr. Speaker, when there was a meeting held in Melville, 
Saskatchewan, which was attended by the member for Melville, the minister. It was attended by myself, 
representing the . . . as a critic on Highways and Transportation for Saskatchewan, and by the member of 
parliament for Yorkton-Melville constituency, as well as a representative of the Liberal Party. 
 
In addition to that, there were many officials from towns and villages and cities. And when I say officials, I mean 
mayors, aldermen, others, representing the interests of a variety of communities at that meeting in Melville on 
June 7 -- one month ago, Mr. Speaker -- exactly one month ago. 
 
At the meeting, the meeting itself generated a resolution which said that the members there should attempt to pass 



 

 

a resolution in the House here, which would encompass the spirit of the meeting that took place on June 7. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did they ask for hearings? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- The member for Melville spoke to that issue; I spoke to the issue; the member for the House 
of Commons spoke to that issue. Six days later I brought forward a resolution which was acknowledged by the 
media and by any fair-minded person as being a non-partisan resolution before this House. 
 
The member for Melville had had six days to think about it before I brought forward the resolution and -- or the 
motion -- and the motion was, quite simply: 
 

 That this Assembly strongly urge the Government of Canada to reinstate federal funding sufficient to maintain 
and improve VIA Rail passenger service which is vital to rural and urban Saskatchewan. 

 
That was turned down by the Assembly because the members opposite decided not to move ahead with the 
resolution at that time, would not give permission to move ahead. 
 
More recently, upon further announcements coming out of Ottawa, members on this side of the House attempted 
to bring forward a further resolution, or a motion under rule 39, which this motion has come forward today under, 
to the effect that it would address the question of the loss of VIA Rail passenger service to Saskatchewan. Again 
that was not permitted to go ahead by the members opposite. 
 
However, I'm quite prepared to discuss their resolution which is before the House now. I'm not going to stand and 
quibble about a few words here and there. We'll offer an amendment which we think will clear up the 
insufficiency in the motion that the government has moved at this time. 
 
I want to comment briefly on the remarks of the member for Melville and the member for Melfort, who moved 
and seconded the motion that we had before us. The member for Melville has sat on his hands for at least a month 
on this issue and suggested that, you know, there was no serious problem. Obviously he wasn't concerned about a 
problem. And he now brings down praise upon his own shoulders about what a saver of jobs he has been in the 
constituency of Melville. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, any time you feel free to tell the member for Weyburn to keep quiet, I would appreciate it, and 
I know the debate would go much smoother. 
 
The member for Melville suggests that the member for the House of Commons for Yorkton-Melville is doing 
nothing, doing nothing in the VIA Rail situation. Well I wish you could have been at the meeting, Mr. Speaker, 
because when we spoke to the audience that was there that evening, the member for Melville -- the member 
representing the constituency -- managed in his brilliance to get himself booed in his own constituency. Now 
that's unusual that a member of the Assembly strives to have that done in his own constituency; maybe in some 
other constituency, but to get himself booed in his own constituency in a meeting of this nature takes some 
engineering. 
 
(1115) 
 
I might say at the time, I might say at the time that the member of parliament for that constituency was not booed. 
He was given a very strong applause and support at that meeting because of the strong stand he took on retention 
of VIA Rail passenger service in Saskatchewan. The member for Melville was wishy-washy on the issue of VIA 
Rail, it was quite clear at the meeting, and he brought the booing on himself. 
 
Now I think that will lay to rest who is doing the job for the people of Melville, as far as VIA Rail is concerned. 
The member of parliament was certainly there; he was doing his job. The member of parliament was actively 



 

 

assisting in the circulation of a petition with regard to the retention of VIA Rail passenger service in 
Saskatchewan. Incidentally, that petition was sent to Ottawa and had over 6,000 names on it -- over 6,000 names. 
Many of these names were collected in town offices and in city municipal offices. People came in and signed the 
petition -- over 6,000 of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Melville makes a direct attack on the management of VIA Rail. He doesn't realize that the 
political situation here is what's paramount. It's not the management of VIA Rail. Their cousins in Ottawa put the 
management in VIA Rail. They put the managers there. They've been in charge of managing it since 1984, Mr. 
Speaker, so they shouldn't stand here and complain about their cousins in Ottawa not managing VIA Rail 
properly. Quite clearly they're in charge of the management in Ottawa. The political masters are in charge. The 
political masters are the Conservative Party, because they're the Government of Canada. 
 
And we have to find out who is in charge. Is the Conservative government in Ottawa in charge of this situation? I 
suppose we have to address the political question and send a political message to Ottawa. And I say it in the 
finest sense of the word, small "p" political. I don't suggest that it should be a New Democratic political message 
or a Conservative political message. It should be a political message that is clear to the Government of Canada 
that the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about the possible loss of VIA Rail service in Saskatchewan 
 
The Minister of Highways and Transportation in his comments today suggested that there's a substantial public 
subsidy in VIA Rail. I think no one will deny that, Mr. Speaker. There is a substantial public subsidy, but there's 
also a substantial pubic subsidy in the air lines, in the highway system, and other forms of transportation. 
Nobody's denying that. 
 
So to suggest that as an argument for holding public hearings doesn't make too much sense. There is a subsidy 
there, we will admit it. But it's interesting to note the Minister of Highways and Transportation said there should 
be some other options. There should be some other options, an alternative way of running VIA Rail in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to know what the minister's position is because he was very clear not to come out with any kind of 
position. He stressed the obvious one is that you completely abandon VIA Rail and we have no passenger 
service, or you keep it in place. But in between, the minister would not state what his position, but he says he 
wants an alternative. There should be some alternative, he says. 
 
Well here's one of the alternatives. It's the Orient Express idea, and it's been advanced by a promoter, Blyth and 
Company, and they're proposing an elite service for VIA Rail. And I suspect that you could get VIA Rail in 
Vancouver or you could get VIA Rail in Montreal and you could travel across Canada either way on VIA Rail on 
this alternate service. And Blyth and Company suggest that the tickets for a three-day trip between Montreal and 
Vancouver will cost travellers $2,495, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there's an elite option. Is that the option that the Minister of Highways and Transportation is suggesting to 
this House in his preliminary remarks on this motion? 
 
He suggests that we may want to stay with the status quo. Mr. Speaker, we've been trying for a month to get this 
government off their status quo of ignoring VIA Rail passenger service. We've been trying to get the country off 
their status quo and doing something positive. 
 
He says we should have public hearings. The Minister of Highways and Transportation says we should have 
public input. Well, Mr. Speaker, if you were listening at the last federal election as I was listening and as all the 
people in Saskatchewan were listening, they heard the Prime Minister and his politicians that are associated with 
him in the Conservative Party suggest the following. 
 
They said, oh we're not going to do away with VIA Rail; we're going to put more money into VIA Rail; we're 



 

 

going to improve the service of VIA Rail. That's the public input. We had it in the last federal election. The Prime 
Minister as much as said it himself. And I take the Prime Minister at his word. 
 
And what we have to do now is to arm the Prime Minister against this consultant's report which says VIA Rail in 
Saskatchewan should be abandoned, that we should have no rail passenger service. We must arm the House of 
Commons, the people that are in charge there, with our view that something has to be done. 
 
It's a political situation. Let's recognize it for exactly what it is, a political situation. The Prime Minister will have 
the value of our input on this particular resolution. He's already said he's in favour of it; he's going to put more 
money in VIA and he's going to improve the service; he's going to get new equipment. That's what the Prime 
Minister of Canada said in the last federal election. 
 
We want to support the Prime Minister in providing new equipment for the VIA Rail passenger service across 
Saskatchewan. That's what we want to do with this resolution. 
 
In the budget that the federal government has brought in, they suggested quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, that there 
should be reductions in the VIA Rail subsidy. VIA received $641 million subsidies last year, and the Mulroney 
government is instructing a company to absorb $500 million cut in subsidies over the next four years. 
 
The corporation will obviously be forced to implement poor quality service, cuts in staff, abandonment of routes, 
or quite possibly a combination of all three. And this prediction of mine, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately appears to be 
coming true. Had we acted a month ago, Mr. Speaker, had we sent a clear message to Ottawa a month ago about 
Saskatchewan's position on VIA passenger service across the province, we might not have been in the situation 
we're in today. We might have headed it off. But we allow the people in Ottawa to get entrenched in their 
thinking about VIA Rail and ignoring the political promises they made to the people of Canada, the people of 
Saskatchewan, about improving VIA service and keeping VIA service running. 
 
When VIA Rail Canada was set up as a Crown corporation more than a dozen years ago now, the company was 
stuck with old, and in some cases worn-out equipment that brought with it the high maintenance costs. The 
agreement signed with the two major railway companies to supply services forced very disadvantageous 
conditions on the new Crown corporation. 
 
Badly needed improvements were not made to road-beds, tracks, crossings, switches, and routes that would have 
made possible a switch to modern light, rapid, comfortable trains. Those few light, rapid, comfortable trains 
acquired by VIA have been used on the so-called Quebec City/Windsor corridor, and in particular on the 
Montreal/Toronto/Ottawa runs. Most Canadians have not seen any new passenger service rolling stock since well 
before VIA Rail was formed in January 1977. 
 
But even with all these obvious defects, Mr. Speaker, VIA has performed well for the travelling public. Even 
with these burdens, these handicaps on them, they've performed reasonably well. Ridership was up in each of the 
first five years of operation by as much as 12 per cent in 1978, and never less than 5.4 per cent. 
 
In the mid-1980s ridership slumped slightly, in 1985 and 1986, but in 1987 passenger numbers came back 
significantly, and again in 1988 a 9.4 per cent increase in passenger volume was recorded. Also in 1988 a 12.9 
per cent increase in passenger revenue was recorded, which equals an additional $25.1 million in ticket sales over 
the previous year. 
 
VIA in the last couple of years has tried hard to bring this trend about. Enhanced coach services, the Rockies by 
daylight, expanded first-class service -- namely VIA I -- and a strong pitch for tourist business have all helped. 
And you've heard the pitch for tourist business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year VIA trains had the highest occupancy in five years, and the trend is clearly up, clearly up. These are not 



 

 

the elite that are riding our trains, although there may be some riding them, Mr. Speaker. These are the average 
people of Canada. The pensioners or retired have time on their hands, they're free to travel, they're not bound in 
by timetables or time strictures. They can get on the train and see Canada. They're not rich. Low income people 
have access to VIA Rail, and they're obviously patronizing it. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, if the VIA Rail service is enhanced as the Prime Minister of Canada promised in the last 
federal election, which my friend from Morse seems to ignore . . . the member from Morse suggests that the 
Prime Minister didn't promise that. Well it's quite clear. In the federal election the Prime Minister of Canada and 
his candidates promised improved VIA service, more and better equipment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think if you get the onerous contract that was foisted on VIA Rail by the railway companies back in the 
formation of VIA Rail, you'd probably do a lot to lifting the debt and the subsidy if you'd put the burden where it 
should have been. But VIA at that time was a convenience for the railways, and they off-loaded, they off-loaded 
their old equipment, they off-loaded the run-down equipment onto VIA and consequently stuck it with the debt, 
and as a result VIA has to have massive subsidies just to keep its head above water. VIA's trying. Their 
government in Ottawa is in charge, at least in theory. They're in charge. They put the management in VIA. 
 
I believe that VIA Rail does work and can be made to work even better, even better. We are strongly committed 
to passenger rail service for all Canadians, and especially making passenger rail service accessible to the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It is quite clear that there are reasons for concern, and you're aware of them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I suppose we should examine whether VIA Rail is popular. I've looked at a couple of polls, for whatever they're 
worth, and these polls, one was taken in March of '89, so it's a relatively new poll, and this was the STV phone-in 
poll in Saskatoon. This was the phone-in poll where anybody phones in. They have to pay 50 cents extra on their 
telephone bill for each phone call. And a number of people took the opportunity to phone in to that VIA poll on 
March 29, 1989. And it says, the question, for the information of the member for Pelly, was: do you think 
passenger train service should be kept as it is in Canada? The answers: yes -- 88 per cent; no -- 12 per cent. So 
clearly the people of Canada believe that you should retain passenger service in Canada. 
 
(1130) 
 
Now when they say, kept as it is, doesn't mean that you keep the inadequacies of the system, it means you 
improve the system. The people want the system; you improve it. 
 
There was another poll taken recently, Mr. Speaker. It was after that one. It was on April 14 '89. "89 per cent in 
favor Canadians for VIA". And that's the poll. It's a headline in the Star-Phoenix, April 14, a Gallup poll. 
 

 Almost nine (out of the) 10 respondents to the survey -- 89 per cent -- indicated it would be a bad idea for 
Ottawa to discontinue Canada's national passenger train service, says the poll in the Montreal Gazette. 

 
 In fact, most respondents want passenger train service expanded. 
 
 The poll was taken April 5-8, a week after Transport Minister Benoit Bouchard indicated Ottawa's attempt to 

reduce the federal deficit could lead to the demise of Via. 
 
 Few passengers use the trains and Ottawa could use Via's $611 million subsidy for other things, said Bouchard, 

adding that a decision on Via's fate will come in June. 
 

And that is a fairly good indication of whether the public supports VIA Rail in Canada. 
 
Obviously, are there any reasons for concern? We have to examine that, Mr. Speaker. On June 7 a report in The 



 

 

Globe and Mail suggested as follows, "May end passenger service if VIA asks, Bouchard says." 
 

 Transport Minister Benoit Bouchard said yesterday he would consider shutting down all rail passenger service 
in Canada if VIA Rail were to propose such drastic action in the revised business plan it must deliver this month 
in response to a huge cut in its subsidy. 

 
 "I know it would be better if I didn't say that," Mr. Bouchard said outside the House of Commons after being 

peppered with questions about whether he was prepared to consider shutting down VIA Rail. 
 

A little later -- that was on June 7 -- a little later, on June 23, again in The Globe and Mail: 
 

 No hearings to be held about cuts in VIA Rail. 
 
 The government will move quickly to cut Via Rail services without the time-consuming process of National 

Transportation Agency hearings that allow objections to be heard, Transport Minister Benoit Bouchard said 
(today). 

 
And he goes on to state in this article on June 23: 
 

 "We have to move as quickly as possible," Mr. Bouchard told the Transport Committee. "It's quite possible we 
will go to the Governor-in-Council" for the orders to shut down routes. 

 
So the minister is committed to shutting down the routes without hearings. I think we have to alter the minister's 
position. There is reason for concern, and we must make our voice heard on this issue in Ottawa. And the way we 
can do it is by having a joint resolution to which we can all agree and sending that off to Ottawa. 
 
I want to refer to the article which raised our alarm again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a couple of days ago, and this 
article appeared originally in The (Ottawa) Citizen, was reprinted in The Globe and Mail. The article I have is 
from The Citizen and it says: 
 

 Passenger train fans express resign disappointment Tuesday over reports that VIA Rail intends to slash its 
network in half over the next few months. (It goes on to say) No rail connections between central Canada and 
the West. (This is in the mill.) The plan would see the lay-off of approximately 3,000 to 3,500 people (3,000 to 
3,500 people thrown onto the unemployment rolls). The plan recommends the most drastic cuts to prairie and 
Atlantic residents. 

 
So we should be alarmed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We should be doing something about it here in Saskatchewan. 
We expect that the minister will attempt to short cut, to short cut the process. We must get a message to the 
minister right away, and we want the minister and Prime Minister's opinion that they will agree to retain rail 
transportation service in the Prairies. It's vital to Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to deal with some other evidence which I think will be helpful to the members of the House. This is from a 
report; it's called The Last Straw. I have the report in my hand; I got it from the library, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
shows the pioneers of Canada in the railway business driving the last spike in the railway that bound Canada 
together from coast to coast. This last spike was driven in British Columbia. It shows the hon. gentleman in his 
top black hat and his white beard driving the last spike. 
 
This was a dream of that Canadian, our first prime minister, John A. Macdonald -- John A. Macdonald, the 
Conservative prime minister of Canada, whose dream it was to bind Canada together with a ribbon of steel. And 
he accomplished his dream by driving that last spike in British Columbia back a number of years ago. 
 
This report is entitled The Last Spike, but spike is scratched out -- purposely -- and it says the The Last Straw. 



 

 

This is the report of the task force on rail passenger service, October 1981. 
 
There's some important and interesting submissions in this report. Oh, by the way, this is by the Conservative 
Party of Canada, so I'm sure all members across the way will be glued to the comments I'm making about who 
the luminaries were that made submissions, that made submissions to this report. 
 
Well, let's start with the Premier of Saskatchewan, the now Premier of Saskatchewan. He wasn't at that time. He 
was in the opposition at that time. But the Premier of Saskatchewan had a contribution to make, and he said this 
-- it mentions his name, it says Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan: 
 

 In fact, next to natural resources, transportation is the most important factor in the minds of the people in this 
part of Canada. 

 
That is the Leader of the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan in 1981 suggesting that transportation is the most 
important factor in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan at that time. This is the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
The Premier of Saskatchewan made the draw from his comments. The people that put this report together, the 
Conservative Party of Canada, draw again on the comments of the Premier of Saskatchewan where the Premier of 
Saskatchewan says: 
 

 In Saskatchewan Dr. (and you know his name, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he's the Premier of Saskatchewan now) 
provided a figure of 13 jobs in the province known already to be eliminated by the cut-backs. 

 
While the Premier of Saskatchewan now, who was the Leader of Opposition then, was alarmed that 13 jobs had 
already been eliminated by VIA cut-backs in 1981 by those terrible Liberals in Ottawa, and the Premier of 
Saskatchewan was obviously alarmed at that, because he made a submission -- he went to this Conservative Party 
task force on passenger rail service and made this submission about 13 jobs being lost. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we're talking, not about 13 jobs here, we're talking upward of 3,000 jobs in 
Canada -- a lot of those jobs, in the hundreds, in Saskatchewan. Where's the Premier? Where is our Premier? 
Why is not our Premier speaking up on this issue? Why wasn't he speaking up a month ago? Why didn't he come 
in with his resolution or a motion before this time? This is the 11th hour. Where was the Premier of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
There are other notables contributed to this Progressive Conservative study on the task force on rail passenger 
service in 1981. Let's see if I can come up with another one here. Mr. Dan McKenzie, member of parliament 
from Manitoba. 
 
I know the members opposite don't like to have the record read back to them. They don't like it -- the member 
from Weyburn especially. The member from Weyburn especially is very sensitive when somebody reminds him 
of what he said in the past. And when we remind the members of this House what the Prime Minister of Canada 
said before the last election about putting more money into VIA, improving the service, buying new equipment, 
the member for Weyburn gets very hostile and he makes a lot of his speeches from his seat at that time. And it's 
too bad they're not on the record because maybe we'd like to have him on record. He very seldom gets on record, 
and when he does it's a cracked record; that's the problem . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, we want to deal with Mr. Dan McKenzie, Conservative MP who made a submission to this task force, from 
Manitoba. He said, he pointed out that his inquiries had produced no support for the cut-backs, termed them an 
abrogation of western Canadian rights. Now there was a Tory standing up for western Canada -- Mr. Dan 
McKenzie of Winnipeg-Assiniboine -- in favour of VIA Rail passenger service. If we can just enlist people like 
Mr. Dan McKenzie, who's in Ottawa, to the view that he held in 1981, we have no fear of losing all of our VIA 
Rail passenger service in Saskatchewan, as this commissioned report suggests. 
 



 

 

But we have to, we have to enlist the support of the member for Wascana who insists on, like the member for 
Weyburn, making a lot of his speeches from his seat. And again, unfortunately, they don't get onto the record of 
this House. 
 
There are many other prominent people that made contributions to this task force report of the Conservative Party 
in 1981. Take Charlie Mayer -- Charlie Mayer, MP from Manitoba Portage-Marquette. And the member for 
Weyburn will be glad to hear what Mr. Mayer had to say about this, quote: 
 

 Railways and rail passenger service (let me repeat that, rail passenger service) are as important to many western 
Canadians as culture and language are to Canadians in Quebec. 

 
Now that's pretty important. Passenger rail service as important to western Canadians just as much as culture and 
language are to Canadians in Quebec. And Charlie Mayer said this. Are we to deny Charlie Mayer, former 
cabinet minister . . . Is he still cabinet minister? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh yes. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Still a cabinet minister. And if we can just enlist Mr. Charlie Mayer's view that he held in 
1981 in support of our position that passenger rail service should not be cut out completely in Saskatchewan . . . 
In other words, they should hold the Prime Minister to his promise that they would improve it, improve the 
service, buy new equipment. That's what we should be doing. We should stick to the Prime Minister's promise of 
what he said he would do. 
 
There are many other contributions. Well, there was Bill McKnight was there. I think he's a federal cabinet 
minister. If we can just enlist his support -- Mr. Bill McKnight. He made a submission to the task force on VIA 
Rail passenger service. 
 
There are a number of others. Oh, there's Mr. Ralph Katzman, made a submission in support of VIA Rail 
passenger service. I don't know, maybe when we get into Highway estimates we can find out if Mr. Katzman will 
support that, since he's now employed by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1145) 
 
But these people that supported this . . . And I don't want to just draw on the names of politicians at the provincial 
or federal level, Mr. Speaker. There were mayors from all the cities -- Winnipeg, Saskatoon, many other cities 
along the VIA route, many of them in Saskatchewan who attended to this commission and supported -- supported 
-- the retention of VIA Rail passenger service in 1981, who, like our Premier, were alarmed that 13 jobs had been 
lost, when in fact looming up on the horizon are hundreds of jobs being lost in Saskatchewan and passenger rail 
service being lost. 
 
The members opposite say, but no decisions have been made. Well if we wait around here, like the member for 
Weyburn would have us do, until the decisions are made, it will be too late. What we have to do is get a message 
to Ottawa - 
_ it has to be sooner rather than later, and I agree it's getting pretty late now -- which supports the position that 
Saskatchewan people want us to take that VIA Rail passenger service should be retained. 
 
This is supported by the polls; this is supported by members of parliament; this is supported by members of the 
legislature; it's been supported by the mayors in the villages and towns. 
 
To just give you a sampling of some of the people that attended the meeting at Melville on June 7, one month ago 
today: the mayor of Melville; aldermen from Moose Jaw; support from the city of Saskatoon; aldermen from 
Yorkton; the mayor of Biggar; the mayor of Watrous; the mayor of Kamsack; a representative from Ituna; a 



 

 

representative from Canora. There were many people representing communities along the VIA route in 
Saskatchewan who want to retain VIA passenger service and in fact want to have it improved. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said that I find some shortcoming in the motion that the member for Melville put 
before the House this morning, and before I resume my seat I want to offer the amendment that I said I would 
offer, and the amendment is as follows: 
 

 That all the words after "further" be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 
 that this Assembly urges the federal Minister of Transport and Prime Minister to immediately disavow such 

reports, and make a firm commitment to the continuance of rail service in this province with no reduction from 
current levels. 

 
Now that is the amendment which, if accepted, I believe will make the motion that the member for Melville and 
the member for Melfort put forward, will make it complete, Mr. Speaker, because what the original motion that 
they put forward changed from the previous day, which was denied under rule 39, was making a commitment to 
the continuance of passenger rail service. It is absolutely imperative that we make a commitment here and now to 
the continuation of passenger rail service. We must indicate that we're in support of that. If, as the member says 
from Melfort, that he's unsure, he says he doesn't want to go with all the subsidies and he doesn't want to 
completely abandon it, but he's somewhere in between, then I think what we should have is an amendment which 
will allow the federal government to express the opinion that there be a firm commitment to the continuance of 
rail service in this province, with no reduction from the current levels. So I move this, seconded by the member 
from Moose Jaw South. I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely happy, Mr. Speaker, to be seconding the motion to the 
resolution by my colleague from Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the course of seconding this amendment, I wish to make a few remarks, both to the amendment 
and to the main motion. 
 
Yesterday in this House, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Transportation, under questioning from the Leader of the 
Opposition, said in his responses that no final decisions have been made by the federal government, by the 
federal cabinet, in regard to the future of passenger rail service in Canada. He said that once, and then he said it 
again, and then he said it three times. Three times yesterday that minister said, tried to assure this House and the 
people of Saskatchewan, that no final decisions have been made in Ottawa regarding the future of passenger rail 
service in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I disagree. I fundamentally disagree. As sure as I stand here, I believe that the decision to end 
passenger rail service in Canada has been made -- has been made. I believe, in the federal government's desire to 
reduce its massive deficit, it has turned its attention on passenger rail service in Canada and has decided to end 
that service across the country. 
 
Now they understand the political unacceptability of making that announcement, and so they have gone about a 
process of trying to fudge their announcement through a number of studies and announcements and business 
plans, and so on. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the decision has been made in Ottawa to end passenger rail 
service in Canada, and nothing that the Minister of Transport in this province says will change my mind on that 
score. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely incumbent upon this legislature to send to the federal government the 
clearest possible of messages and in the most concise terminology; therefore the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore the amendment that clearly would indicate the position of the legislature of Saskatchewan, 
representative of the people of Saskatchewan, that rail service in this province, rail service in this country, should 



 

 

receive the commitment to continue. That should be the position of this legislature and the position of all 
members, particularly in light of the fact that the decision at the federal level has been made. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would remind the member from Weyburn, there's ample time for 
him to get into this debate. When I resume my seat, we'll be happy to have him stand and share for the record his 
view on the future of passenger rail service in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I suggested that the decision has been made, it's not an opinion that is shared simply by 
myself or other members of this side of the House. From The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, on Monday, June 12, 
the column written by Hugh Winsor -- and Hugh Winsor, as you well know, is the national political editor for 
The Globe and Mail -- Mr. Winsor comes to the very same conclusion. And he entitled his article that day, 
"Secrecy, manipulation the instruments as government strangles Via." And within the body of his article he says, 
and I agree entirely: 
 

 Pursuing its over-all goal of reducing the deficit, the cabinet's (the federal cabinet's) expenditure review 
committee decided to kill Via Rail, except for some minor services to remote areas . . . 

 
Further in the article: 
 

 Mr. Bouchard didn't say that he would kill Via Rail, even though death was the certain outcome of cutting the 
Crown agency's subsidy. It will just take longer this way, and the Transport Minister can confuse the public 
with talk about studies, task forces and business plans. 

 
Well the Minister of Transport in this province, I guess like his federal counterpart, is trying to confuse the issue 
here by talking about studies, task force, business plans, public input. That's just fudging the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
The decision in Ottawa has been made, and the only course for this legislature to take is to issue a clear and 
concise unanimous statement, the kind of statement that is contained in this amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like the member from Melville, I share great concern about the loss of VIA Rail as it will affect . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . now the member from Wascana is anxious to get into this debate. I invite him, when 
my remarks are concluded, to stand up and state his position on the future of VIA Rail. I will certainly sit down 
when I've concluded my remarks, and I will wait for the member from Wascana to speak to this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like the member from Melville, the community that I represent has a long history as a railroad town, 
and if the federal government is allowed to persist, to pursue this policy of ending passenger rail service, that will 
have some very direct and very serious consequences on the community that I represent, and, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to draw those consequences to your attention and to the attention of all members. 
 
Today the community of Moose Jaw and the communities along the main line of the CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway) across the southern portion of the province, today my community and other communities, Regina, 
Moosomin, Broadview, all along, are served by the passenger rail train that we've known for many, many years 
as the Canadian, part of the VIA network; we're served by the Canadian. Twice daily the Canadian passes 
through on the CP main line through our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we lose the Canadian from Moose Jaw, if we lose it from the CP main line in southern 
Saskatchewan, in my community alone, Mr. Speaker, that will mean the loss of some 20 jobs -- some 20 full-time 
jobs in the city of Moose Jaw. Those jobs consist today of seven locomotive engineers, three conductors, two 
baggage men, three train men, a ticket agent, and four car men. Mr. Speaker, if passenger rail service is ended, if 
the Canadian ceases to pass through our communities, the city that I represent will lose 20 full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that represents in my community a wage of some $996,000 on an annual basis. If you add to that, 
Mr. Speaker, the fuelling contract that exists in the city of Moose Jaw for the Canadian, for VIA, if you add the 



 

 

value of that fuelling contract which is available to a number of dealers in Moose Jaw, the economic loss to the 
community of Moose Jaw is well over a million dollars. Mr. Speaker, that's an economic loss that the community 
I represent simply cannot stand. To lose 20 jobs in Moose Jaw, to lose a million dollars out of our local economy, 
would be a severe blow to the city that I represent. 
 
But even more, Mr. Speaker, even more than simply the financial implications are the community implications, 
because when we lose these 20 jobs, we lose perhaps 20 families -- 20 individuals, 20 couples -- households who 
are involved in our community in a whole variety of ways. Mr. Speaker, the consequence for the city of Moose 
Jaw in losing these jobs and these people would be tragic. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, three years ago, about three years ago, the Canadian Pacific 
Railroad chose to withdraw the passes earned by railroad employees for travel in their retirement. The CPR 
railroad unilaterally withdrew those passes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors, retired railroaders from the community of Moose Jaw, led the way across this nation in 
fighting the railroads to regain the right of those passes. And, Mr. Speaker, they won their battle. They led the 
way out of Moose Jaw across the nation and they won that battle. They won their pass back; now they may lose 
the train. Mr. Speaker, now they may lose the train. A pass that was won over years of hard work for those 
railroads, won back three years ago, now the prospect of losing the train. Mr. Speaker, that's an important 
consequence in the community that I represent. It's an important consequence all across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a broader issue here. In this nation today we are, at least in rhetoric from the federal 
government, committed to making all of our economic decisions in light of the environment, in light of 
consideration of sustainable economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have not heard one word, not one word from the federal government or from members opposite 
regarding the sustainability, the environmental sustainability of this decision to end passenger rail service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when we are more and more concerned as a people about our environment, it only makes 
good sense that an efficient, well-run, well-managed rail service conserves fuel, is primarily better for the 
environment of Canada than for increasing air or road traffic. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel this has not been addressed by the federal government in any of their consideration. They 
have simply decided, as a quick way to cut costs, to end VIA Rail across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's a great irony in all of this. When the Liberal government was in Ottawa and proposed cutting 
back on VIA Rail, well the federal Conservatives at that time screamed loud and long and supported them in their 
fight. When they ran before the next election, they promised improvements to VIA Rail, improved service. What 
happens now? They want to cut the entire rail passenger service in Canada. Mr. Speaker, that's ironic. 
 
It's ironic too that 122 years ago a Conservative government and a Conservative prime minister had a vision of 
this nation. He had a dream that would forge a nation from coast to coast, from sea to sea. And that dream was to 
be built and to be forged on a rail line, on a ribbon of steel that would run from coast to coast to enable Canadians 
to travel from coast to coast, to enable immigrants and settlers to come to the west and homestead. That was the 
dream of a Conservative government and a Conservative prime minister, and they built that dream and they built 
this nation. 
 
Now these 122 years later we have another Conservative government and another Conservative Prime Minister 
who seem to be willing to destroy that dream and to destroy that ribbon of steel that has linked our country from 
its beginning from coast to coast. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, you see, what I'm afraid has happened is that the current Prime Minister and the current 
Conservative government in Ottawa somehow have a vision of Canada that ends on the borders of Ontario and 
Quebec. And so we have a Conservative government in Ottawa, you see, that sets interest rates for downtown 
Toronto and not for Main Street, Moose Jaw, or Melville or Moosomin, but for downtown Toronto, as if 
somehow Canada ends at the borders of Ontario and Quebec. 
 
We've got a Conservative government in Ottawa now who just, without notice, will devastate the communities of 
Summerside, Prince Edward Island, Portage la Prairie; a Conservative government that's willing to close rural 
post offices; and now a Conservative government in Ottawa that's willing to do away with passenger rail service 
in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic that one Conservative prime minister would build this country, would build the rail 
line in this country, and now another generation and another Conservative Prime Minister is willing to destroy 
the dream and tear it apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is more to passenger rail service in this country, there is more to VIA Rail than just 
economics, than just finances. In the 122 years, some things about this nation have not changed. We are a vast 
nation from coast to coast. We are a sparse population scattered across a vast nation. We need those links to tie us 
together. It's not just in reality that the passenger rail service in Canada ties us together; it is a symbol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that train that twice daily passes through this community, that passes through my community, it's 
called The Canadian . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from Wascana seems to want to attack VIA 
Rail from his seat. I would appreciate him getting on his feet and doing it there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that train, in my view, is well-named. To name that train The Canadian is well-named because it is 
that ribbon of steel, it is that link to every part of our country. And I don't think, Mr. Speaker, there's one of us, I 
don't think there's one of us who has grown up on the CP main line who has not at some time stood on a rail 
crossing . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you for bringing the Minister of Health to order. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I would just simply ask the hon. member to carry on with his remarks and not 
comment on the Speaker's actions. I don't think that adds to the debate. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, I don't think there's one of us who have 
grown up anywhere near the CP main line in southern Saskatchewan who have not at one time or another stood at 
a rail crossing and watched the Canadian as it rolls by and not pictured ourselves sitting in that dome car, left 
with the thought and the dream of travelling perhaps to the Canadian Rockies, perhaps through the great 
Canadian Shield, perhaps into the Maritimes. 
 
I don't think there's any one of us who grew up along the CP main line in southern Saskatchewan who hasn't seen 
that silver train sitting in the station at night, on a cold winter night, and seen the steam rising, and to have that 
sense of adventure, the magic and the mystery that goes with passenger rail service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don't think there's any one of us who have grown up along the CP main line who hasn't seen that Canadian 
passing through on a summer night across the prairie, and the little dots of lights travelling along this prairie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's more to passenger rail service than simply economics and finances. There is a magic and 
there is a mystery and there is a link. There is a link in that train that pulls our nation together. 



 

 

 
It was the dream of the Conservative Party in 1867, of a Conservative prime minister in 1867. Now what we have 
is a Conservative Prime Minister and a Conservative government in Ottawa, supported by their Conservative 
friends here in Saskatchewan, who seem to think that Canada ends on the borders of Ontario and Quebec, and 
that those links that can draw us together, like passenger rail service, are no longer important. And in their 
desperate attempts to lower the deficit which they've created, they're willing to sacrifice this heritage of our 
nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my view, Canada without a passenger rail service is like Canada without a maple leaf. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to support the amendment that has been brought forward by my colleague from Saskatoon 
Westmount, and I hope members opposite will support it so that from this House can go the clearest possible of 
messages from the federal government, that the people of Saskatchewan wish to see the continuance of passenger 
rail service in this province and in all regions of this country. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a few comments before I ask for leave to adjourn debate 
on this particular motion. 
 
What I would say, Mr. Speaker, is this. If you go back yesterday to question period when this issue first came up 
-- and I think it's important to read the Hansard from yesterday as to what was said -- and in questioning by the 
Leader of the Opposition to the Minister of Transportation for the province of Saskatchewan, what goes on is the 
Leader of the Opposition proposed a motion, Mr. Speaker, and listen to what it said: 
 

 I'm going to send a copy over to you. You can consider it, and if you have some word changes . . . (and then) if 
you want to introduce it, that's fine by us; we don't care who gets the credit for it. 

 
And then he goes on and lists what the motion was and then asked that -- and to give the benefit of the doubt to 
the Leader of the Opposition -- asked that what we have here is a motion that all sides of the House can then 
agree to, have a unanimous resolution, send that unanimous resolution off to Ottawa, and maybe by it being a 
unanimous resolution of the House, it might have more impact than simply one side of the House or the other 
side of the House. That was the intention of it. 
 
And then the words of the Leader of the Opposition is: 
 

 . . . some word changes we'll accept them. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there were some modest word changes proposed. The motion was introduced by the member 
from Melville and the Minister of Transportation, designed so that everyone in the House could support it -- 
perhaps not exactly as every member would like to see it, but so everyone could accept it, and then a unanimous 
motion could be introduced. 
 
Now there was some concern as to whether or not this was being grandstanded, but we put that aside, Mr. 
Speaker. So the amendment that was introduced today basically says that we should make no changes whatsoever 
to the current way things are being done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, is that designed to adapt to change or adjust to change, or is that designed simply to say: 
status quo, don't change, leave it exactly the way it is? 
 
Now the members say, vote against it. But the purpose of it, as advanced by the Leader of the Opposition, was to 



 

 

get a unanimous view of the whole House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would simply suggest that what we try to do is go back to that premise advanced by the Leader of the 
Opposition, and that is to try to adopt this thing so that everybody can agree to it, and therefore it can have some 
force and effect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this amendment advanced today by the member from Saskatoon Westmount is not designed to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. So I would think what we should do is reflect upon this over the weekend, see if we can't get it resolved 
so that we have one motion that all can agree to, and accomplish the purpose as stated by the Leader of the 
Opposition yesterday. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:12 p.m. to 12:19 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Muller Meiklejohn t 
 McLeod Martin t 
 Andrew Toth t 
 Lane Sauder t 
 Taylor Johnson t 
 Swan Swenson t 
 Muirhead Martens t 
 Maxwell Baker t 
 Schmidt Wolfe t 
 Hodgins Gardner t 
 Gerich Kopelchuk t 
 Hepworth Saxinger t 
 Hardy Britton t 
-- 26 R 

Nays 
 
 Prebble Anguish t 
 Shillington Goulet t 
 Lingenfelter Pringle t 
 Tchorzewski Calvert t 
 Koskie Lautermilch t 
 Brockelbank Trew t 
 Upshall Van Mulligan t 
-- 14 R 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 16 



 

 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's my pleasure to introduce to you and the members of the 
legislature, officials from the Department of Highways and Transportation. Seated to my right is the deputy 
minister, Mr. Jack Sutherland; to his right is Mr. Myron Herasymuik, the assistant deputy minister, operations; 
directly behind me is Paul Fitzel, executive director of support services division; and to Mr. Sutherland's right is 
Phil Pearson, executive director of transportation, planning and research division. And Mr. Speaker, it's a 
pleasure to bring these officials here to the committee today to discuss the estimates of Highways and 
Transportation. And I look forward to the many questions that I am sure members of the opposition have. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to start off the estimates today by sending over to the minister a 
number of what I regard as more or less routine questions which the minister could peruse and assure me that he 
would be able to supply the answers to me in a reasonable length of time. I'll send these over as soon as I get a 
page. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to advise the Assembly that not only myself having been in contact 
with the federal minister, I want to advise the Assembly that officials in my department have been in discussions 
with federal officials or federal counterparts, if you like, and have as well been closely monitoring the situation. I 
feel that we certainly have adequately expressed our representations to the federal government. 
 
In direct response to your question, I would say no, at this point in time on this particular issue, over the last short 
while there has not been any direct correspondence by myself to the federal minister, other than personal, direct 
meetings with the federal minister. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- What we have here, Mr. Chairman, is a most critical situation with regard to VIA Rail. The 
minister rises in his estimates and gets off on a tangent about being out of the House for 17 days. That has 
nothing to do with VIA Rail. It's a red herring to try and draw people off the track of this government's position 
on VIA Rail. We want to find out what their position is. 
 
The minister says the only representations that he's made of recent times is a personal representation to Benoit 
Bouchard, the minister. Nothing in writing. He's confirmed that there's absolutely nothing in writing about this 
most earth-shaking of a development with regard to VIA Rail in Canada. 
 
Obviously somebody has been touch with the tourism minister in Alberta and the tourism minister in British 
Columbia, because they're talking about taking over VIA Rail. Has the Government of Canada been in touch with 
you or your Premier, Mr. Minister, asking you to provide options about VIA Rail and how it should be handled in 
Saskatchewan? Has there been any communication? There obviously has been with other provinces. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I have the following response. And I think we could look back in history, 
and not all that long ago, and find numerous examples of what I'm going to say. 
 
I think it's extremely important that good, solid representatives in the province of Saskatchewan work towards 
and seek and ultimately have good working relationships with other levels of government, and extremely 
important for the well-being of the people in this province that members on this side of the House, and indeed 
members on the opposite side of the House have a good working relationship that is in the best interest of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I feel, Mr. Chairman, and although we have disagreements with the federal government from time to time, for the 
most part we have a good relationship. And, Mr. Speaker, had I just sent a letter, as has happened on other issues 



 

 

in the past, what would the opposition have said? Oh, you just sent a little letter. Who's going to read that? Why 
didn't you fly to Ottawa? Why didn't you chat with Benoit Bouchard when he was here? Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
took that direct approach and I spoke, and I spoke strongly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, to Mr. 
Bouchard. 
 
I say, secondly, Mr. Chairman, indeed the strike of 17 days has something to do with this issue because this issue 
has to do with federal-provincial relations. And, Mr. Chairman, my method of operation and the method of 
operation of such people as our Premier in negotiating with the federal government has been and still is today of 
very serious importance to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the proof of the pudding of that relationship, Mr. Chairman, is in such things as billions of dollars in drought 
payments, billions of dollars in deficiency payments, billions of dollars in help in various areas that have helped 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that our methods of dealing and negotiating with the federal government have been, 
for the most part, fairly successful, Mr. Chairman, I submit to you far more successful than antics of the NDP 
such as walking out on strike for 17 days, such as encouraging mass demonstrations, obstructionistic tactics, and 
whatever else the radicals on the opposition side of the House can come up with and put forth to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Another diversion by the Minister of Highways and Transportation. Mr. Minister of 
Highways, you've taken so many detours on the VIA Rail thing today, I'm beginning to wonder if you're, you 
know, a specialist in detours because you're certainly detouring on this issue. 
 
The only thing that you've done today in the legislature or recently that has any bearing on VIA Rail is today in 
the House where you brought forward a motion. You and your seat mate brought forward a motion, and then you 
adjourned the debate so we couldn't decide what the outcome of the motion would be. 
 
A motion of some urgency I gathered, because you brought it forward under rule 39 which provides for a matter 
of some urgency to require unanimous consent of the House. We agreed with you. It's an emergency; it should be 
dealt with. 
 
But then you adjourn it, and then you stand on your feet and you talk about everything but VIA Rail, Mr. 
Minister. I think you have to face up to the facts that things are happening here and you're not doing anything 
about it. 
 
I want to ask you whether your seat mate, the member for Melville, reported to you on his trip to see Mr. 
Bouchard after the June 7 meeting. Did your seat mate, the member for Melville, report to you on his contact 
with Mr. Bouchard about VIA Rail? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to refer to yesterday's events in this legislature, whereby the 
Leader of the Opposition, and I will quote, Mr. Chairman, says: 
 

 I'm going to send a copy over to you. You can consider it, and if you have some word changes we'll accept 
them. If you want to introduce it, that's fine by us; we don't care who gets the credit for it. 

 
And that was the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, this government took that motion that was forwarded to us, I think five or 10 minutes after 2. 
We looked at it and said, no, that does not quite clearly express the position of this government with respect to 
VIA Rail. And so we made some changes to it that the Leader of the Opposition said the day before he'd accept, 
made some changes forward to it, brought it to the legislature this morning. 
 
And then the members of the opposition take that motion that I feel very adequately and accurately and correctly 
articulated a very good position on behalf of the people of this province, and they took that, Mr. Speaker, and 
they changed it back to just about what they had yesterday, but added a little hooker on there that said, "with no 
reduction from current levels." 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say to you and I articulated this morning, that position is indicative of the irresponsibility of 
members opposite. The members opposite continue to pay no heed, no attention whatsoever to the $600 million 
deficit that that corporation runs on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I submit to you that that $600 million doesn't come out of the air; it comes out of everybody's 
pockets. Let us not hide our heads in the sand and think that money grows on trees. It comes out of all of our 
pockets and it is a fundamental consideration, and I say not the only consideration, certainly. VIA Rail, the issue 
of rail passenger service in Saskatchewan is an important issue. Rail passenger service has some benefits. 
 
But we cannot just agree to a motion that says forget the money; we're just going to leave service exactly as it is 
and take a hard and fast and extreme approach. Let us take a more moderate approach, Mr. Chairman, one that is 
realistic in today's society. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite asks about the member for Melville and what his representations have 
been. And, Mr. Chairman, I sit in this legislature with pride beside the man today who introduced what I view as 
a fair motion; beside the man, the member for Melville, that went home to his constituents, was responsive, was 
responsive to an issue, a local issue, faced the issue; went to a public meeting, clearly, expressly articulated his 
thoughts and his views as an elected member in the constituency of Melville; stood before and on behalf of the 
people of his constituency and talked about the issue. Mr. Chairman, I feel that was responsible. 
 
The member from Melville did say at the meeting that he was prepared to go to Ottawa if need be. Mr. Chairman, 
I do know that the member opposite has not at this time gone to Ottawa, and, Mr. Chairman, I would think that 
the member who sits beside me, the member from Melville, has some degree of confidence in his Minister of 
Highways and Transportation in adequately expressing concerns to the federal government. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I say here again, rather than condemn a member who is working very hard on behalf of his 
constituents and facing the issues of the day, why not offer just a little bit of credit, just a little bit of 
encouragement for a member who has in the past and continues to speak well on behalf of his constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Well I notice that the Minister of Highways has equal facility with the road-block as he does 
with the detour sign, and he's road-blocking this issue. 
 
The member for Melville at the meeting in front of 150 witnesses says, I'm going to Ottawa; Benoit Bouchard is a 
personal friend of mine and I'm going to talk to him. There's witnesses out there in Melville in his constituency, 
and there are mayors, and there are representatives from cities and villages, and there are local people, railway 
workers, and he stood before them and said, Benoit Bouchard is a personal friend of mine and I'm going to go 
and see him in Ottawa . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you've had plenty of time, Mr. Minister. You've 
delayed the motion that's before the House. 
 
You know, he complains about us offering an amendment. In the arsenal of democracy there's a thing called the 



 

 

sub-amendment. If you didn't like our amendment, you could remove some of it by the sub-amendment. 
 
But I don't suppose you were thinking too clearly, as indicated by the fact that you took an urgent motion brought 
up under rule 39 and delayed it, wouldn't vote on it. This is something urgent that's got to get to Ottawa to let 
them know what our view is. 
 
Can you imagine what Benoit Bouchard, the personal friend of the member from Melville, is thinking right now 
as he gets the word from Regina? He says, the Tories are sitting on the motion at Regina, so we're safe from 
Regina's point of view. They're not going to raise any ruckus. 
 
Because what you're going to do, Mr. Minister, I suspect, if we don't goad you a bit, is to put it on the order paper 
like government motions where we've got one on interest rates. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And who put that one on? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- And who put that one on? Well it was the member from Melfort. He put it on . . . this is his 
old trick of road-blocking again. This is a definite road-block. He put something on on interest rates on the order 
paper, Mr. Chairman. That has been standing on the order paper, it's got to be two months -- two months. He 
won't discuss it. He passes it. Every time it comes up under orders of the day, he says "stand," and won't discuss 
it. 
 
And is that the fate of the motion on VIA Rail, on this most important issue, which they have now road-blocked 
by their vote in the House today. That is indeed unfortunate. It's within my knowledge, Mr. Minister, that the 
Minister of Transport is looking to the provincial governments to assume responsibility for rail services to 
operate within their provincial boundaries. That is a paragraph out of a letter to the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what representations have been made from the Minister of Transport to the Premier of Saskatchewan? He's 
obviously . . . the Minister of Transport is making these representations because he got through to Alberta and 
B.C. Now the thing that I don't understand is, don't you open your mail? Where's the letter, where's the 
communication, in whatever form it was, because it got through to Alberta and B.C. Why hasn't it got through to 
you, Mr. Minister, about what your options are for VIA? 
 
Because I'll tell you quite frankly, Mr. Minister, if it is permitted that each province will take over the operation 
of VIA Rail, you'll have a Balkanized railway. You'll have 10 little railways. No, you'll have two big railways in 
Ontario and Quebec, and you'll have eight more little ones which will be of no value to anyone, or very little 
value. 
 
If we're going to retain a national railway passenger system, it is categorically and publicly indicated to the 
Minister of Transport that under no circumstances would this province accept responsibility for rail passenger 
service. And I want to know why the minister isn't doing that on his own initiative if he's got nothing from the 
Minister of Transport, or the Prime Minister, or the federal government. Why, on his own initiative, hasn't he put 
something down in writing and said to the federal government, get that idea out of your head that you're going to 
Balkanize the railway across Canada as far as passenger service is concerned? 
 
What's going to happen here, Mr. Minister, if you're not on your toes, if you're not on your toes in this issue, 
you'll have the province of British Columbia and Alberta running a quasi-Oriental Express through the 
mountains, which will be very attractive to the tourists . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Those who can afford it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Yes. And then you'll have another train, maybe in Ontario or Quebec, obviously, and you'll 
have a few northern routes. But by and large you'll have a freight system, not a passenger system. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, what is your plan, what is your game plan to head off a potential disaster in this area? I want to 
know your plan in detail. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would firstly respond to earlier comments in the member's last few 
moments of talking about road-blocking and accusing I, or this government, because a debate was adjourned 
today for very good reason, of road-blocking. 
 
I find it extremely interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite would have the gall, I guess is the only apt 
word that I can think to describe it, but have the gall to talk about road-blocking. Mr. Chairman, I submit to you, 
and I submit to all members of this legislature, that in the history of this province there has never been, has never 
been a more obstructionistic opposition than currently exists. There has never been an opposition before that has 
sided with the words: we plan to make this province ungovernable. If you can imagine, Mr. Chairman, if you can 
imagine: we plan to make this province ungovernable. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it was predicted at the beginning of this session that there would be obstruction, there would 
be delay, there would be lack of deportment, there would be trouble caused by members opposite. And here we 
sit today, Mr. Speaker, well past, well past 60 or 70 days, or just . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Seventy-two. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Seventy-two days, 72 days. And, Mr. Speaker, that member opposite, that member opposite 
who sides with a party that continues to filibuster and delay and obstruct, who continues to debate, for instance, 
the potash issue now probably on the 30th hour or thereabouts; probably on the 30th or 40th day since potash was 
first introduced. Probably, Mr. Speaker, potash has been debated now since when? March? 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that member opposite has the gall to talk about road-blocking by the government. I don't 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that I have ever heard anything of quite such a hypocritical nature. 
 
Be that as it may, Mr. Chairman, the member asks: what is the government's plan. Mr. Chairman, I submit to you 
that this minister's plan, this government's plan is to continue on in negotiations and discussions with the federal 
government, with the federal government in the similar manner to which we have been successful in the past. 
And I use the example of success in literally billions of dollars pumped into our agricultural economy with 
respect to drought and deficiency payments at a time, Mr. Chairman, when never before has it been needed or 
appreciated so very much. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I believe that I have prior to this moment articulated the representations I have had with Mr. 
Bouchard. I have talked to you, Mr. Chairman, about the personal contact that I made just two days ago with his 
office. I have told you, Mr. Chairman, that our government initiated today a motion that would call on the federal 
government to hold public hearings on the issue and allow Saskatchewan people input into the matter. 
 
I intend, Mr. Chairman, to follow that motion up, although it was not allowed to pass because of silly 
amendments by the members opposite. I would say, Mr. Chairman, I intend to follow our motion up by 
expressing immediately to the federal government the position as articulated in our motion, and that will be done 
forthwith, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 
 


