


















































June 2, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 2, 1989 
 
 

 
1595 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
this morning to introduce to the members of the legislature and 
to you, the newly formed Premier’s disabled persons advisory 
committee that has been now established in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I want to introduce some of the members of 
that committee to you this morning. They’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, and one of the members is seated on the floor 
behind the bar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier’s disabled persons advisory committee has been 
formally established to guide the government in its 
development of policies and programs which affect 
Saskatchewan people with disabilities. It was initiated by Rick 
Hansen, Mr. Speaker, and he has asked premiers across Canada 
to put together advisory committees. And I am happy to 
announce the members of our advisory committee here today. 
 
So I will just briefly introduce them. There are 11 members in 
all, Mr. Speaker. I believe that six members are here today and I 
will introduce them and ask them to be warmly welcomed to the 
Assembly. 
 
The first is Kirk Banadyga who is an architect with experience 
in design for accessibility for disabled persons; Mr. Doug 
Caswell, member of Handicapped Farmers’ Association; Ruth 
Fiala, civic alderwoman, community organizer, past editor of 
community newspapers, and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) representative; Dr. Jim 
McClements, chairperson, Integration ’84, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons; Mr. Quinn Schafer, who is a 
22-year-old disabled person from Saskatoon, and Quinn is 
sitting right here. Doreen Silcox, parent of a physically disabled 
person, and volunteer worker with disabled people. 
 
There are five other members, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be making 
a brief ministerial statement after question period about that. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to warmly welcome 
this very important advisory council to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to join the 
Premier in welcoming the members of the Premier’s advisory 
body on the disabled. I’m sure that they will perform their task 
very diligently, Mr. Speaker. And it’s our pleasure to join with 
the Premier in welcoming these distinguished guests to our 
Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly a group of 17 grade 8 students from 
Eatonia, Saskatchewan. They are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery 
just above the folks that were just introduced. This particular 
tour is sponsored each year by the Eatonia Lions Club where 
the students are brought to Regina to tour various points of 
interest in Regina. 
 
Accompanying the students is their teacher, Roxanne Lemire, 
along with the Lions members, Robby Bennett, Don Punter, and 
bus driver, Karen MacDonald. I would ask all to welcome this 
group of students from Eatonia. And also I would like to 
congratulate the Eatonia Lions Club for their community 
service that they undertake each year. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my real privilege 
to introduce to you, and through you to all members this 
morning, 40 students from the grades 3, 4, and 5 classes of King 
Edward School in Moose Jaw and in my constituency. I want to 
welcome these students to the legislature. They will be viewing 
question period and then touring the building, and then I look 
forward to meeting with them at about 11 o’clock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly glad to welcome this group of 
students because they do come from King Edward, and King 
Edward was the school that I attended just a few short years 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied today by their teachers, 
Rhonda Meena and Bob Gusa, and they have adult chaperons, 
Faithe Daniels and Louise Chamberlain with them. I ask all 
members to welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure that I introduce to you, sir, and to the members 
of the Assembly, some 20 grade 4 students from White City 
School. This is the second grade 4 class to attend the Assembly 
this session, and this week. And to the students, I did advise the 
Assembly the other day when the first class was in, about the 
tremendous interest and practical programming that White City 
has shown in the Far East, Asia, and particularly the People’s 
Republic of China, one of the most imaginative programs in the 
school system in Saskatchewan, and for that they are to be 
commended. 
 
They are accompanied by a teacher, Mrs. Debbie Bresciani; 
chaperons, Mrs. Judy Leier and Mrs. Barb Bender. I will ask 
my colleague, the Minister of Highways, to meet with the 
students after. I have a family matter to attend to, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would ask all hon. members to join with me in 
welcoming the White City students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
a great deal of pleasure this morning to introduce to 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1596 

 
 

you, and to other members of the Assembly, some special 
visitors that we have from the state of North Dakota visiting 
with us, and they’re seated in your gallery: the dean of the 
graduate school, Minot State University, Dr. Carol Sue Butts, 
and her children, Nathan and Jessica. 
 
Along with touring the legislature this morning, they’re also 
going to be visiting the Science Centre and taking in some of 
the festivities at the Mosaic. And I would ask all members to 
join with me in wishing our American visitors a very warm 
welcome this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is a real pleasure for me to 
introduce to you, and through the members of the legislature, 
students from the Parkland Christian Academy from Canora. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are a small group, but I know they are 
very dedicated and intelligent students, and I respect and have a 
very close working relationship with the pastor, Mr. Keith 
Eberhard, who is with the students today. 
 
And I’m especially thrilled that they chose to come here today, 
and I have the opportunity to introduce them and later on to 
visit with them and have pictures and to have a little discussion. 
And I would certainly ask all members of the legislature to help 
me in welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Problems with GigaText 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister in charge of SEDCO. 
 
Madam Minister, yesterday you told us that the Deputy Premier 
would be here to answer questions that had been taken notice 
of, and I would ask you to be more accurate today in the 
answering of the questions we have for you than you were 
yesterday. 
 
You informed the people of Saskatchewan through the press 
yesterday that Monsieur Montpetit retained sole signing 
authority for disbursements for GigaText until March of this 
year — March of 1989. Madam Minister, are you telling us that 
for six months after the Montreal lawsuit was launched, well 
after to the time Mr. Montpetit had testified about the 
questionable disbursements from the company, you still 
allowed him sole signing authority for GigaText? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition for the past 
two days have been questioning me on this matter. I think we’re 
dealing with three issues, Mr. Speaker: one, will the system 
work; two, the opposition has made allegations of wrongdoing; 
and three, they have also made allegations of either proper or 
improper management. 
 
With regard to the first one, will the system work — we 

have made it clear, Mr. Speaker, that we have given the 
company to June 17 to demonstrate the technology does in fact 
work. We still do have a high degree of confidence that that 
technology will in fact work. 
 
With regards to the allegations of wrongdoing, it was clearly 
stated, Mr. Speaker, that when we were apprised of the 
Montreal lawsuit on October 27, the whole matter of the $4 
million investment into GigaText was referred to the RCMP, 
and I understand that the RCMP will be wrapping up their 
investigation about mid-June. 
 
With regards to whether or not there was proper management, 
Mr. Speaker, and the question from the member: in October 
when we were appraised of the lawsuit and the matter was 
referred to the RCMP, SEDCO put an employee . . . an 
employee of SEDCO was put into GigaText to monitor the 
day-to-day activities of that particular company. 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Guy Montpetit had sole 
signing authority is because SEDCO, at that point in time, did 
not have control of the company and therefore did not have 
signing authority, though we monitored from October 27 on. 
We monitored all payments made by the company; however, as 
of March 7, SEDCO was able to gain control of the company 
and thus gain control of signing authority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Madam Speaker, new question to the same 
minister. The court case started in Montreal. You said at that 
time, because of a memo from Dr. Young that you turned it 
over to the RCMP, yet you still allowed for six months the 
individual in question from Montreal, Guy Montpetit, to be the 
sole signing authority for the company. That’s shameful, 
Madam Minister, shameful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Instead of providing us with a written answer 
that you’re reading from on your desk, how about if you told us, 
during that period of time from March of 1988 until April of 
’89, when SEDCO finally got control of the company that they 
had lost complete control of. Can you tell us what 
disbursements, what expenditures were made under the signing 
authority of Mr. Montpetit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member 
does not listen. I clearly indicated to him that once the matter 
was referred to the RCMP for investigation here in our 
province, SEDCO put a person . . . an employee of SEDCO was 
put into GigaText to monitor and evaluate all payments. As of 
March 7 of this year, SEDCO gained control through the 
transfer of shares to SEDCO of the company, complete control. 
But from late October till March, all transactions were 
monitored and approved by SEDCO. 
 

Further Payments to GigaText 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — My question is also to the minister of 
SEDCO. Madam Minister, you said in this House 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1597 

 
 

yesterday that aside from the $4 million, that your government 
had advanced a further $500,000 to GigaText and that 1.25 
million was on call to the company through a SEDCO 
mortgage. 
 
Can you tell this Assembly how much of that extra money Mr. 
Montpetit stuffed into his pockets before you finally got smart 
and cut him off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, from October to the 
present day, SEDCO is running the daily business of the 
company, paying the bills that have to be paid — I believe it’s 
around $50,000 a month. The majority of that money, Mr. 
Speaker, goes to the 22 or 24 young people that work at the 
company. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Another non-answer, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another question to the same minister. Madam Minister, in this 
House on Tuesday the Deputy Premier told us that your 
government referred the whole matter of GigaText to the 
RCMP, in his words, “in October or November”. And he also 
said, and I want to quote to you, that: 
 

the minute that this court action in Montreal, that we 
became aware of that, we moved to protect the 
investment of people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Moved to protect the investment of Saskatchewan people? You 
gave a blank cheque to the Montreal business man for $4 
million. Six months after court action commenced you still 
allowed him to continue fleecing the people of this province. 
You not only continued to give him a blank cheque, you 
advanced him more money. Is there anyone on that side of the 
House that cares about the people of this province and the 
money that you’re throwing at this guy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, for all intents and 
purposes SEDCO had control of the company as of late 
October. We didn’t have signing authority, Mr. Speaker, 
because SEDCO did not have control of the company at that 
point in time. However, I clearly indicated that at the end of 
October a SEDCO employee was put into GigaText to run the 
company, for all intents and purposes, and to monitor all 
payments and authorize all payments. 
 

Loan Made to Ken Waschuk 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the same minister 
about another very concerning aspect of this deal, the kind of 
information which makes people in Saskatchewan realize that 
your government can’t manage public funds wisely or properly. 
Now according to the sworn testimony of Guy Montpetit, in 
December of 1988, and again in April of this year, one of the 
places where our $4 million in taxpayers’ money went is to a 
no-interest loan of $150,000 paid to the Conservative Party’s 
pollster, one Ken Waschuk — Ken Waschuk. 
 
This loan was paid to Mr. Waschuk’s Bermuda company, 

Libra International Ltd. And according to Mr. Montpetit the 
loan was for favours Mr. Waschuk performed in getting 
GigaText set up, in opening the doors to the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan so that Montpetit could come in and get our $4 
million and get all the other things that he got. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, when were you made aware that the PC 
Party’s pollster, Ken Waschuk, had received a $150,000 
no-interest loan from taxpayers’ money for helping Mr. 
Montpetit open the doors to the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the allegations of the 
member are not accurate. That payment that came . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That payment that came to light in the 
court in Montreal, which we read about in the Montreal 
Gazette, I might add, was not made by GigaText — was not 
made by GigaText at all. And he would have to ask Mr. 
Montpetit. That payment allegedly made to Mr. Waschuk was 
not made by GigaText and does not involve Saskatchewan 
taxpayer dollars. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Madam Minister . . . a new question to the 
minister. Minister, that $150,000 no-interest loan was made by 
Mr. Montpetit to Mr. Waschuk from money that he received 
from GigaText. There is just no question about that, and you 
know it, Minister. No question at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now in this House on Tuesday the Deputy 
Premier told us that your government . . . sorry, Minister. As I 
said, that money clearly came from Mr. Montpetit and there is 
simply no question that it came from the money that he received 
from GigaText, which is our $4 million of taxpayer money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And I suggest, minister, that rather than 
reading The (Montreal) Gazette, you also read the transcript of 
the court proceedings that have taken place in Quebec. It’s in 
French, but if you have somebody other than GigaText to 
translate it, you might have access to it before the change of 
government in 1990 or 1991. 
 
Now in his testimony, Mr. Montpetit states that on a Regina 
golf course Mr. Waschuk approached him for a loan, and he 
decided that since Mr. Waschuk did him such great favours in 
getting the company going in Saskatchewan, he would oblige 
him. And I quote testimony given in April 28 of this year. 
Quote, this is the translation: 
 

Because, after all, he (meaning Waschuk) had rendered us 
a good service. He had, after all, negotiated. It was he who 
had done the representations. He was, after all, my 
representative, or the one I used with respect to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1598 

 
 

Now, Madam Minister, Mr. Montpetit clearly understands what 
the loan was for. It was for payment for favours rendered. 
 
Now do you have any problem understanding that, Minister, 
and do you have any quarrel with Mr. Montpetit’s clear 
evidence in that regard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it was because of those 
very allegations of criminality that the matter in October was 
referred to the RCMP. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I believe the 
member from Saskatoon Mayfair is asking the questions, and 
let’s allow him to do so. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister. 
Minister, this is taxpayers’ money that is going from our 
pockets into the pockets of the PC Party pollster. You can’t get 
away from these questions by saying that the matter of 
criminality has been referred to the RCMP. That’s interesting, 
and we’re glad that happened, but that doesn’t relieve you of 
responsibility to answer for your knowledge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Minister, what was this valuable service 
Mr. Waschuk provided? Mr. Montpetit testified, and I quote: 
“He is not a member of the government; he is an individual; he 
knows the people in the government well, but he is not a guy 
from the government.” 
 
Now to the public that says only one thing: this is an individual 
who has influence with the government and who used his 
influence with the government to set up a deal for Mr. 
Montpetit, and in return he got this $150,000 that I mentioned. 
Now surely you can see that clearly, Minister. Are you naive, 
and are you not prepared to stand in your place and admit that 
this transaction actually took place for that purpose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview is alleging is criminality in this case. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, I will reiterate, is the very reason that it was 
turned over for a thorough investigation by the RCM Police in 
our province, and I understand that the RCMP report should be 
finished by mid-June. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — New question to the same minister. Minister, 
are you telling this House that it was that precise question of 
that payment to Mr. Waschuk that was referred to the RCMP? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That and many other questions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister. Will the 
minister tell the House what other questions were referred to the 
RCMP? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the allegations that the 
hon. member has just raised with regards to what I would say 
was influence peddling, that, along with all the other issues that 
came out and were emanating from the court action in 
Montreal, the entire operations with regards to the $4 million 
investment was turned over by the Department of Justice to the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
The reference by the Department of Justice to the RCMP was to 
look into the entire operation alleged, and that’s exactly what 
the RCMP, I’m advised, have done and are now in the process 
of doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to refer a 
question also to the minister in charge of SEDCO, and I refer 
again to Mr. Montpetit’s testimony when he discusses where 
the money paid by your government, through GigaText, for the 
purchase of the computers from his other company went. 
 
In his testimony, Madam Minister, he takes the money through 
a series of companies that he owns until it ends up in Bermuda, 
company called Koyama, from which it goes directly into his 
bank account — all except $150,000 which he testifies that 
went to Mr. Waschuk’s Bermuda company, Lebra International 
Ltd. 
 
What we have here is Mr. Waschuk setting up a deal for Mr. 
Montpetit with your government, then Montpetit using 
taxpayers’ money, paid to himself for his own equipment, and 
handing the proceeds over to Waschuk for his service of 
influence peddling with this government. I ask you: how can 
you condone that type of activity with taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises in 
his question the allegation of influence peddling by these two 
individuals. That is exactly why this matter was referred to the 
RCMP. And the entire issue was turned over to the RCMP. 
Now those are serious allegations of influence peddling. If that 
is in fact proven, Mr. Speaker, then proper action would be 
taken by the RCMP and charges would be laid, as they should 
be laid, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the allegation by the hon. 
member. The investigation is ongoing at this point in time, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is in the hands of the RCMP, and it’s been 
referred by the Government of Saskatchewan, Department of 
Justice. 
 

Allegations of Influence Peddling 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the minister in charge of 
SEDCO, in charge of GigaText, and I want to indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, the gross negligence and the management of 
taxpayers’ money is becoming evident as this case unfolds. 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1599 

 
 

Here we have a man, Waschuk, who worked for the Tory party 
provincially and federally. In the last two years in the Public 
Accounts, we see that the government paid to this individual, 
Waschuk, almost $250,000 for polling. This is a man who can 
walk into the doors of the Premier and into the Deputy Premier. 
He has influence. And for cash consideration this is what we 
have before this House. He used that influence to cut a deal 
with his friend, Montpetit, and his buddies on that side of the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Madam Minister, how much 
of this kind of behaviour are you prepared to countenance 
before you realize that this is not the legitimate way to carry on 
the business of representing the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I say to you the following, 
as I’ve answered in the two previous questions. The hon. 
member has raised the issue of influencing peddling by these 
two individuals, involved in influence peddling by these two 
individuals, and then says: what is the government’s response to 
that, Mr. Speaker? When this matter came to our attention, the 
response of the government was to refer the entire question to 
the RCMP. Now it seems to me that is the proper response 
when there’s allegations of criminality, whether it’s in this case 
or in any other case, Mr. Speaker. That matter has been referred 
to the RCMP. The RCMP are still in the process of conducting 
that investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that, in my view, is the proper response of the 
government and of anybody else when there is allegations of 
criminality, allegations of influence peddling in this particular 
case. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to whoever wants to answer it, 
including the Premier. I refer also to October 20, 1988 memo 
from Dr. Douglas Young in which he sets out his concerns over 
the way GigaText finances were being handled. 
 
On a flight from Regina shortly before the deal was closed with 
your government, Mr. Montpetit and Dr. Young discussed the 
considerations which had to be made to certain unnamed people 
before the deal could go through. I say, Mr. Minister, we’re 
talking about the management of taxpayers’ dollars. It points 
directly to corruption in high places. And I say to you, is your 
government also under investigation for either its gross 
incompetence, or duplicity in this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the minister should be 
allowed to answer. He was having some difficulty last time, so 
I’m bringing it to your attention before he speaks. 
 
Order, order. 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member in his questioning 
today has raised without question, questions of criminal 
wrongdoing against individuals, and other allegations. Now as 
I’ve indicated in my previous answers, when this matter came 
to the attention of the government, the entire question was 
referred to the RCMP for a full investigation. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest that is the proper course to take. 
 
Now I’ve also indicated that that particular investigation has 
been ongoing for some period of time, from last fall until now. 
It is still ongoing at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. And I 
simply ask the question: what do we serve with regards to the 
question of criminality by discussing, or attempting to discuss 
in this House, the question of that particular investigation? The 
matter is in the hands of the RCMP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And your cover-up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And the member from Regina 
Elphinstone says it’s a cover-up by the RCMP. I don’t believe 
that, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a cover-up. The matter has totally 
been referred to the RCMP; the RCMP are investigating it. That 
is the proper course of action to take. Once that investigation 
has been completed, the RCMP will recommend what their 
course of action is, or should be, following that, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it is only proper that we all wait for that investigation to 
be completed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a further question to the Minister of 
Justice. As you have indicated, Mr. Minister, that there’s an 
RCMP investigation, the potential of criminal investigation into 
the matter. That’s one thing — you admitted that. 
 
The other thing is the accountability of the taxpayers’ money. 
That’s the one that we are pursuing here. And what I want to 
know: when were you aware of all of the expenditures that were 
being made in respect by the French-Canadian business man 
from Quebec as the sole signing officer of this corporation 
when he initially started the operation? And did you concur 
with those outlandish expenditures and the pilfering off of 
taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has 
raised in the question period today the allegation of influence 
peddling, and that’s a serious allegation to make, and that has 
be dealt with seriously. 
 
The hon. member today, in her answer to the question, indicated 
that there were three questions involved here. One is the 
question: will the system or the process undertaken by GigaText 
to translate languages through computers work - 
_ will that work? And that has been mandated by SEDCO to the 
middle of June sometime to determine that. 
 
There is a second question, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 
question of criminal wrongdoing that the hon. member raised 
today. And I indicated that that was referred to the RCMP back 
last fall when the allegations first came to surface with regards 
to that, Mr. Speaker. My involvement, and my understanding 
when I knew about 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1600 

 
 

this, was when I heard about the matter raised in the media last 
fall in the Montreal media with regard to this question. That’s 
when the matter was referred to the RCMP. I was not apprised, 
nor was I aware of the various issues that come out in The 
(Montreal) Gazette of what, a week and a half, two weeks ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Disabled Persons Advisory Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a very 
brief statement with respect to the Disabled Persons Advisory 
Committee that I introduced this morning. 
 
With the help of Mr. Rick Hansen in November of 1988, 37 
groups concerned about the disabled developed a set of 
recommendations which were presented to cabinet members 
and to me. Today it was my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to announce 
the new advisory body, the Premier’s Disabled Persons 
Advisory Committee, that has been formally established to 
guide the government as it develops policies and programs 
which affect Saskatchewan people with disabilities. 
 
The mandate, Mr. Speaker, of this committee is to provide 
advice and sincere guidance and to identify issues, policies, 
programs and procedures which require additional research and 
analysis to meet the needs of disabled more effectively here in 
Saskatchewan, and frankly to make recommendations across 
Canada. 
 
Committee members have been drawn from across the province 
from a variety of occupations and backgrounds. They will have 
first-hand experience with disabilities, either because they or a 
family member have a disability, or because they have been 
actively involved with individuals or groups associated with the 
disabled. 
 
Although the committee will report directly to me, I have asked 
the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment to 
assist in getting the initiative off the ground. 
 
Together, we have named the following individuals to 
participate, and for the record, Mr. Speaker: Alvin Law is the 
chairman. Other committee members are Kirk Banadyga of 
Regina, Colette Bourgonje of Saskatoon, Doug Caswell of 
Wolseley, Ruth Fiala of Swift Current, Bob Livingston of 
Regina, Dr. Jim McClements of Saskatoon, Quinn Schafer of 
Saskatoon, Cindy Smith of Regina, Doreen Silcox of Regina, 
and Dave Wall of the city of Regina. Each member will serve 
for one year, Mr. Speaker, and their term may be renewed. 
 
The government recognizes the capabilities of the disabled in 
Saskatchewan, and we’re happy with the initiatives that we’ve 
taken recently to put people to work and back into the 
community. I feel very confident that the insights and, indeed, 
the guidance we receive from this committee will help make 
significant progress in that direction here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the formation of the 
advisory committee. In fact, it’s long overdue, Mr. Speaker. 
And I guess our greatest concern will be to see what action the 
government takes on many of the very pressing issues that 
disabled people face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, disabled people in this province have an 
unemployment rate of in excess of 50 per cent. That’s 
intolerable. And we’ve seen this government do very little over 
the last few years in terms of affirmative action within 
government or within civic authorities, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that disabled people would receive employment and 
good-paying employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen that advocacy groups on behalf of 
the disabled in this province have received severe cut-backs. 
For instance, two years ago, the Voice of the Handicapped 
received a 37 per cent cut in their budget. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, a government that has placed 
disabled people in poverty in this province, and an example is 
the welfare rates for the disabled. A disabled person, Mr. 
Speaker, at the maximum in this province — for clothing, 
household allowance, personal allowance, food allowance, 
everything other than rent, Mr. Speaker — receives a maximum 
of only $225 a month. That’s a government that has guaranteed 
that the poor who are disabled in this province live in bitter 
poverty, Mr. Speaker — in bitter poverty — and the 
government ought to be ashamed of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — We’ve seen a government, Mr. Speaker, that 
has cut off the travel allowance to many partially disabled 
persons in this province, forcing them, Mr. Speaker, to . . . 
isolating them, in effect, by doing that, Mr. Speaker, and 
making it very difficult for them to get around their 
communities. 
 
We’ve seen a government that has taken inadequate action with 
respect to assuring accessibility in public buildings in this 
province. Not even members of the legislature, when they open 
their constituency offices, Mr. Speaker, are required to open an 
office in an area that’s accessible to handicapped persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen cuts in mental health services, to 
people with serious mental health problems in this province. 
We’ve seen disabled children, Mr. Speaker, in this province, in 
a situation where they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I don’t know if we’re into the whole 
spectrum of this area, and I’m sure the hon. member knows 
that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I will wrap up with this comment, Mr. 
Speaker. We have seen services to disabled children in rural 
Saskatchewan — speech therapists, occupational therapists — 
cut back so that children in dire need, and their families, aren’t 
able to access those services. 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1601 

 
 

These are the kind of issues, Mr. Speaker, that we hope that this 
committee will address. The urgency of addressing them and 
the urgency of the government taking action on them is great 
indeed, and we look forward to the recommendations that this 
committee will make. And we hope that those recommendations 
will be public, Mr. Premier. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of a Bill to amend The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the most important thing 
is that government and opposition members obey the rules right 
now. We’re trying to get on to the next order of business, but 
there’s a stream of heckling back and forth across the floor. 
And I would just like to ask the members to cease and desist. 
Order. 
 
(1045) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the 
priorities of this government are totally evident for the people 
of the province. It’s more important for this government to deal 
with changing the rules of the legislature than it is to deal with 
the real problems that ordinary people, including disabled 
people, in this province feel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the agenda of this legislature has 
turned into a document of hypocrisy, a document of hypocrisy 
and the sign of a failed government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — A hypocritical document, Mr. Speaker, a 
hypocritical agenda, a hypocritical government because it’s not 
dealing, Mr. Speaker, it’s not dealing with the realities that face 
the people of Saskatchewan. It is not dealing with the realities 
on a day-to-day basis that face everybody in this province. 
 
What this government wants to do is ram through its own 

political agenda so that it can carry on its maniacal, it’s 
maniacal course to privatize the assets which belong to the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And everybody on this 
side of the legislature, and now everybody in Saskatchewan, is 
saying shame, shame to that government that is more interested 
in its own narrow, partisan political purposes than it is in the 
real problems facing people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had an example here of a Premier setting up an 
advisory committee to supposedly deal with the problems 
facing people with handicaps in this province, who are 
physically handicapped and who have other handicaps which 
limit them, and some of the things that those of us who are . . . 
or don’t have those limitations feel. 
 
It seems to me that the work of this legislature would be much 
less hypocritical in terms of the agenda of the government if 
that government, Mr. Speaker, were to deal with the problems 
that those people face, rather than the problems that it faces 
because it has lost the confidence and the trust of the people of 
this province, and it’s more interested in trying to ram through 
its own political agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I have been on my feet in the past few 
days speaking on this issue, we’ve covered a number of 
different topics. First of all, we have dealt with the question of 
the constitutionality of bell-ringing that brought forward this 
motion to the House. Secondly, we’ve done an analysis of 
whether or not, not only was it constitutional, was it the duties 
of the members of this side of the House to engage in that 
operation. 
 
Thirdly, we have dealt with the question of, is this Bill 
enhancing, strengthening, democracy. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not a Bill, it is a motion. It is a motion. Does this motion 
enhance and strengthen the democratic operations of this 
institution, or does it weaken it? And, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
only conclusion that has been drawn to that is that in fact it has 
been weakened. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with — before I get into 
the main part of my speech next week — I want to deal with 
some of the options that these members had in terms of the kind 
of legislative reform that could be coming before us, before this 
House; things which would have been agreed upon by all 
members of the House, as has been done in the past. And 
hopefully a little later on today, I’m going to get on into the 
question of what has happened in the past in this legislature 
when it comes to rule changes. 
 
But I think for now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say is that the 
government has options, even on the field of democratic 
legislative reform, which would have opened up this legislature 
to a much greater extent for the participation by citizens of 
Saskatchewan in the actual operation of the legislature, as 
opposed to what they are doing, which is trying to close the 
doors of this legislature, close in the political debate, to try to 
carry on their narrow, partisan, political interests behind closed 
cabinet doors. And when we see what that happens, Mr. 
Speaker, we see what that leads to in the Gigagate scandal 
that’s emerging before the people of this province. 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1602 

 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to take some little time outlining to you 
what our party and those on this side of the House see as what 
constitutes real democratic legislative reform, as opposed to the 
kind of authoritarian, undemocratic legislative reform that this 
government is trying to drive through in order to carry through 
the privatization of SaskPower and the potash corporation and 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and the electrical 
side, which will end up coming up, as they already have partly 
done already, is privatize the electrical side of SaskPower. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to outline to you a document which 
was presented by members of our caucus in April of 1987, a 
scant two years and two months ago, which proposed an 
alternative to what this government is doing, which proposed 
what we consider a step forward, as opposed to a step back in 
opening up this legislature. And the name of the document is A 
Legislature for the Future, Proposals for Reform. Not proposals 
to close in the legislature, or try to limit debate, or try to stop 
the participation of citizens in the actual operation of this 
legislature, but proposals for reform that would open that 
legislature up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this document was based on four principles, 
and each of those principles led to a number of conclusions. 
And I want you, Mr. Speaker, as I go through them, to contrast 
the proposals that our party put forward to this legislature as an 
alternative to what this government is presently doing. 
 
Let’s weigh them in the balance, Mr. Speaker, here in the forum 
of public scrutiny, and then I will ask the question and have 
hopefully members on the side, when in fact they get their turn 
to participate in this debate, of who stands on the side of real 
democratic reform, and who in fact kneel before the jackboots 
of authoritarianism, spitting and polishing them up in order to 
cut off public participation in their affairs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the first principle enunciated in our 
document was to make the legislature more accessible to the 
public. That was the first thing. We believe, contrary to what 
this motion does, that we want to enhance the accessibility of 
this institution to the people of this province. And we say so and 
do so, Mr. Speaker, on the understanding that, unlike the days 
of medieval England in which learned . . . the quote was, those 
knights of the shire and able burgesses were drawn together and 
those of able and discreet character were drawn together, in 
order to make decisions. 
 
We think that things have changed somewhat since this 
institution was established, and that there must be reform 
because of just the very nature of the world that we live in. One 
of the things that has changed is in fact the accessibility. Unlike 
taking 20 days to ride from the north of England down to 
Westminster or Reading or where the parliament was being 
held, or if we want to say from the north of Saskatchewan to 
Regina in which in the ’20s and ’30s it was almost a major 
undertaking of trek proportions or an odyssey to come down 
from northern Saskatchewan to Regina; now with the 
accessibility of air transport, we are able to have people from 
northern 

Saskatchewan come to Regina, not just the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but all people in northern 
Saskatchewan, because that modern form of transportation can 
be, and should be, available to all. So we can have that kind of 
accessibility. 
 
And what we’re proposing, Mr. Speaker, in regards to that 
accessibility, is this. First of all, we believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
the special . . . in order to help make the legislature more 
accessible to the public, we want to open up the legislature to 
public hearings, and that special legislative committees be 
appointed to study rule changes. 
 
The very, very first thing . . . item on this agenda, Mr. Speaker, 
is this: that we want to establish a special legislative committee 
to study rule changes, hold public hearings throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, not being stuck here in Regina, not 
being ensconced and hidden away under the dome in the marble 
palace. But we want to take this committee out around the 
province so that the people themselves can have input and 
direct input as to what they see is necessary to change the rules 
of this legislature so that more public accessibility is made 
available to them. 
 
You contrast that, Mr. Speaker, you contrast that very first 
recommendation of a whole series of recommendations to what 
the motion this government is proposing, and I ask you, sir, and 
I ask everybody in this province who is watching here today, 
which is more democratic, a government which tries to ram 
through a rule change in order to carry out its political agenda, 
or a proposal which would set up a committee to travel the 
province to allow people to say themselves how they want this 
legislature to function in order to make it accessible to them? 
Because after all, it is their legislature, it’s not ours. 
 
You, Mr. Speaker, pose that question: which is more 
democratic in terms of legislative reform. I say, and I submit, 
and I know the members on this side of the House say that our 
proposal to allow the people of this province to determine what 
legislative changes are necessary, to determine what kind of 
accessibility they want, is much more democratic — in fact is 
democratic, as opposed to the anti-democratic and authoritarian 
and arrogant, contemptuously arrogant, actions of this 
government to try to ram this rule change through the 
legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because it goes on to say that it’s set out to collect ideas on how 
to improve the workings of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of 
the legislature say this place needs to be improved in its 
workings. This place needs to be improved in its workings. I 
don’t think, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that there’s anybody in 
this House, given the very nature of this debate that stands 
before us, that would not agree to that particular proposition. 
 
Now the second specific proposal, Mr. Speaker, we have in 
regards to making the legislature more accessible to the public 
is this. We want province-wide television coverage of the 
proceedings, province-wide television coverage of the 
proceedings, Mr. Speaker. Right now we find ourselves in the 
situation in Saskatchewan where television coverage is 
available to some and is not 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1603 

 
 

available to others. 
 
Now I know some members of the Legislative Assembly are 
uncomfortable first of all with the very notion of television 
coverage at all, and that’s understandable. But it seems to now 
have become, throughout Canada and throughout other areas of 
the British Commonwealth, an acceptable practice in houses of 
parliament and in legislatures that in fact television coverage be 
provided so that the citizens of the country can actually see 
what is going on in their Legislative Chamber. 
 
And given the changes from medieval England to modern day 
Saskatchewan, in terms of the enhancement of the ability to 
communicate what constitutes the issues of the day, we think, 
Mr. Speaker, that it is only a fair and just thing that all citizens 
— all citizens — have the right to view the proceedings of this 
Legislative Chamber and its committees, I may say. Right now 
we have a situation which is discriminatory. Quite frankly, 
some citizens are granted access; other citizens are denied 
access, based on their place of location. 
 
(1100) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we argue that this television coverage must 
be expanded throughout Saskatchewan, and we have the 
technology here in this province to enable us to do so through 
the fibre optics. The Minister of Education takes great delight in 
talking about distance education. Well, Mr. Speaker, I say this, 
that our proposal, compared to what’s before us today, can form 
an integral part of the democratic educational system in this 
province, where the citizens of this province are educated as to 
what the nature of the issues are and where the political parties 
stand on those issues. 
 
You contrast, Mr. Speaker, that second specific proposal, which 
is to expand television coverage so that we end discrimination 
in Saskatchewan, with this motion before us, which limits 
public participation in the governance of the daily affairs of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I may say, Mr. Speaker, you take this proposal, this 
specific proposal to expand television coverage province-wide, 
with what was passed at the annual policy convention of the 
Progressive Conservative Party in Swift Current, and what did 
they say, Mr. Speaker? What did the Tories say about television 
coverage? They passed a resolution saying, phase out 
television. They passed a resolution saying that the people of 
this province should not see what’s going on in the legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I was sitting on that side of the House 
looking at what’s been happening lately — one scandal after 
another, one Tory after another getting accused of fraud, going 
before court, having the jail door slammed behind them — I too 
may not want television coverage in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But that is the short-sighted view, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
short-sighted view. Because, Mr. Speaker, when this side of the 
House changes to that side of the House, I’m sure that the 
Tories who survive the next electoral onslaught which faces 
them will want to have their day before the court of public 
opinion. And the best way, in terms of 

modern technology, to provide that day in court, I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, is not to, as the Tory party wants to do, 
phase out television coverage, but in fact expand television 
coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no surprise that this rule motion before us 
which limits democratic debate, limits the ability for people to 
participate, is in the same mode, the same authoritarian, 
arrogant mode of the Tory policy convention resolution, which 
was to phase out television coverage. 
 
Now I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the Conservative Party has 
very good reasons for wanting to phase out television coverage 
— very good, narrow, partisan, political . . . partisan reasons — 
but it doesn’t serve the interests of democracy in this province. 
It doesn’t serve the right of individual citizens in this province 
to be able to see what is going on, to understand what the issues 
are. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, our party supports that, and 
put this forward in this document of April 1987. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Assembly’s 
proceedings have been televised in Saskatchewan since 1983, 
but the broadcasts are currently available in only eight 
Saskatchewan communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, you know and I 
know that there are many, many more communities in 
Saskatchewan than these eight. And I say that it’s 
discriminatory, and that this government has the ability to 
expand, has the ability to expand the democratic process into 
each and every living-room and den and study in the province 
of Saskatchewan if they had the will. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about is a whole new 
generation of political participation by citizenry on a world 
scale. And the role that television plays, that particular medium, 
well outlined by Marshall McLuhan in his world famous book 
— and Marshall McLuhan being a great Canadian scholar, and 
the book, The Medium is the Massage, or is the mass age, 
depending on how you read it — talked about precisely how the 
expansion of democracy can take place in terms of developing 
the global village. In fact, it was in that book, the term “global 
village.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that we could have a global 
province, or that concept, that notion that each of us are all 
connected through the fibre optic system here in Saskatchewan, 
and can, in fact, develop ways of political communication 
through the box, as it’s called. Instead of being, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest instead of being a mechanism of alienation, Mr. 
Speaker, it can be a mechanism for participation. Television on 
a provincial scale, a provincial television political network in 
which the issues are well laid out before the people of the 
province can do nothing except serve the people of the province 
and serve the whole strengthening and the concept of 
democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our document we outlined with the following 
words: 
 

The public has a right to know what their elected 
representatives are doing on their behalf. To make that 
right meaningful in the television age requires 

  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1604 

 
 

making the Assembly’s proceedings available for 
broadcast. 
 

So that’s why, Mr. Speaker, in contrast to what the Tory party 
wants to do, which is to shut down television coverage, we want 
it expanded. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the third specific proposal relating to our 
principle of making the legislature more accessible to the public 
is this: we want television coverage of legislative committees as 
well. Remember, Mr. Speaker, this is in April of nineteen 
hundred and eighty-seven. We want: 
 

That all meetings of Saskatchewan legislature’s two key 
committees, the Crown Corporations and Public Accounts 
committees, be held in the Legislative Assembly to allow 
television coverage of their proceedings. 
 

Mr. Speaker, you contrast that notion of opening up this 
legislature to the motion that’s before us, and once again I 
would say, sir, that this specific proposal to broadcast the 
proceedings of the legislative committee, including the Public 
Accounts Committee and the Crown Corporations Committee, 
you contrast that with what this government is doing, trying to 
limit and muzzle the opposition through this motion which 
would end bell-ringing, and I ask you, sir, once again: which is 
the most democratic option for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
One is the democratic option, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, and 
the other is the anti-democratic option. The one which is 
democratic is the coverage of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had here, in the last several weeks in this 
province, a fairly major debate as to the activities of the auditor. 
And certain charges were laid against the auditor and certain 
things were done in regards to the auditor, and we had an 
auditor’s special report presented to this legislature to put 
forward his side of the proceedings. 
 
Yesterday in the Public Accounts Committee, in following 
along with our proposal, our proposal for reform of this 
legislature, I moved a motion saying that the question of the 
auditor’s public accounts for 1987-1988 be dealt with in this 
Legislative Assembly so that television and the people of this 
province, through television, would be able to see precisely 
what the auditor was charged with, and that the auditor would 
have the right to defend himself in this Legislative Chamber. 
 
But what happened, Mr. Speaker? What happened? What did 
the Conservative members of the Public Accounts Committee 
do to that motion? They voted against it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously if they want to reform, it seems to 
me — and they try to talk about defending democracy — those 
members of the Public Accounts Committee who want to hide 
what happened to the Provincial Auditor in room 10 in the 
basement of this legislature, as opposed to bringing out into the 
public notion in the eight communities presently served by 

television, I ask you, who then passed the democratic test in this 
matter? 
 
Is it those members of the Public Accounts Committee who 
voted against having television so that the auditor can defend 
himself, or is it our side of the House, Mr. Speaker, which says, 
no, this should be a normal, everyday occurrence in the 
legislature when the Public Accounts or Crown Corporations 
Committee meet? — that these be televised so that the people of 
the province, those who are interested and those who have the 
time, and those who have the ability, and those who have the 
general interest, I guess, have the right to be able to see how the 
taxpayers’ money of the province of Saskatchewan is spent in a 
very meaningful way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And that they understand what the issues that 
take place in those committees, they understand precisely the 
nature of those issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why we ask that it be moved to the Legislative 
Chamber, as we did yesterday, is the high cost of outfitting 
committee rooms with television equipment. That was the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve allowed very far-ranging 
debate, but I don’t see the relevance of the Public Accounts 
Committee to the motion that’s before the House, and I would 
ask the member to make his remarks back on the motion that’s 
before us now. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. I’m dealing with the question of legislative reform. 
One of the reforms that we want, unlike the Conservative Party 
of Saskatchewan, given that this motion deals with the question 
of legislative reform, is of course the question of television 
coverage. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Roy Romanow and his radical. Hey Roy, 
can’t you control him? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, once again the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloyd is chirping away from his seat, 
right. He was one of those members who voted against having 
televised proceedings of the Public Accounts Committee, 
against the democratic right of the citizens of this province to 
see what’s going on. 
 
Seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this motion before us, this 
motion which would limit the democratic right, this motion, 
rule 33(1), that would limit the democratic right of the citizens 
of the province to participate, stands in stark contrast to our 
attempts to democratize this legislature for the citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I guarantee, Mr. 
Speaker, I guarantee that when we form the next government in 
this province, those members will have the right to have their 
viewpoint — even though it will be a grossly, grossly minority 
viewpoint — they will have their right to have their viewpoint 
expressed through television, because that’s the kind of 
democratic reform, as opposed to this kind of undemocratic, 
undemocratic jackbooting that faces us here in this legislature. 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1605 

 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the third — the television coverage of the 
legislative committees — the third legislative reform that we’re 
talking about as compared to the Progressive Conservative 
notions, the authoritarian, Progressive Conservative . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the fourth, the fourth motion that we would 
put forward, the fourth proposal that we put forward on this is 
province-wide radio coverage of proceedings. Now we went 
through, Mr. Speaker, we went through yesterday a fair bit of 
debate — five and a half hours — in pointing out that this 
motion before us limits the right of, and limits the ability of 
citizens to participate. And I don’t think there’s any argument 
by anybody — at least there hasn’t been — by anybody in this 
Legislative Assembly that that’s what it does. The intent is 
clear; the intent of this motion is to limit the democratic 
participation. 
 
You contrast this motion, Mr. Speaker, you contrast this motion 
with our proposal to have province-wide coverage of the 
proceedings of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you to bring the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster and Melville to order. And I thank you. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposal for province-wide coverage of the 
proceedings, radio coverage, so that those farmers, when we’re 
sitting here in the legislature and during seeding time and 
they’re driving their tractors and they’ve got their radios on, 
they can take part in the debate as well, through understanding 
the positions of both sides of the legislature. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it used to be in Saskatchewan that 
there was province-wide radio proceedings. But who cut it? 
Who cut it? Here we had an effective tool of communications 
which allow citizens to educate themselves as to the political 
issues of the day, but who cut it? Was it the members of this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker? No, Mr. Speaker, it was the 
members on that side. It was the members of the Progressive 
Conservative side of the House who cut radio proceedings, 
radio coverage of the proceedings of this House. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker? And why? Because they’re afraid to 
put their arguments, they’re afraid to put their arguments — 
including their arguments on this motion — before the people 
of Saskatchewan. So what did they do? Instead of enhancing the 
accessibility of the citizenry to the proceedings which go on in 
this Legislative Assembly, they cut it. They cut it. That’s the 
record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this motion fits in with the same kind of authoritarian, 
know-it-all, contemptuous attitude that members of the 
Progressive Conservative Party are becoming well known for in 
this province — well known for, Mr. Speaker. We already read 
last night into the record the comments of the Swift Current 
Sun, talked about the . . . and I quote, the Devine government 
contempt . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is not 
allowed to use other members’ name, and the member 

was not quoting from anything. So I would ask the member to 
refrain from using member’s names in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 
have a piece of paper. I was quoting from memory. I will quote 
now from the May 29 Swift Current Sun. The headline in the 
Swift Current Sun is, as we outlined last night, “Devine 
government shows its contempt.” I’m not going to go into a 
long dissertation on that. The contempt that this Swift Current 
Sun is what we were talking about is the kind of contempt that 
this government shows in its know-it-all attitude that it knows 
best, and that the citizens should be kept like mushrooms — fed 
the kind of Tory fertilizer that we know, and kept in the dark. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not political rhetoric. The actions of this 
Progressive Conservative government in cutting radio coverage 
— province-wide radio coverage — fits perfectly in the spirit of 
this motion; that is, to deny access to what is really happening 
in this province. Mr. Speaker, that’s the fourth for a specific 
proposal in regards to providing public access. 
 
The fifth proposal that we have, Mr. Speaker, the fifth proposal 
we have, and I know that the Conservative members opposite 
are really going to shudder at this, given the nature of the public 
delegations that their SaskPower road show saw in the last little 
while, is that we’re proposing, as a method of public access to 
the legislature, that there be a public delegations period, that the 
Legislative Assembly introduce a weekly public delegations 
period where members of the general public could come before 
the Assembly, present their views on matters of concern to 
them, put questions to cabinet ministers and answer any 
questions from any of the MLAs here in this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you take that proposal, where we allow . . . 
would, as a group, decide to have the citizens of this province 
come before the floor of the Legislative Assembly to plead their 
case, to plead their case on whatever manner, in whatever 
manner and whatever issue that affected them. You take this 
proposal and contrast it to the motion that’s before the 
Assembly. Which is democratic, Mr. Speaker? Which is the 
democratic proposal? The one to allow the citizens of 
Saskatchewan to present their own case on the floor of this 
legislature, or the ones which would deny the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, as this motion does, the right to accessibility to 
the political process. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this motion is undemocratic that 
we are debating, and you can contrast that with our proposal for 
a public delegation. Again, Mr. Speaker, this was proposed 
April 1987, long before the bell-ringing episode happened. We 
were talking about legislative reform, real legislative reform, 
not the kind of authoritarian backtracking on democracy that 
has been engaged in by that government. They’re not interested. 
They’re not interested in allowing the citizens to participate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, next week I will get into the precise reasons 
of why this motion is here in order to keep citizens from 
participating, and the reasons why this 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1606 

 
 

government is afraid of its own citizenry, and what are the 
political ramifications for that. I’ll get into that next week. 
 
Now as I said, Mr. Speaker, in the public delegations proposal, 
what we want to do is have citizens come to the legislature to 
put questions to cabinet ministers; to make it accessible, Mr. 
Speaker; to put questions to cabinet ministers; to have cabinet 
ministers responsible to the people of this province, unlike the 
present situation where they’re not responsible to anybody but 
the Premier. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They wouldn’t be impressed with the 
answers we’re getting. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that, as my 
friend and colleague from Saskatoon Eastview says, they would 
not be impressed with the answers they’re getting these days. 
But fair enough. It may happen that . . . when even on the 
government side. 
 
Think about the future a little bit, Mr. Speaker. Think about the 
future. Think a little farther along than the next election or 
trying to win the next election. Think about what happens, Mr. 
Speaker. Those members had better do it, those members had 
better think about it, because maybe when they’re sitting in 
opposition they would like to see public delegations come 
before this legislature and question cabinet ministers, if there 
are any members of the government that survives the next 
electoral onslaught. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now citizens presently have that right, but only 
through written petitions filed by an MLA. Saskatchewan 
people, we believe, should have the right to speak directly, 
directly to their representatives from the floor of this Assembly. 
 
Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that is a much more 
democratic type of activity that this government could be 
putting forward than the present motion that would limit 
bell-ringing, and I’m sure you would agree to that, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our sixth proposal to open this legislature to the 
people of the province, to allow the access, is to set up a 
legislative intern program. Mr. Speaker, we want people in 
Saskatchewan to understand how the whole process of political 
decision making and of government operation takes place. We 
feel that it’s important for the self governance of themselves as 
citizens that they understand that there are rules, regulations, 
techniques, and principles in order to guide themselves in the 
conduct of their affairs. Some of them are applicable, some of 
them the people learn in activities in their own organizations 
through trade unions or through service organizations or 
through their churches, or through whatever organizations that 
they’re involved in on a day-to-day basis. 
 
But there are other forms and techniques that they can learn, 
and we think it’s particularly appropriate for young people in 
this province to be able to do that. So we’re proposing a 
legislative internship program, and that this legislature work 
with Saskatchewan universities, and with Saskatchewan 
technical schools, the development of an internship program 
which would allow young people to train while they’re working 
here at the 

legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not a particularly radical proposal because 
it’s presently in place in the operation of the federal government 
in Ottawa. It’s part of the function of the Ontario legislature, 
where the Ontario legislature has its own internship program. 
And we think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s particularly appropriate, 
given the high level of politicization in this province, and given 
young people’s activity in politics from a relatively early age, 
that we provide the opportunity for those people to delve more 
deeply into the subject of how the legislature and how the 
institutions of democracy function, and that they work directly 
with elected representatives. Now, Mr. Speaker, you know in 
Ontario that they work with the directly . . . representatives 
from both sides of the legislature, some from the government 
and some from the opposition, and we would propose that that 
be done here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you contrast this proposal for legislative reform, Mr. 
Speaker, with the motion that’s presently before us, and once 
again I ask you: what does more to help the people of this 
province to participate in the governance of their affairs — our 
proposal for an internship program, a leadership internship 
program, or this proposal? 
 
I think the answer to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
as it is to yourself, I know yourself and to members of the 
opposition, that that obviously is . . . the answer to that is 
obvious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the specific proposals for allowing 
accessibility to the legislature: public hearings, province-wide 
television covering of proceedings, television coverage of 
legislative committees, province-wide radio coverage of 
proceedings, public delegations period, legislative internship 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — All, Mr. Speaker, of which, I think, and the 
members of this side of the House think, are good ideas that 
would help to serve and strengthen the foundations and 
functionings of not just this institution but of the democratic 
processes and the development of those democratic processes 
throughout the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the second principle, and again I repeat that 
we enunciated it of April 1987, was making the legislature not 
only more accessible to the public of Saskatchewan, but also of 
making the legislature more accountable to the public of 
Saskatchewan. And we came forward with a series of specific 
recommendations at that point in time, in 1987, to try to do that, 
to make the legislature more accountable to the public. 
 
And the first specific proposal that we put forward in making 
the legislature more accountable to the public was to lengthen 
the oral question period. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, do we find that proposal here in this motion 
before us today to allow members of the legislature to grill the 
front benches, to ask questions of the cabinet, to make the 
executive branch of government more accountable to, not only 
this legislature, but all the 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1607 

 
 

people in the province through the lengthening of the oral 
question period? No, Mr. Speaker, we don’t find that proposal 
in this motion. What we find is a motion which would limit — 
attempt to limit — public discussion of the issues. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They backed away from it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — What happened, Mr. Speaker? My friend says 
they backed away from that whole notion. They don’t want to 
lengthen oral question period. 
 
So what do we propose, Mr. Speaker? In April of ’87 we 
proposed that the oral question period be lengthened to 45 
minutes per day from its present length of time of 25 minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, oral question period — and I want to say this for 
the people who may be watching this on television today — 
oral question period is one of the four ways that private 
members can ask the government in the public forum about its 
plans or performance with respect to specific issues. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, there are not many opportunities for private 
members of the opposition, but I dare say private members that 
occupy the back benches of the government side of the House 
— there are not that many opportunities to ask them in a public 
way to account for their activities. 
 
We want to be able to enhance that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 
through lengthening the oral question period to 45 minutes per 
day. And the reason we put it at 45 minutes per day, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Saskatchewan has one of the shortest oral 
question periods in Canada of 25 minutes per day. And we 
think that, given the complexity of issues, given the . . . for 
example, we saw today in question period the ministers are 
trying to outline the government’s case regarding Gigagate, and 
the members on this side of the House are trying to outline their 
position. 
 
(1130) 
 
That the proposal . . . it seems to me that it benefits all members 
of the House to take a serious look at this proposal, which is to 
lengthen the oral question periods to 45 minutes a day. Because 
it allows for the further development of issues, Mr. Speaker, 
and hence it allows for the further edification of the public in 
education as to what constitutes a specific issue. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, it provides a method to bring out 
the truth. And anything, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that allows the 
truth to be brought to full light through the proceedings of this 
legislature is a good thing, not a bad thing. 
 
And I would, Mr. Speaker, very much support a motion like 
that. Because, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan ranks second to last 
in its length of oral question period. Only British Columbia has 
a shorter oral question period. That, Mr. Speaker, is the first 
proposal that we put forward to make the legislature more 
accountable to the public. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, is to improve the public control of Crown 
corporations. Now does this motion before us, Mr. 

Speaker, enable the people of Saskatchewan to make Crown 
corporations more accountable to the people of the province? 
On the political level, Mr. Speaker, on the political level, I 
would submit that in fact it does the exact opposite; that the 
result of the passage of this motion — not that it is ever going 
to pass; not that it’s ever going to get through this House — but 
that the intent of this motion is to make Crown corporations less 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say so, Mr. Speaker, by way of this reasoning: that if this 
motion goes through, we’re going to see the sell-off into foreign 
hands, into hands outside Saskatchewan, into hands of the 
American multinationals or the Japanese multinationals, of our 
assets of SaskPower, Sask Government Insurance, SaskTel, and 
so on and so forth. 
 
So far from making, Mr. Speaker, the activities of the public 
corporations of this province more accountable, it makes it less 
accountable because the result of this motion will be to move 
control of those public corporations into the hands of others. 
 
You take, Mr. Speaker, this motion and contrast it to when our 
proposal was put forward in April 1987. The specific nature of 
our proposal was that the Crown corporations of the committee 
of the legislature be given the same powers as the Assembly’s 
Committee of Finance, including the power to approve all 
proposed spending in advance. 
 
What happens, Mr. Speaker — let me explain that; the nature of 
that proposal — is that what we are saying is that to make 
Crown corporations more accountable to the public is to take 
the spending and the financial activities out of the hands of the 
technocrats that run those Crown corporations, supposedly for 
the benefit of all people in Saskatchewan, take that power from 
them, put it in the hands of the directly elected representatives 
of the people of Saskatchewan by opening the legislature and 
allowing the people themselves into those committees where 
they make proposals, they can make suggestions, and they can 
come forward with ideas on what those Crown corporations 
should be doing. That’s accountability; that’s democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I ask you, sir, to think seriously, which is the more 
democratic way of proceeding for this legislature, to limit 
bell-ringings, or to make the Crown corporations accountable to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
It’s obvious — the answer is obvious to anybody, any person of 
any kind of fair and right-thinking, and with the modicum of 
justice in terms of their character that you know very well, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is a need to make Crown corporations more 
accountable. Nobody denies that. Isn’t that what we should be 
doing, as opposed to debating this particular motion which 
would in fact take away the public accountability of Crown 
corporations as its ultimate end. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, we proposed in April of 1987 that all 
Crown corporations be required to submit their expenditures to 
the Public Accounts Committee of the legislature for review, 
once again taking out of the hands of the private sector auditors 
and the technocrats in the Crown corporation, taking their 
spending habits out of 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1608 

 
 

that particular forum and placing it in open public scrutiny so 
that the people of this province, through the Public Accounts 
Committee, which link to our proposal that I talked about 
earlier, which would be hold open televised hearings so that the 
spending of the Crown corporations would be subject to public 
scrutiny and public comment in a very meaningful way. 
 
You take that aspect of this second proposal, Mr. Speaker, and 
put it up against what this government is proposing, and I say to 
you that the people of Saskatchewan know who the real 
democrats are when it comes to promoting public 
accountability, particularly in the Crown corporation sector of 
this province. 
 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, that Crown corporations have 
expanded sharply in recent years. And I want to read, Mr. 
Speaker, this sentence from this document produced in April of 
1987, because it tends to be somewhat of a prophetic statement: 
“Crown corporations have expanded sharply in recent years, yet 
their public accountability has been steadily eroded.” Mr. 
Speaker, isn’t that what the Provincial Auditor said in the 
auditor’s report, that his ability to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I do not believe the question 
on Crown corporations or public accounts has anything to do 
with the rule before this House on bell-ringing, and I would ask 
the member to address the rule . . . the motion before this House 
on the bell-ringing question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Regina North East, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not arguing with 
your ruling, I would simply like, because of the importance of 
this debate, and as I was listening to the member opposite, I 
heard him make a relevant connection to the issue that is being 
debated here in that motion, and I would appreciate it, in order 
that we could understand clearly what your ruling is, if you 
would indicate some reference in the rules that are before us 
which would support the ruling that you’re making, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because simply stating it does not help. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the member from Regina 
North East is quite aware of the rule which speaks about being 
relevant in your speaking to a motion. And the debate on public 
accounts and Crown corporations isn’t directly relevant to the 
rules and the bell-ringing which is before this House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. We’re dealing with the proposal, Mr. Speaker, that 
the government’s putting forward in order to muzzle the 
opposition, as opposed to the proposals in counterpoise with 
that, the proposals made by our side in dealing with the Public 
Accounts Committee and how it should be dealt with, and that 
is to make it more accessible to the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, it is a long and established tradition of 
the Progressive Conservative Party to try to trample on the 
democratic rights of the people — it doesn’t matter of 
Saskatchewan or British Columbia or England. 

And let me say, Mr. Speaker, that the question that, it seems to 
me, of relevance in regards to our proposals that we put forward 
of April of 1987, stands in a much higher light in the eyes of the 
public, given the events of the past two weeks in this 
legislature, including those of the Provincial Auditor and of the 
Crown Corporations Committee. Because, Mr. Speaker, as I 
have said, Crown corporations have expanded sharply in recent 
years, yet their public accountability has been steadily eroded. 
 
Now I don’t know if anybody can deny that fact. Here in April 
of 1987, in proposing legislative reform, putting forward a 
suggestion to this House that the rules be changed in this 
manner, we said that there was a loss of accountability to the 
public, a loss of financial accountability, steadily eroded. And 
so what’s happening? 
 
Crown corporations today spend nearly as much as government 
departments, yet unlike government departments, their spending 
plans are not submitted for public examination in advance. Mr. 
Speaker, we think that that should be done, and we will ask why 
hasn’t the government put forward that rule change compared to 
what it’s dealing with. 
 

Their spending performance after the fact is subject to 
only the most cursory of reviews. Public scrutiny of this 
important sector must be improved. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let me say this, that this bell-ringing and the 
reason that this motion is before the House is precisely because 
of the totally out-of-control plans that this government has 
involved in the public spending of Crown corporation assets 
and of Crown corporation’s money, in particular SaskPower, 
because this government intends to use those assets of the 
people of the province to line the pockets of their friends the 
same way the Tory party did with Ken Waschuk in Gigagate, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s why we need public accountability in the 
Crown corporation sector. 
 
We have another Crown corporation now, Mr. Speaker, another 
corporation in the public sector, called GigaText, and it’s in the 
public sector, Mr. Speaker, precisely because of the kind of 
corrupt machinations that Tories are well-known engaged in, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s why we need accountability. That’s what 
the government should be dealing with now, Mr. Speaker, 
instead of this motion which limits accountability. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is what is relevant to the people 
of this province. Where is their money going? Why isn’t there 
accountability in the Crown corporation sector? Why has this 
government steadily eroded, steadily eroded, so where even the 
Provincial Auditor takes the government to task? Why isn’t that 
the motion before us instead of this motion which would limit 
accountability, Mr. Speaker? That’s what the people of this 
province want to know in dealing with that. We, Mr. Speaker, 
we think that this question of accountability is more than 
relevant, and that’s why we put it forward in 1987. 
 
Public review of certain cabinet appointments, Mr. 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1609 

 
 

Speaker, our third specific proposal, our third proposal in that 
regard, relates to the public review of certain cabinet 
appointments. And we think, Mr. Speaker, that a standing 
committee of the legislature be empowered to review major 
order in council appointments. It seems to be a reasonable 
suggestion. It seems to be a reasonable suggestion, right, made 
up by members of both sides of the House, where a person who 
is appointed by order in council for certain levels of 
appointment be brought forward, first of all, so that their 
competency could be questioned. 
 
You contrast that proposal with what’s before us, Mr. Speaker, 
and ask yourself this: which is the democratic proposal? And I 
speak, Mr. Speaker, particularly of an appointment to the head 
of the Sask Power Corporation which this government wants to 
privatize, Mr. George Hill. And does this legislature have the 
accountability in the appointment of Mr. Hill and those other 
Tory hacks, which erodes the accountability of this legislature 
and the accountability to the people of this province? 
 
You take that motion, Mr. Speaker, and contrast it with the 
motion that’s before us, and I say there is no doubt in anybody’s 
mind that those of us on this side of the House have been 
pressing for democratic reform in this legislature, unlike the 
authoritarian jackboot mentality which is leading to this 
muzzling of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for themselves. Mr. Speaker, the 
public has grown weary of political patronage and suggestions 
of favouritism and cronyisms in government jobs. Nobody 
wants that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member has been allowed 
a lot of latitude. And the debate before the Assembly is on the 
motion of rule 33(1), and the member is bringing other debates 
into the debate. He can debate the rule change, but to bring in 
debate that’s going on in other committees or other debates that 
are going on in the legislature is not relevant. So I would ask 
the member to keep his remarks — order — I’d ask the member 
to keep his remarks to the motion before the House. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. We are dealing with the question of rule changes here, 
and I certainly don’t want to stray off that subject, particularly 
with the subject that we’ve been putting forward, our notion of 
what constitutes rule changes, as opposed to what this 
patronage-ridden, corrupt, authoritarian bunch of neo 
something-or-others — and I won’t go ahead and say what it is 
because they can smell the polish on the jackboots themselves. 
 
What these people are doing, Mr. Speaker . . . But, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to say this: that we have before us a set of proposals put 
forward by our government that makes this motion that we’re 
debating here today, puts it into the kind of shameful activity 
which this government is well known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we call for the public review of certain 
cabinet appointments. You take that motion . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The debate is on rule 
33(1). If the member wants to debate the actions of the 
government, by proper notice, can put a motion before the 
House to debate that. Today we are debating that rule change 
and that rule change only. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s look back at the history of this rule change and 
why it arose. And perhaps we might want to look at the history 
of rule changes in this legislature, commencing in 1969, 
because after all, this rule change, Mr. Speaker, this rule change 
is what has been known as an abnormal imposition into the 
daily life, as a cancer into the daily life of this legislature, a 
cancer put forward and germinated by that government. 
 
And if the Speaker wants me to deal with rule changes, I intend 
to do that. This rule change which is, as you pointed out so 
quite correctly, Mr. Speaker, is an aspect of an attitude of 
authoritarianism well known to the people of this province and 
reflected by the commentators, political analysts, and 
editorialists across this province, that they can damn well do 
what they please. That’s what the Swift Current Sun says in its 
editorial right here. That’s what they can do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what kind of people, what kind of people, I 
ask you, would initiate this rule change? What kind of 
narrow-minded people . . . What kind of world view do these 
people hold that they think that this little rule change will 
muzzle this opposition, or muzzle the opposition of the people 
of Saskatchewan, to their privatization attempts and particularly 
in regards to SaskPower. Let’s describe what kind of people, 
Mr. Speaker, would come up with this kind of narrow, 
authoritarian view of the world. 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, we have characterized this rule 
change as authoritarian. Mr. Speaker, it is authoritarian because 
it tries to limit by its very nature — and I don’t know whether 
I’m going to be ruled out of order because I read part of the rule 
change, maybe that’s too narrow, but perhaps I’ll try and we’ll 
see what happens, okay. What this rule change does: 
 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended by adding the following after “rule 33(1).” 
 

So what we do, Mr. Speaker, after rule 33(1) add an article 
which says: “when the Speaker, or the chairman of Committee 
of the Whole . . .” 
 
Now we know, Mr. Speaker, that we know here in the 
legislature what the Speaker is, but we know very well that 
there are many people out there who don’t know what the 
Speaker is, or who the Speaker is. And for those of you who 
don’t know, I might say that the Speaker, and it’s contained 
right here, second word, third word in the rule change, is the 
person that occupies the big red chair in the Legislative 
Assembly and who sometimes makes rulings which affect all of 
us and the conduct that each and every member has in the 
House — right? — with the rules. And those rules are laid 
down and have been laid down, particularly in this Legislative 
Assembly, have been laid down with the consent and unanimity 
of a 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1610 

 
 

special committee which was set up, and had been set up in the 
past. 
 
And I’m going to intend to go into now, at great length next 
week, as to the actual historical precedence or rule changes and 
this rule change before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the Speaker is the person that sits in the Chair. And it says 
when the Speaker — he sits in the Chair and interprets how 
those rules are to be applied in the House — and he consults 
with a person who sits at the Table down below, who’s Clerk of 
the Assembly, and who makes advice and advises the Speaker 
in rulings, or whether not the things he says about rules in this 
legislature are correct or incorrect, because after all, none of us 
in this House would want the Speaker to make an incorrect 
ruling. 
 
That’s why we all want an input into what the nature of the 
rules are so this House functions in a form of civility and 
operates in a manner which is conducive to efficiency as 
opposed to the kind of . . . I think it was “a state of continuous 
warfare,” Sir Douglas Diddles said in 1649 upon the 
impeachment of the Duke of Buckinghamshire, who was one of 
the ministers who in fact was the very first minister impeached 
by a Legislative Assembly anywhere in the House of England, 
and talked about the concept of entrenched warfare. 
 
So we have the Speaker here who operates and decides whether 
or not the rules of the House are being broken. So this rule 
change says, when the Speaker or the chairman of Committee 
of the Whole . . .  
 
Now the Committee of the Whole, of course, for those of us in 
here and who know what the Committee of the Whole is, I 
don’t have to explain it, but for those who are watching on 
television, for the edification and education particularly of 
children who are watching and don’t know how this place 
functions, the Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, as it says 
here, the chairman of the Committee of the Whole is the person 
that sits at that desk and is one of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly who, when the legislature and the 
Speaker leaves — and there’s a reason why the Speaker leaves, 
and I’ll get into that in a few minutes — but when the Speaker 
leaves and goes out that door, there at the desk comes the 
speaker of the Committee of the Whole, because the legislature 
resolves theirselves into what is known as the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
We then become a committee. We’re not the legislature; we’re 
not divided into the same way that the government and the 
opposition is, but we’ve all become a committee. And we deal 
with questions that come before us that are in fact dictated, that 
come before us by the rules of this Legislative Assembly. And 
that’s what we’re talking about, this rules change. It says: 
 

When the Speaker or the chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole or Committee of Finance . . . 
 

Now the Committee of Finance is a different committee. It’s 
like the Committee of Whole, except it is all of the members of 
the legislature meeting together to deal with 

the question of the public finances and the budget, the budget 
which is brought down by the Minister of Finance and is 
discussed on an annual basis. Hopefully, if the Minister of 
Finance brings it in in a timely manner, we get to discuss it in a 
timely basis, although that has not always been the case in the 
past, but that again depends on one of the rules of this 
legislature. 
 
Anyway, when the Speaker or the chairman of Committee of 
the Whole or Committee of Finance has put the question on a 
motion and a recorded division is requested under rule 33(1), 
which is the rule that we’re discussing here, Mr. Speaker, so 
what does that mean — has put the question on a motion and a 
recorded division is requested under rule 33(1)? 
 
Well, first of all, has put the question on a motion. Now we all 
know in this Legislative Assembly, those of us who sit here, 
what putting a question on a motion is. Putting a question on a 
motion is at the end of a debate of a particular motion which is 
put before the House of Assembly, there is question called; that 
is, after everyone has had the chance to speak or everyone has 
attempted to have the chance to speak, at the end of their 
speech, in regards to this particular rule change, the question is 
then put and a recorded division is requested, pursuant to rule 
33(1). 
 
Well many people in this province, Mr. Speaker, will not 
understand the words “and a recorded division is requested.” So 
for those of us who don’t understand what that phrase means, a 
recorded division, there are votes that are held in this 
Legislative Assembly that are not on recorded division, and 
those are votes that are voice votes where one side says aye and 
the others say nay. And depending on who has the loudest 
voice, or depending on the way the particular motion is, or 
depending on the subject matter being dealt with, either the ayes 
have it or the nays have it, and it’s generally accepted. 
 
Those are routine procedural motions, for example, that there is 
agreement, that basic agreement, for example, times to adjourn, 
leave to introduce guests, and so on and so forth — all of which 
are non-recorded divisions, Mr. Speaker, but are recorded by 
voice. And you know that, but there are many people in this 
province who don’t know that. 
 
But on recorded division, Mr. Speaker, is a different matter. 
Recorded division is a question of determining who stands for 
what on a particular issue which is brought before the House, 
this particular Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now the government would have us, through this rule change, 
despite the fact that we could be using the time of the House, in 
our opinion, to much better advantage, debating the questions of 
farm financing or debating the questions of whatever, that are of 
particular importance to the people of this province; but this 
government because of its twisted priorities and its perverse and 
authoritarian streak, and well-known by . . . a character trait 
that’s embodied in certain members of the opposition, 
well-known to us on this side of the House, they want on 
recorded division, that is on the recording of the votes, to, as it 
says here: 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1611 

 
 

. . . the bells to call in the members shall be sounded for 
not more than one hour . . . 
 

Well first of all, what is the present situation that we find 
ourselves in, and does this apply across the piece, throughout 
the British Commonwealth? 
 
Okay, the present situation in Saskatchewan is that when there 
is a recorded division, that is that there is a demand a vote be 
taken that counts each and every member — and that’s done by 
each and every member of the Legislative Assembly standing in 
their place — when that particular recorded division is taken, 
the bells ring to summon the members so that everybody in the 
Legislative Assembly has the opportunity to get in for the vote. 
 
The government, however, as now presently existing in this 
province, those bells can ring for an indefinite period of time to 
call attention to the public of issues of great importance. And of 
course, the longer the bell rings, the greater the issue of 
importance before the public. And the greater of the issue of 
importance before the public, Mr. Speaker, such as in the case 
of SaskPower, when this government tried to sell off the assets 
of SaskPower . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, Order. Order. The member is 
bringing specific issues into the debate of the rule changes. 
Order. The question before the legislature is a change to the 
bell-ringing rule, and the debate is on rule 33(1). To bring 
specifics into that is not relevant, and I would ask the member 
to get back on to the . . . Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 
member to keep his comments relevant to the motion before the 
House. If he wants to get into other debates, he can move 
motions to bring before the House that can be debated at 
another time. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want to make a comment, as a point of 
order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the question of relevancy. And I 
want to refer you to Beauchesne’s . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It was not a point of order. 
There was no point of order raised. Order. Order, order. The 
member never said anything about raising a point of order when 
he rose in his place. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise a 
point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that the rules of the House allow the member to make 
references to matters which are related to the motion which is 
being debated at the present time. As is indicated in 
Beauchesne’s, on page 98: 
 

299. (1) Relevancy is not easy to define. In borderline 
cases the Member should be given the benefit of the doubt. 
 

In this particular case, by making reference to the SaskEnergy 
debate which . . . SaskEnergy Bill, which 

caused the ringing of the bells, is not even borderline, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I submit in my point of order that the 
member ought to be able to make that reference in the remarks 
that he makes, as is indicated in Beauchesne’s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. It’s up to the 
Chair to decide relevance. Page . . . Order, order. Order. Erskine 
May . . . Order. The member for Regina Lakeview keeps 
interrupting the Chair. I would ask the member for Regina 
Lakeview to allow the Speaker to read from Erskine May, page 
424: 
 

A Member must direct his speech to the question under 
discussion or to the motion or amendment he intends to 
move, or to a point of order. The precise relevance of an 
argument may not always be perceptible but a Member 
who wanders from the subject will be reminded by the 
Speaker that he must speak to the question. 
 

Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wish to make a brief remark and then 
challenge the Chair in the appropriate fashion provided by the 
rules. 
 
Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I want to read, and I will 
do this briefly within the rules. I want to read rule 299: 
 

Relevancy is not easy . . . In borderline cases the Member 
should be given the benefit of the doubt. 
 

This rule, Mr. Speaker, this motion that is being passed goes to 
the way in which this legislature functions, and what the 
member was saying fell well within the compass of that. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, if one other will rise with me, I will 
formally challenge this rule. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. His actions cannot be 
criticized, incidentally, in debate or upon any form of 
proceedings except by a substantive motion. 
 
Order. Order. The only way the Chair can be challenged is by 
substantive motion. The Speakers’ rulings, once again, belong 
to the House which, under S.O. 12, must accept them without 
appeal or debate. That’s page 39, rule 119. 
 
Saskatchewan now follows Ottawa’s ruling. The Speaker 
cannot be challenged; the chairman of committee can. Debate 
continues. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to deal with the question 
of the rule changes, and particularly as it has been practised in 
this House. At an appropriate time I want to speak on the basis 
of what caused the formation of this rule change. 
 
But before I do, I want your ruling, Mr. Speaker, on this. I’m 
going to say that the reason that this rule changing took place 
was because of the introduction of Bill 21 into this legislature, 
and of something . . . 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1612 

 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The rule change is 
what it is in the orders of the day. The relevance has nothing to 
do with any other legislation that has been introduced. It’s the 
motion before the Assembly; it is now being debated. I would 
ask the member to keep his comments relevant to rule 33(1). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In regards 
to the rule changes that are before us, I want to speak to you 
about the question of the procedure of how rule changes have 
proceeded in the past in this legislature; and does this particular 
motion to add the limit to bell-ringing appear under motion of 
33(1); and why it is that this motion is abnormal, and it is an 
imposition and is a cancer on this legislature, and is in fact one 
of the kind of germs that it is well-known to be thought up in 
the somewhat fertile although . . . (inaudible) . . . mind of, I 
would say, people like the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this rule change, this authoritarian attempt to 
muzzle the opposition in Saskatchewan, is without precedent in 
this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — There is nothing, Mr. Speaker — absolutely 
nothing — nothing in the history of this legislature which 
would suggest that this change in position in this legislature by 
the government — that does not have any basis in the history of 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in saying that, there is a history recorded in the 
Report of the Special Committee on Standing Orders and 
Procedures of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done a little bit of research. I’ve looked 
back in time immemorial in this legislature, at least from 1969, 
which in terms of any member here is time immemorial, 
because on the . . . the history of this legislature has been to set 
up a special committee which is a Report of the Special 
Committee on Standing Orders and Procedures of the 
Assembly. That’s been the normal way in which rules in this 
Assembly have been changed. 
 
A committee is made up — some of them from the government 
side, some of them from the opposition side — has been set up 
to make changes to the rules, such as this rule change as being 
before. And, Mr. Speaker, that is our suggestion to this 
legislature, and that is still our suggestion to this legislature. 
Unlike the authoritarian, jackboot mentality which would try to 
muzzle the opposition in this province, we’re proposing that the 
people get together, some from that side of the House, some 
from this side of the House, to decide on what the rule changes 
will be. And that’s a compromise, Mr. Speaker, because . . . and 
that’s the compromise, because that’s the way it’s always been 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — That’s the way it’s always been done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my colleague and seat mate here from 

Moose Jaw South wants to introduce some guests, so I’m going 
to ask if the member can have leave so that he can introduce his 
guests, and I will resume my remarks, which will be extensive 
and lengthy, on the procedures in this House, and well on the 
point and always relevant in regards to the procedure. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thanks to my 
colleague from Regina Rosemont, and thanks to all members 
for leave to introduce these guests. 
 
Through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members, I would like to 
introduce a group of 40 students who come from grades 3, 4, 5, 
and 6, from Empire School in my constituency. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Empire School is not only in the constituency of 
Moose Jaw South, it is the public school in my own 
neighbourhood of the constituency, and so I’m particularly 
happy to be introducing the students from Empire School, Mr. 
Speaker. It is the school which our son attends, and he will 
know some of the students here today, although he’s only in 
grade 1. With the students today, Mr. Speaker, teachers Rich 
Towriss and Marlene Hart, and chaperon Kim Robert. 
 
Students from Empire, you are witnessing an important debate 
in this legislature today, a debate over a motion to change the 
rules and the functioning of this House in terms of the ringing 
of bells in this legislature. And I hope we can have a chance to 
discuss the debate, because we are going to meet for a picture 
and then go for some drinks, and you will be able to ask any 
questions that you’d like to ask. 
 
So I would encourage all members present in the House now to 
join with me in welcoming the grades 3, 4, 5, and 6 students 
from Empire School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to speak a little bit about the question of 
precedent in regards to rule changes in this House, and does, in 
fact, this rule change as introduced by the government meet the 
test of time and the test of historical precedent in this. 
 
What has happened in the past, Mr. Speaker, was that rule 
changes were done through consent, as I was earlier saying. The 
first establishment of this tradition of precedence, that it be 
done through co-operation, that it be done through compromise, 
and that rule changes be taken from the heat of debate in the 
Legislative Assembly 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1613 

 
 

and moved into a special committee to deal with the rules, is 
contained in the Report of the Special Committee on Standing 
Orders and Procedures of the Assembly of December 1969. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1969, on Monday, February 17, 1969, the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan passed the following 
resolution constituting a special committee of the legislature to 
consider and report upon the advisability of making changes in 
the standing orders and procedures of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the way in 1969 that rules changes were 
done. 
 
Now in 1969, Mr. Speaker, at the time, there were Liberals who 
formed the government side of the House, the members of the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), as it was 
known then, which later became the New Democratic Party, on 
the opposition side of the House. The members of the Liberal 
Party and members of the CCF got together on a motion moved 
at that time by the hon. Mr. Steuart, and seconded by the hon. 
Mr. Thatcher. 
 
And at a special committee . . . And this was the motion, Mr. 
Speaker — and it’s something that may serve as a guide for this 
government in its activities in dealing with this question of rule 
changes, as opposed to its present attempt to ram these rule 
changes down the throats of this legislature — that if they really 
respected this Assembly and they wanted to operate in a spirit 
of reasonableness and of compromise, that they may want to 
consider this, Mr. Speaker, as an alternate method of 
proceeding as opposed to what they’re doing. 
 
(1215) 
 
And at a special committee consisting of Mr. Speaker — and 
that’s important, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it be the . . . 
that Mr. Speaker take part in those rules as it’s the Speaker of 
this Assembly who has to administer those rules — as 
chairman, plus eight members to be named at a later date . . . So 
at that time, in 1969, when they wanted to change the rules, 
they appointed first of all the Speaker, and eight members to be 
appointed. 
 
And here’s what the mandate of that committee was: be 
appointed to consider and report from time to time upon the 
advisability of making changes in the standing orders and 
procedures of this Assembly. That was the first thing that that 
committee was empowered to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to 
set up eight members, chaired by the Speaker, empowered to 
look at, and mandated to look at, the standing orders and 
procedures of this Assembly. 
 
In 1969 it was a very reasonable process. We had two political 
parties that had been locked into pretty intense political debate, 
particularly four or five years before, around the question of 
medicare. Yet despite the heat of that particular debate and the 
animosities that remained in that debate, they were able to set 
up a special committee, unlike this government today, unlike 
this government today which wants to, because of their narrow 
and putrid partisan political purposes, wants to ram through this 
rule change. 
 
Back then, back then the former minister . . . the Minister 

of Finance’s former seat mate, Mr. Thatcher, even he 
recognized that in order to operate this House in any kind of 
manner that it took compromise and a reasonable approach, so 
they did that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that also went on to mandate the committee for 
other purposes, and that this special committee would be 
empowered to sit after prorogation of the legislature and during 
the intersessional period. That is, Mr. Speaker, not only did they 
recognize that to change rules required a reasonable attitude 
towards it and a whole spirit of co-operation and compromise, 
they recognized that in order to achieve that spirit of 
compromise, that they had to remove it from the heated debates 
of this Assembly and take it out, to move it after the legislature 
prorogued and sit between sessions. 
 
Now of course, Mr. Speaker, there was another reason why they 
did that, is that they did not want the time of the Legislative 
Assembly to be spent, to be taken up with hours and hours and 
hours over debates over rules of procedure which, to the 
average, everyday citizen in Saskatchewan, aren’t the most 
pressing things in their life. They understood at that time that 
the reasonable course of action was to take it where the debate 
could be held among those who had a particular interest in the 
subject and who understood how this legislature operates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to consider: wasn’t that the good old 
days when things ran a little bit better? You contrast that 
attitude, Mr. Speaker, to the attitude of the government opposite 
in dealing with this question of rule changes. You just contrast 
that attitude as reported in the written record here in the 
province in terms of the precedent of the operation of this 
legislature, and I say to you, sir, in all due respect, that the 
government is to be found wanting — wanting in the highest 
degree — absolutely no sense of reasonableness, absolutely no 
understanding of compromise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion went on to say: 
 

That this Special Committee be instructed to include in its 
reports drafts of proposed Standing Orders drawn to give 
effect, if adopted by the Assembly, to any change or 
changes that may be proposed by the Committee; and 
 
That this Special Committee be further instructed to submit 
its final report to the Assembly not later than the tenth 
sitting day of the next ensuing session. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are two important elements to the 
compromise that was reached back in the heated political days 
just two years prior to the downfall of Ross Thatcher and the 
Thatcher government. You know, Mr. Speaker, one would be 
tempted to draw certain political parallels as the electoral clock 
ticks, ticks, ticks away on this government as it ticked, ticked, 
ticked away on Ross Thatcher. 
 
But even, Mr. Speaker, with the sense of impending doom of 
the Liberal government which hung over it, they were willing to 
sit down in a spirit of reasonableness and compromise to work 
it out. And not only that, Mr. 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1614 

 
 

Speaker, what they did during that time as they attempted to 
develop this compromise in 1969, they also said that this 
committee which is going to meet intersessionally and has got 
the mandate to draw up the draft rules for the legislature, that 
this committee had to report back by a certain fixed date. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is in essence the same 
proposal which we on this side of the House put forward to the 
government by way of letter, by way of personal contact, and 
here for the second time in this debate, as I stand on my feet, 
that that compromise still stands. That offer is still out there. 
 
And if this government were serious, if this government had 
any kind of understanding of the depths to which they have 
sunk in the minds of the public and the level of hatred which 
exists out there against them as a government, and in some 
cases as individuals, that they would accept that compromise, 
Mr. Speaker — that they would accept that compromise to try 
to regroup and gather their forces together to try to work out 
some kind of political strategy which is at least going to life 
them up in the polls, if nothing else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why, however, that this motion that we’re 
dealing with, I suggest to you, is here, sir. You contrast the 
operation of this government when it comes to setting up rule 
changes through this motion and what happened in 1969 — 
February 17, 1969. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what happened after that committee met, 
there were rule changes which were introduced into the House 
as a result of the work of that committee. For example, there 
were rule changes which affected the Committee of Finance and 
the Committee of the Whole in regards to its amendments; and 
Committee of the Whole in regards to rulings; and the 
membership and sitting of committees; and the estimates; and 
the hours of sitting; and the introduction of the guests — as 
we’ve just had graphic illustration here not more than five 
minutes ago; member services and committee on; letters of 
transmittal; money Bills; motion for returns — on and on and 
on and on. 
 
All those subjects — not one subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
a whole range of subjects in regards to making at that point in 
time, this legislature operate more efficiently, all those things 
were done through a committee that was struck in the spirit of 
reasonableness and compromise; unlike the activities of a 
government who are hell-bent and desperate government that is 
hell-bent to ram through this rule change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was that the only time that this procedure was 
followed in this Legislative Assembly? Mr. Speaker, the answer 
to that is not. We have said that what the government is doing is 
unprecedented, that it does not have any precedent, has never 
been done before. The ramming of rules at the legislature by an 
authoritarian, arrogant government has never been done before. 
 
Because the second time, Mr. Speaker, not only was it done 
1969, that special committee struck; I want to say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that in November 22 of 1976, seven years later, 
November 22 of 1976, Mr. Speaker, a similar 

type of order of reference was determined by the Legislative 
Assembly in order to deal with the question of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And it goes on: 
 

On Monday, (November) 22, 1975, the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan passed the following resolution 
constituting a Special Committee of the Legislature to 
consider and report upon the advisability of amending the 
Rules and Procedures of this Assembly. 
 
On the motion of the Hon. Mr. Romanow . . . 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, unlike the first commission, which was set 
up in 1969, of which no member remains in this Legislative 
Assembly, there are some people who were involved in 1976 in 
this Legislative Assembly to set up the committee to strike the 
rules. 
 
It says that: 
 

On motion of the Hon. Mr. Romanow, seconded by the 
Hon. Mr. Smishek: 
 
Ordered, That a Special Committee consisting of Mr. 
Speaker as Chairman . . . 
 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, we have precedent. In 1969 the 
Speaker was appointed as chairman to deal with the rules. In 
1976, the Speaker was appointed as chairman to deal with rules. 
And we make the same offer to the government today, we make 
the same offer to the government today. We want the Speaker. 
We think that it’s important that the Speaker be involved in 
rules changes. You obviously don’t because you got no respect; 
nothing but an authoritarian streak a mile wide. 
 
We want to put the Speaker, as they did in ’69 and as they did 
in 1976, to be named: 
 

. . . plus seven Members (the first committee had eight 
members, this one with seven members), to be named at a 
later date, be appointed to consider and report with 
recommendations the advisability of amending the Rules 
and Procedures of this Assembly (legislature) to provide 
for an oral question similar to the Rules of the oral question 
period in the House of Commons and to consider the 
possibility of improving on the Debates and Proceedings 
of the Assembly and the feasibility of producing the 
Debates on a daily basis; and 
 
That this Special Committee be instructed to include in its 
report, drafts of proposed Rules drawn to give effect, if 
adopted by the Assembly, to any change or changes that 
may be proposed by the Committee; and 
 
That this Special Committee be instructed to consider and 
report with recommendations the advisability and 
feasibility of televising the proceedings of the Assembly 
and to consider and recommend on any mechanisms which 
may be 

  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1615 

 
 

needed to control the said broadcasts; and 
 
That the Committee review necessary renovations to the 
Legislative Chamber and sound system; and 
 
That this Special Committee be further instructed to submit 
all or part of its report to the Assembly not later than 
March 1, 1976. 
 

What happened, Mr. Speaker, in 1969? In a highly charged 
partisan atmosphere the Assembly was able to strike a 
committee to work out through compromise a reasonable 
approach to rule changes. 
 
In 1976 the same thing occurred. Rule changes . . . actually, Mr. 
Speaker, that is a misnomer. It was “rules changes,” because not 
one rule was dealt with, but a whole series of rules were dealt 
with through this committee, outside the heated debate of the 
legislature, in a reasonable manner. In 1976 that was thought to 
be the approach that this Legislative Chamber should take. 
 
Why isn’t that the approach that this Legislative Chamber, why 
shouldn’t that be the approach that this Chamber take today? 
What could possibly be motivating the government to try to 
change that method of operation, except political desperation, 
except a narrow partisan political interest to ram through their 
Bill. 
 
In ’69 it was acceptable; ’76 it was acceptable. Strike a 
committee; have the speaker as the chairperson; set up a 
committee where the rule changes of a whole number of issues, 
including at that time televising the proceedings of the 
Assembly, could be dealt with. Absolutely nothing wrong with 
that procedure, Mr. Speaker, for 1969; absolutely nothing 
wrong in 1976. 
 
What is wrong with that procedure today? What is wrong with 
that procedure today? The only thing wrong with that procedure 
today from the point of view of that government, I suggest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that it doesn’t suit their political purposes to 
privatize the assets of the people of this province. That’s why 
they’re ramming the rule changes the way they are . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is bringing 
specific debates from other issues into the debate of the rule 
change. And I would ask him again to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
What motivates the government . . . The question of motivation 
of the government, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you is highly 
relevant to the people of Saskatchewan. The whole question of 
motivation of why the government is ramming this rule changes 
at us is not only relevant to Saskatchewan, it is the heart of this 
question of rule changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not a question of irrelevancy to say that the government is 
motivated by its partisan political 

purposes, and it’s not a question of irrelevancy to say that those 
partisan political purposes are nothing more than the attempt to 
sell off the assets of the people of this province. That’s what the 
motivation is and that is highly relevant. 
 
In fact, that is not only highly relevant, that is why we are here 
debating the issue, because those two issues are inextricably 
linked. They are inextricably linked not just in theory, not just 
on the head of the pin, or the pin of the head of people like the 
Minister of Justice who like to take and slice issues into narrow 
little compartments, and maybe, in fact, if he got out of that 
lawyer mode of thinking and began to look at the thing in a 
holistic fashion, he’d be able to understand that. That’s not, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not irrelevant. 
 
What is relevant to this debate is the precedent of the rules 
change in this House and why this government is breaking with 
precedent. And why this government was breaking with 
precedent is for one reason and one reason only — its political 
agenda of privatization. 
 
Historically these two issues have been linked. This issue that 
we are debating today, the question of this rule change to rule 
33, this motion is inextricably linked in history with the 
bell-ringing episode which took place prior to the introduction 
of this motion and with the reasons for the bell-ringing, and no 
amount of legislative higgledy-piggledy, no amount of twisting 
of logic is going to change that historical fact, that the question 
of relevancy is always concrete because the truth is always 
concrete. And what is concrete in this matter is that the 
government is breaking with precedent in order to put forward 
their political agenda. 
 
In 1969 we had a committee to deal with the rules; 1976, we 
had a committee set up, chaired by the Speaker, to deal with the 
rules in a reasonable manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to preserve that because, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not the only time, that is not the only time that this has 
occurred in this House — not just in ’69, not just in ’76. I refer 
you, sir, and all members of the Legislative Assembly, to the 
report of the special committee on the review of rules and 
procedures of the legislative committee, April 21, 1921. 
 
All, Mr. Speaker — ’69, ’76, ’81 — all part of the history and 
tradition of this legislature, where the rules are changed, the 
rules are changed not on the floor of this Legislative Assembly, 
but are changed through calm and reasoned and rational debate, 
in the spirit of compromise, intersessionally, with most of all, 
Mr. Speaker, most of all, a respect for each and every individual 
member and the rights of each and every individual of this 
Legislative Assembly, no matter what side of the House they sit 
on, unlike the activities of that government and members of that 
government, in whatever particular form or role that they 
happen to occupy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The rule changes in ’69 and ’76 were set up specifically with 
the intent to protect the rights of individual members of the 
Legislative Assembly to better serve their constituents. And in 
doing so, it was understood at that time, at those times — and 
it’s 1969 and 1976 — that the 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1616 

 
 

best way to do that was to take it off the heated floor of this 
political Assembly. 
 
Because at that point in time in 1969 and in 1976, the people 
who were occupying the chairs — and it didn’t matter whether 
they’re sitting on this side or sitting on that side of the House — 
understood that there are long-term implications for these rule 
changes. There were long-term implications for these rule 
changes. 
 
And I can tell you something, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 there was a 
rule change, and in 1990 or 1991 there’s going to be another 
rule change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And I tell you right now, that for the sake of the 
smiling member from Shaunavon back there who thinks this 
whole thing is a joke, he won’t be here in 1990 to enjoy those 
rule changes, but there will be a few members who will be. 
There will be a few members who will be, Mr. Speaker. And 
there will be a few members who will then live under the 
consequences of introducing into the House unprecedented rule 
changes — unilateral actions by the government. Because if 
you Tories say it’s okay, if it’s okay to change the rules 
unilaterally by the government, what’s sauce for the goose, 
boys, is sauce for the ganders. What’s sauce for the goose is 
sauce for the ganders. 
 
And let’s ask your friends out there in the real world, when the 
question comes to putting forward Bills, for example, to take 
back into the public domain those things which have been sold 
off, and to take back in a method which may not meet with the 
approval of the friends of those boys out there. And there is no 
bell-ringing allowed, and there will be unilateral rule changes, 
let them then stand here in their place and say, oh heavens, we 
didn’t want this to occur; oh heavens, isn’t the NDP 
undemocratic; oh heavens, isn’t things bad. Right? Well, what’s 
going on. 
 
And we can turn, Mr. Speaker, we can turn and say those who 
are occupying the front bench condoned it. They didn’t 
condemn it, Mr. Speaker, they condoned it. And not only have 
they condoned it, they have set the precedent for it. Unlike the 
Liberals in 1969, unlike the New Democrats in 1976 — and I’ll 
get to 1981 in a few moments — unlike those two, these people 
have condoned the unilateral rule changes to this Assembly. 
 
And if that’s the precedent that they want to set, I can tell you 
boys, if that’s the precedent that you want to set, you will be 
mightily sorry after the government changes next time. Because 
things will happen that you won’t like, and your big business 
friends won’t like, and your multinational buddies won’t like. 
That will happen because we’ve got the precedent, because 
that’s what precedent means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can turn and say there is history here, and in fact every 
historical change in the Legislative Assembly and in the change 
of powers of parliament, whether it’s a change backward during 
the days of Richard II or a change backward during the days of 
Devine the first, or a change . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members are not to use other 
members’ names in the legislature. I’d ask the member to 
refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Unlike the days, Mr. Speaker, of the reign of the 
member from Estevan, when the days when the powers of the 
people and the powers of the Legislative Assembly went 
backwards, when we move the powers of the people forward, 
when we introduce legislation in this legislature and utilize the 
rules procedure, for example, to allow for employee 
participation in the direct management of companies, despite 
the cries and howls of the big business buddies of the Tories. 
 
When we utilize the precedent that these people are setting, I 
don’t want to hear . . . because I’m going to be here, my friends; 
I will be here. Some of you won’t be, but those of you who will 
be left, I don’t want to hear one whimper or one peep or one 
snivel or one whine out of you, because it is you who have set 
this precedent, you who have in fact broken with tradition in 
this province in regards to what constitutes legitimate 
operations of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
It is you who will make your bed, and let me tell you, whether it 
is a bed of roses or a bed of nails, you will then be forced to 
sleep in it. And in the case of the Minister of Justice, the 
puncture holes from the bed of nails will be well, well received 
by the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned 1969, 1976. I 
want to turn now to the whole question of rule changes in 1981, 
and was that done in regard to the precedents which had been 
set in this Assembly prior. 
 
And I want to read on page 4 of this Report of the Special 
Committee on the Review of Rules and Procedures (of the 
Legislative Assembly), the order of reference, same title of the 
rules, outline which I had read earlier on regarding ’69 and ’76. 
I want to read: 
 

On Thursday, May 3, 1979, the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan passed the following resolutions constituting 
a Special Committee of the Legislature: 
 
On motion of the Hon. Mr. Romanow, seconded by the 
Hon. Mr. Smishek: 
 
Ordered, That a Special Committee consisting of Mr. 
Speaker as Chairman and twelve Members . . . 
 

The first committee, 1969, that I referred to, Mr. Speaker and 
eight members; the second committee, Mr. Speaker and seven 
members; the third committee, Mr. Speaker and 12 members, to 
be named at a later time, be appointed. Consider the extent that 
voice clips should be used by the media; the number, size, and 
nature of standing committees; and the operation of Committee 
of Finance and Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The process is relevant, but 
other specific rules are not under debate in this 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1617 

 
 

Assembly. The process, I say, is relevant, but speaking of other 
specific rules is not relevant. So I bring that to the attention of 
the member. The rule before the Assembly is rule 33(1). I 
would ask him to keep his comments to that rule change, but the 
process of other rule changes is relevant. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the 
committee of 12 was set up to discuss specific rule changes — 
this is a specific rule change — and the extent to which those 
rule changes affect the operation of the legislature. Looking at 
other provinces and looking at the other jurisdictions, both in 
Canada and throughout the British Commonwealth, I would 
suggest, is particularly relevant. 
 
So we see that on Thursday, May 3, 1979, there was a 
committee struck consisting of 12 members and Mr. Speaker, 
outlining three matters, including, I want to say, other such 
matters relating to rules and procedures which the committee 
deems necessary. And I think that that’s important, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that’s important, that particular item, because it 
relates directly to what we’re doing here. The question of other 
matters to be dealt with in terms of the mandate of a committee 
regarding the procedure, as you yourself have said, the 
relevancy of this committee, very simply is this: “that the 
committee be instructed to include in its report, drafts of 
proposed rules given to its effect.” 
 
In other words, the mandate of the committee, as it was in 1969, 
as it was in 1976, as it was in 1981, all of which contain the 
following elements . . . and I may say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
latter two strikings of committee to deal with rule changes were 
initiated, as I have read it, by the present member from 
Riversdale, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, who, when he 
was a member of the Executive Council of this government, 
understood — unlike the Premier of this province who fails to 
understand — that the process to which you just referred is 
more than relevant, it is essential. 
 
It is not just a question of relevancy, it is a question of essential, 
the essential nature of the functioning of this legislature. The 
member from Riversdale understood that in 1976 and in 1981 
when he moved these motions. Why does not the Premier of 
this province understand the same thing? 
 
(1245) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Why does not those members on the 
government side understand? Why don’t they have got it in 
their heads that it takes . . . In order to change the way a family 
lives — and I want to use an example of a family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re stuck here, and right now it’s day 49, and I am here for a 
great deal . . . I spend a great deal of my time here having to 
coexist and live with members of this Legislative Assembly, 
trying to co-operate. But on a personal level, let me just say 
this. Some of those members I like and respect as individuals 
from the other side; others I don’t, but that’s natural with any 
family or 

any large extended group. But there have to be rules, Mr. 
Speaker, in order for that coexistence to take place. There have 
to be rules drawn up that everybody can agree on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You know, Mr. Speaker, those rules, first of all, 
have to be fair; and secondly, everybody has to agree upon 
them. Mr. Speaker, think of what happens when you have a 
high-spirited teenager in your family that wants to go out, spend 
all hours of the night out on the street, driving down to the 
Burger King or doing whatever teenagers do these days. Well, I 
think most families, Mr. Speaker, say there are some limits to 
that kind of activity. 
 
And those rules that are established, in terms of limiting the 
kinds of activity of a family, are worked out as a compromise. 
On the one hand, there’s the need for that young person to 
exhibit some sense of responsibility and some sense of freedom 
and some sense of initiative and going out and making their 
social connections; but on the other hand, there’s the need for 
the peaceful functioning, if you like, of the family unit and for 
the development of respect of other members in that family. 
 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a compromise 
worked out between, on the one hand, the needs of the child and 
the teenager, and the other hand, the needs of the family as a 
whole. And that’s generally done through a whole process of 
give and take, of negotiation, of working together in a spirit of 
compromise and reasonableness, but most importantly, in a 
spirit of respect, a spirit of understanding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — In a spirit of understanding that each and every 
member of that family has their individual needs, and each and 
every member of that family has their individual wants. And to 
accommodate those needs and wants, we must all work 
together. 
 
So that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that is why in 1969, in 1976, and in 
1981, these committees were struck. I mean, you don’t have to 
look very far in terms of the history of British parliamentary 
democracy, although we will when it comes to dealing with the 
question of precedence as it relates to this motion. 
 
In a theoretical sense, but in a very practical sense and a very 
down to earth sense, what we have here is for many, many days 
we as individuals have to exist in the common room. We have 
to find some method of functioning where we can exist. We 
have to find some method of functioning where each and every 
one knows what the rules are, and where each and every one 
feels that they have, in fact, although they may not like this 
particular aspect or that particular aspect of this rule or that rule, 
that there is essential fundamental agreement on the way in 
which this legislature operates. That’s always been the case. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s always been the case. That was the case, by 
the way, in the Parliament of Canada in terms of dealing with 
the same issue that we’re dealing with today, this rule change 
on the ending of bell-ringing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, whether or not there remains the case 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1618 

 
 

in terms of the aftermath, at least at that point in time there was 
general unanimity or general agreement, even if somewhat 
grudging, by all three parties involved in the episode, that that 
particular legislative change, along with other legislative 
change, because, Mr. Speaker, that particular rule was not dealt 
with in isolation. And I’m going to go into that in a little while. 
 
But it was dealt with altogether . . . the same way that the 
family rules that are drawn up, when a time limit is set on a 
teenager that you have to be home by 11 o’clock or 12 o’clock 
on weekends, and that you have to do the dishes and have to 
make the beds, but in exchange for that, other things will 
happen. That’s common sense. That’s just plain, ordinary 
common sense and understanding how people work together. 
 
Well, what’s happened, Mr. Speaker? What’s happened here is 
that this government is not well endowed with that particular 
quality of common sense these days. In fact, I would suggest 
that it is a general opinion of people across this province, and 
particularly in regards to this rule change, that that government 
has taken leave of its senses; that it’s not operating in the way in 
which every family unit in this province generally operates to 
make its own rules; that it is not operating through that period 
of reasonableness and compromise, but that in fact it is 
operating through a unilateral, dictatorial, and authoritarian 
manner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in that kind of a situation in a family, what 
happens? What happens when you’ve got the big boss-man, the 
big daddy in the family, the big daddy that goes and tells the 
wife what to do and the kids what to do, and this is the way it’s 
going to be, and that’s the way it’s going to be, and no 
questions asked because we’ve got the power? What happens in 
that kind of situation, Mr. Speaker? Family falls apart — the 
family falls apart. 
 
You know that and I know that and other members of the 
Assembly know that, Mr. Speaker, in a very graphic way they 
know that, that when you try to be the single authoritarian 
figure in a family, that the family falls apart, because people 
can’t work that way. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s even worse when those in the 
family unit, the teenager, for example, say, wait a minute, okay, 
this part of the rule I’ll accept, but why don’t you accept or 
operate in this or that way; and the parent turns around and 
slaps the kid, punches the kid in the mouth, then kicks him out 
the door or locks him in a room or does something like that. 
Because that’s what the analogy that we’re dealing with here, 
Mr. Speaker, is. 
 
What kind of respect, what kind of even modicum of respect do 
you think will exist after a repeated occurrence of those kinds in 
any family? Mr. Speaker, you know and I know and everybody 
in this Legislative Assembly knows that that family will not last 
very long. 
 
And I’m telling you, Mr. Speaker, the same thing can be 
applied to this Legislative Assembly. That’s why we’re sitting 
here at day 49, debating this unilateral action on behalf of the 
government, the arrogant and contemptuous manner in which 
it’s acted. 

And things are falling apart in the province around us. Things 
are going to the dogs, as they say, because we’re spending the 
time debating this motion when we could have, as we did when 
we offered the compromise to the government, done this in a 
manner which is reasonable, which is civil, and which produces 
the intended effect, which is to develop a set of rules that we all 
can live with. Just the way that it’s done in a family, just the 
way that it’s done in a family, so too could we bring here into 
this particular rule change. 
 
But flying, Mr. Speaker, I say flying in the face of tradition, this 
government has taken a mode of operation, the procedure as 
you have pointed out, that procedure which has worked so well 
in the past and has resulted in the kinds of democratic reform 
that I earlier referred to in our proposals for democratic reform, 
in regards to those particular items, that procedure worked in 
the past. And, Mr. Speaker, I dare say that when we form the 
government after the next election, we will strike up that rules 
committee and move towards the kind of democratic reforms 
that I’ve talked about, in contrast to the activities of this 
arrogant government. 
 
And doesn’t that seem to be a reasonable way of operating 
things, Mr. Speaker? Doesn’t that seem to be a reasonable way 
of operating, as opposed to trying to come down with the iron 
heel like a bunch of dictators. Doesn’t that seem to be the way 
of compromise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I’d like leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I regret having 
to interrupt the debate, but perhaps it’s the end of the week and 
it’s the end of the morning, and it’s a good way to end by 
introducing 53 children from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 53 students from Central School. They 
are grade 4 students. I think every year since I’ve been in this 
House we’ve had the honour of hosting a group from Central 
School, and this year is no different. And it’s always a pleasure 
to indeed have them in here. 
 
They have with them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, three teachers, Mrs. 
Donna Stinson, Mark Miller, and Mabel Lake, and I believe 
they also have a couple of parents that are busy supervising 
today. 
 
I will be meeting with them at 1 o’clock when this is done, and 
I look forward to an enthusiastic question period with them. 
And I would ask all members to welcome them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome 
the students here to the Assembly on behalf of 
  



 
June 2, 1989 

 
 

 
1619 

 
 

this side of the House. 
 
I was just ending up on my speech and was going to go into the 
next topic that I want to deal with, Mr. Speaker. And given that 
it’s several minutes to adjournment time, I would move that this 
debate do now adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 
 
 


