


















































June 13, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 13, 1989 
 
 

1835 
 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you, five people seated in your gallery, sir. 
These are constituents from Weyburn. They include: Myrtle 
Evans, Marjorie Hagen, Helen Stewart, Frances Stewart, and 
Charlotte Watson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are in Regina today to participate in a 
program voluntarily, a seniors’ life-style research project, Mr. 
Speaker, that looks at the whole question of fitness, life-style, 
and physical activity patterns of older adults. It’s being 
conducted at the Dr. Paul Schwann Centre at the University of 
Regina, and they have agreed to do this public service, if you 
like, on behalf of . . . as part of a sample group on behalf of all 
seniors across the province. 
 
I would just ask them to rise, Mr. Speaker, and that all members 
of the legislature would welcome them here to the legislative 
proceedings this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
today to have in to your gallery, a group of 46 students from 
Oman School in Swift Current. They have with them today 14 
adults, and, Mr. Speaker, about three-quarters of this group are 
in the French immersion class. They are also one of the older 
schools in our city and in fact this year are celebrating their 
75th birthday as a school, along with the city of Swift Current 
which is celebrating its 75th birthday. 
 
I want to welcome them, and I will look forward to meeting 
with them after question period, and I would ask all members to 
please join me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a guest seated in your gallery, a Mr. John 
Maximiuk from Grenfell. John is in Regina for the day and 
decided to take in some of the proceedings in the legislature this 
afternoon. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming him to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure 
for me this afternoon to introduce to you, and to my colleagues 
in the Assembly here, a group of visiting students from Wagner 
Elementary School in Nipawin. I believe there’s 50 students; 
they’re from grades 3 and 6 classes. They’re accompanied today 
— and they’re in the west gallery, by the way, Mr. Speaker — 
they’re accompanied today by their teachers, Bev Gunnlaugson,  
 

Freeman Reynolds, and Mr. Charles Webber. As well, they 
have chaperons, Marilyn Gray, Evelyn Sholter, Elaine Thorne, 
Sylvia Palmer, Cheryl Fraser, Tammy Gobert, and Dawn 
VanDorpe, and bus drivers, Jean Berriault and Terry 
Grandfield. 
 
I understand they’re attending various other places in Regina in 
their tour down here. I hope that they have an enjoyable time 
here in the legislature this afternoon, and informative and 
educational. I look forward to meeting with them at 3 o’clock 
for pictures and a short discussion period after to discuss what 
they’ve seen here. 
 
I would just ask all members of the Assembly to help me 
welcome them here to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to welcome the school children from Nipawin. It’s obvious, as 
you look at them in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve got 
their faces painted. It’s going to be kind of a humorous picture 
to look at, I think, as a remembrance of their visit here. 
 
But I had the opportunity to bring greetings earlier in the day, 
with Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, at the second annual 
Regina International Children’s Festival. And I’m sure that 
they’re going to enjoy their visit there, and as a matter of fact I 
understand there’s going to be 35,000 children attend that 
before it’s over on Saturday. 
 
I welcome all the other school children, if they haven’t seen that 
yet, to go and have a lot of good time there on a visit there later 
in this day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Regina South in welcoming these students 
who are here this afternoon that will be attending this 
International Children’s Festival. I had the occasion to attend 
the official opening at noon hour today, and it was a perfect 
day. There were thousands of school children there, and they’re 
going to be entertained, I think, with about 45 different acts. 
And I’m sure they’re going to have a great five days in Regina, 
and I hope that you enjoy the session today, and I hope that you 
enjoy in particular the events of the children’s festival. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Farm Poverty in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 
yesterday Michel Smith, top official at Family Services Canada, 
rejected your ludicrous notion that there’s no poverty in 
Saskatchewan. This week we have a report published by the 
Faculty of Social Work at the University of Regina, the Riches 
report, which shows that since welfare reform was introduced, 
when food banks were established in 1984, that since that time 
food bank use in  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1836 
 
 

 
Saskatchewan has increased some 89 per cent in Prince Albert, 
some 70 per cent in Regina, and some 165 per cent in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: do these startling 
figures in the increase of food bank use in this province not 
indicate to you that poverty is very real in this province, and 
that in fact what you are doing, Mr. Minister, is using the food 
banks of this province as a substitute for decent social 
assistance rates and fair jobs for the people of Saskatchewan 
that all poor people in this province deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for families with 
children we have the third highest social assistance rates in 
Canada, behind only Ontario and Alberta, and not much behind 
those two provinces. Our cost of living is not as high as Ontario 
nor as high as Alberta. So therefore when taken into account, 
our rates are consistent with the best rates in Canada, and 
there’s only so much that we can do. We’d like to do more, Mr. 
Speaker, but there’s only so much we can do at any given time. 
Our rates have been increased regularly, and our rates are, 
relatively speaking, as high as the rates were under the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you know that’s not true, because every time you increase the 
basic allowance you cut back on other areas of social assistance, 
like the travel allowance, and therefore the rates have not 
increased a penny since 1981. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: 
in light of the fact that you’ve cut the rates for single people 
who are employable from $581 in 1981 to 375 maximum today, 
in light of the fact that you haven’t increased the minimum 
wage more than 6 per cent although inflation’s been 43 per cent 
over the last seven years, I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could 
explain to us how you expect that there can be no poverty in 
Saskatchewan when you force social assistance rates down in 
this way and frozen the minimum wage. Haven’t you made it 
impossible for people to pull themselves up by their bootstraps 
when your minimum wage has been frozen for so long in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I did not say that there are 
no poor people in Saskatchewan. I said that there is no poverty, 
and there is no mass poverty in this province. There are some 
people who are poor, but it is not for lack of this government 
spending money on the poor people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have, as I indicated, the second or third highest rates — it 
depends on how you want to play with the statistics — but I 
will acknowledge that they are at least no worse than the third 
highest rates in Canada, behind only the two richest provinces 
in Canada. And therefore, I submit  

to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are doing everything reasonable 
to eliminate poverty in this province. 
 
I do not deny that there still are some poor people. There always 
will be people who are poorer than other people. But there is 
not mass poverty, and that’s what the dispute is here — the 
amount of poverty. And I say that if there is poverty, it’s not 
through lack of trying from this government to help people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, do you deny the report of the National 
Council on Welfare that says we have the second highest rate of 
family poverty and child poverty in Canada. Do you deny, Mr. 
Minister, the fact that that excludes native families living on 
reserves, of which we have far more than the most poor 
province, which is Newfoundland? Do you deny, in fact, that 
when those native families are included, Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of family poverty and the highest rate of child 
poverty of any province in Canada because of the policies of 
your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, what we have here is the 
opposition playing a little political sensationalism with the lives 
of people and with the statistics. We have two elements: we 
have, yes, many . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like to ask the hon. member 
to refrain from interrupting the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, we have many Indian 
families living on Indian reservations which are paid out of the 
federal treasury. And secondly, those statistics would not be 
totally accurate because they do not include the housing 
provisions provided by the federal government, the education 
provisions, and the non-tax status of those families. In addition, 
we have farm families who have low incomes, and those 
families have been helped by the provincial government. 
 
So when you take into account the fact that we have a high 
percentage of Indian population, which is federal responsibility, 
and is cared for by the federal government under different rules, 
and the farm population, which this government and the federal 
government have helped as much as possible, I say those 
statistics are not accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question again to the Riches report, but this time the failure 
of your work-fare program, Mr. Minister. The vast majority of 
work-fare jobs created thus far have lasted only 20 to 23 weeks, 
long enough just to get people off welfare and onto 
unemployment insurance, and not to reintegrate them into 
long-term, permanent employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you not acknowledge that your  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1837 
 
 

work-fare program is a failure; that it has failed to create 
long-term, meaningful jobs for people; that all it has done is 
taken people off welfare and onto unemployment insurance, and 
then they go back to a life without hope and without work as a 
result of the failures of your policies, Mr. Minister. Will you not 
admit that that is the result of your work-fare program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I say to you that even your Mr. 
Riches has reported that there were 1,678 fewer cases between 
’84 and ’88, which shows that welfare reform is working. The 
actual numbers are higher than that. But welfare reform is 
working, and you only have to go and look at the pool in 
Watrous which was built by people who had jobs rather than 
being paid to do nothing — people who have pride in their 
work. Go to Elbow harbour, and if you have time, go to your 
own city of Saskatoon and look at the river banks and the 
improvements that are being made there, and the Meewasin 
Valley Authority — and then you go to those workers and tell 
them what they’re doing is useless, because that’s what’ve you 
said today. We are giving those people a job, training 
experience, and pride in themselves, and you have the audacity 
to come here and say that this is all useless. Well these are 
useful projects for the people and the workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, your work-fare program isn’t working because you 
only give jobs to people for 20 weeks instead of giving them 
long-term, decent-paying, permanent jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Minister, you know that your 
welfare . . . the number of people on welfare is 20 per cent 
higher than it was when you took government seven years ago. 
 
And my question to you is this: will you not admit that in light 
of the failure of your work-fare program, the only way that 
you’ve been able to take any people off the social assistance 
rolls is by illegally cutting at least 1,500 people in the last 18 
months off social assistance in violation of the Canada 
Assistance Plan Act? Isn’t that the only way that you’re able to 
succeed in taking people off the welfare rolls is by illegally 
cutting them off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m a lawyer, and I 
can confirm for you that it’s not illegal to work in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Silver Lake Farm 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
direct my question to the minister of privatization. I would like 
to ask some questions about the sell-off of the Silver Lake farm, 
Mr. Minister, at Green Lake. 

Mr. Minister, as we understand it, this farm with the livestock 
and feed and buildings is currently valued at $2.5 million. By 
way of information, Mr. Speaker, considering the Silver Lake 
farm with 1,800 pure-bred head of cattle, 4,800 acres of 
developed land, houses, numerous barns and outbuildings, is a 
much larger operation either than Ile-a-la-Crosse or the central 
farm at Green Lake, my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: why 
did you transfer the smaller operation to the community and sell 
the largest one off to some of your friends in Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Minister, or Mr. 
Speaker, as I pointed out before, there were four northern farms. 
Three of them have been transferred to the surrounding villages, 
that of Cumberland House, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Green Lake, 
and I understand both Cumberland House and Ile-a-la-Crosse 
are quite satisfied with the arrangement. The one farm, Silver 
Lake farm, was put out for bid for all people in Saskatchewan. 
The people of Green Lake were able to bid on it, as were 13 
other groups. Theirs was not the successful bid; it went to 
another group, a group from Prince Albert which was a much 
stronger bid. I’ve said, when the documentation is completed, I 
will table that bid in the House so that everyone in 
Saskatchewan can see what was paid for this asset. 
 
But I think the member opposite does not give credit to the 
extent of the central farm. As I understand, the central farm is 
about 9,400 acres, Mr. Speaker. The buildings and the assets — 
this is the Green Lake one — worth about $290,000, and 50 per 
cent of the hog and cattle operation is about $300,000. So if you 
add all those up, you’ll see that the value of the assets is 
approximately, with the buildings, $590,000, not counting the 
price of the land, which I think would be well in excess of a 
million that the community of Green Lake have been given for 
a dollar. And I think that’s very reasonable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Most certainly 
that is a big difference between $3 million on the Silver Lake 
farm and $500,000 on the central farm. You can see where your 
priorities are. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people who work at that farm in Green Lake 
built it from nothing to what it is today, the Silver Lake farm. It 
has become a viable operation and now you want to sell it off to 
some of your Conservative friends in Prince Albert. Mr. 
Minister, I ask you, why could you not have made the same 
offer to the citizens of Green Lake, the same kind of financing 
arrangements you offered to companies such as Weyerhaeuser 
and Manalta Coal, so that they could have an opportunity to 
build an economic future right there in Green Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious the 
member did not hear the figures. I’ll run over them again for his 
information. There’s about 9,400 acres; there’s  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1838 
 
 

buildings and assets of approximately 290,000; there’s a value 
of livestock, hogs, and cattle at about 300,000. And that comes 
to about 590,000, not counting the price of land which I think, 
taken all together, would be in excess of a million dollars. 
 
And I think that is a very fair settlement to be given to the 
community of Green Lake for $1. And also they had the 
opportunity to bid on the Silver Lake farm the same as every 
other community in Saskatchewan, and any other group that so 
wished to do so. They were not successful on that bid; it was a 
group from Saskatoon. 
 
But I think the settlement with the village of Green Lake is very 
fair, as do the people of Ile-a-la-Crosse, as do the people of 
Cumberland House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you know full well, at the Central Lake farm all the assets that 
are movable are going to be sold, and the government gets half. 
So you’re fudging those figures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
the people of Green Lake believe that what the future holds for 
this farm is a sell-off of the cattle herd they have built up over 
the years so that new owners will collect a quick profit. Then 
the remaining land will be used for other purposes or a game 
farm. 
 
Will you tell this House what guarantees we have that this will 
not happen, that the cattle herd that has been built up will not be 
sold off, and that the farm will continue as it is, and that it will 
not be turned into a game farm in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea as to what 
plans the community of Green Lake . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea what the 
community of Green Lake plan to do with the central farm 
when it’s theirs for a dollar. If they choose to sell some of the 
cattle herd, I suppose that’s their decision. If they choose to sell 
some of the land to the people in the community, I suppose 
that’s their decision. If they want to diversify and do other types 
of agriculture, that’s their decision. 
 
I would hope the people of Green Lake can take this asset and 
have the people in that community build and diversify and grow 
from this initiative. And I think having this type of an asset 
transferred to them for a dollar, certainly gives them that 
opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you know full well that the citizens of Green Lake do 
not own that asset any more. It’s gone to Prince  

Albert. 
 
My final supplementary to you is: will you guarantee and will 
you put it in the contract a condition that that farm will not be 
used for a game farm; that the cattle will not be sold off and it 
turned into a game ranch? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, that is not the style of 
operation of this government. It’s not for me to dictate to the 
people who bought the Silver Lake farm what they should do 
with it, nor is it right for me to dictate to the community . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. We can’t hear the 
minister. And I would like the opportunity for everybody to 
hear the minister, including myself, and we’ll give him that 
opportunity now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I say that may be the 
operation of the members opposite when they had the land bank 
and tried to control the lives of farmers, but it is not the 
intention on this side of the House to dictate to the people who 
bought the Silver Lake farm what they should do with it, or to 
the community of Green Lake to say what they should do with 
that asset which they have had for a dollar. I hope they develop 
it to the benefit of that community and to the people who live 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to bring to the attention of the hon. 
member from The Battlefords that it is not in the tradition of the 
House for hon. members to question decisions of the Chair 
simply because they don’t like it. If you wish to do that, sir, you 
know the route you must follow. 
 
Order! And I also bring that to the attention of the member from 
Saskatoon South. The hon. member from Saskatoon South, I’m 
going to bring it to his attention once more, and I expect all hon. 
members not to interrupt the Chair and question the Chair. And 
if he wishes to do that he will have to pay the consequences. 
 
Order! The hon. member from Saskatoon South keeps making 
remarks to the Chair and I ask him to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for thanking you for 
drawing it to my attention. 
 

Environmental Impact Study on Mine Project 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Minister of 
Rural Development took notice of a question from the member 
for Cumberland, and the question dealt with Hudson Bay 
Mining and Smelting and the Namew Lake mining 
development. 
 
This development is occurring in Manitoba, so the requirement 
for any environmental assessment would be done by the 
company in Manitoba and it would be reviewed by the 
Manitoba government. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1839 
 
 

As it relates to the water that could flow back into Namew 
Lake, we will be having the Manitoba inquiry come into 
Cumberland House so that that community would have the 
opportunity to express their concerns about the project. Some of 
my staff will attend that particular hearing. And following the 
hearings, we intend then to deal with the Government of 
Manitoba as it respects the ongoing development of this mining 
project. 
 

Job Losses at Cameco 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 
Premier. Fourteen more jobs were recently slashed right in La 
Ronge and a major office closed as a result of the privatization 
of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). 
Last year, Mr. Deputy Premier, you said:  
 

You can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that the people who 
work at SMDC today will be working there in the new 
merged uranium company as well. That will be a 
commitment that is delivered. 
 

Mr. Deputy Premier, are your words absolutely worthless? Or 
are you that incompetent? Or did you deliberately mislead this 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland, as we have 
indicated in the House before, cannot indirectly infer what the 
rules do not allow directly. Through his question, he indirectly 
inferred that the member may have deliberately misled the 
House. I ask him to rise and withdraw that remark. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I was meaning to say . . . I withdraw that 
remark. I was meaning to say that he misled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is none of 
the above. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, there was quite a 
different world environment at the time that the merger took 
place. And let me talk about it for a minute, Mr. Speaker, 
because at the time that merger took place, uranium prices were 
some place, on the stock-market, some place around $17 a 
pound. Today uranium prices, Mr. Speaker, are some place 
around $10 a pound. Now if those guys were in office, Mr. 
Speaker, they would have closed all of those mines and none of 
those people would have any work. 
 
Now let me tell you why uranium prices are at $10 a pound, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re at $10 a pound primarily because of 
weapons-grade ore coming onto the market because of 
disarmament agreements between the USSR (Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics) and United States. 
 
Now I suppose they’re against those agreements as well, Mr. 
Speaker. But the upshot of it all is, Mr. Speaker, at the end of 
the day the new Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy 
Corporation) will be better positioned than any other uranium 
company in the world to take up the new market, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know . . . 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Premier, how can you seemlessly 
disregard the job loss of 14 people in La Ronge at the same time 
when you’re giving $4 million to GigaText? Why are you 
giving tremendous amounts of millions of dollars to big 
corporations? Why don’t you stand up here, get red-faced and 
pound on the table for the people and jobs of northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how he can 
even ask that question when he knows full well that, had they 
been sitting over here, there wouldn’t be one of those jobs in the 
uranium mines; they would have closed them all down. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, he talks about job loss, job loss where 
ore bodies are depleted. Would he have us crush rock for the 
sake of crushing rock, Mr. Speaker? 
 
He talks about what this government has done for northern 
communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago the 
Premier and I were up North, and we visited eight communities 
served by the Athabasca power line, Mr. Speaker, one that was 
only a dream for Northerners when those people were sitting 
over here, Mr. Speaker. They now have unlimited power at 
southern rates, Mr. Speaker, where they used to pay anywhere 
from 17 to 29 cents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Fire-fighting Crews for Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce today, on behalf of the Department of Social Services 
and in conjunction with my colleague, the Minister of Parks, 
Recreation and Culture, that the government has established 
three new early response fire suppression crews for 
north-western Saskatchewan. These crews will be based in the 
northern villages of La Loche, Buffalo Narrows and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
This Saskatchewan works project is a part of welfare reform 
and will create 68 jobs at a cost of more than $380,000. The 
crews will be utilized as an initial react force by Saskatchewan 
Parks, Recreation and Culture to fight forest fires in the area, as 
well as for fire prevention and reforestation. If the crews are not 
kept busy fighting forest fires, which is truly our hope, Mr. 
Speaker, then they will be doing community work in the three 
named communities. 
 
Parks, Recreation and Culture will be supplying all overhead 
and training for these projects. These projects will not only 
provide meaningful employment and training, but also save 
property from seasonal forest fire damage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this initiative shows this government’s 
commitment to the protection of the environment, protection of 
natural resources, and to job creation.  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1840 
 
 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I just wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the 
minister would take the time of the House to make a ministerial 
statement on the types . . . of this nature, on the type of jobs that 
he’s creating. 
 
I sincerely hope, Mr. Minister, that the jobs that you’ve 
announced here today are jobs that are not going to be paid 
$4.50 an hour or such that you . . . on your welfare jobs. I’ve 
always maintained in this House that fire-fighting in northern 
Saskatchewan, that the citizens up there that were fighting the 
fires should be on on a full-time basis. 
 
I sincerely also hope, Mr. Minister, I sincerely hope that the 
jobs that you have created, the 68 jobs that you announce here 
today, will also be given the same opportunities as the 
helicopter pilots and the other fire-fighters that you bring in 
from British Columbia will be getting paid. And I sincerely 
hope that they will be given the same services, and I mean, by 
being able to use the cookhouses, and the showers, and the bunk 
houses that you provide for the pilots. I sincerely hope, Mr. 
Minister, that they’re being given the same opportunity. 
 
I say to you that these jobs are long overdue, and I ask you the 
question again. Make sure that they’re paid a good wage, and 
you also have a react crew in northern Saskatchewan, 
well-trained fire-fighters. I hope that that react crews that have 
been there and have been trained for years are not going to be 
dropped in favour of the type of program that you announced 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Maintenance and Improvement of Via Rail 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
wish to rise under rule 39 to bring forward a motion to this 
House, a bipartisan motion to this House, a non-partisan 
motion, I should say, to this House, which has come about as a 
result of a meeting that occurred at Melville recently. The 
member for Melville and I both attended that meeting. It was 
the overwhelming view of the meeting that a motion be brought 
forward in this House which could be unanimously supported 
by both sides of the House, and that’s the reason I’m here. 
 
The wording of the motion . . . and I’ve asked the member from 
Melville to second the motion, and I’d be pleased to have him 
second it, and he received a copy earlier today: 
 

 That this Assembly strongly urge the Government of 
Canada to reinstate federal funding sufficient to maintain 
and to improve Via Rail passenger service, which is vital 
to rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 

And if the minister wishes to second it, I’d be glad to have his 
name on it. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If the hon. member wishes to . . . 
Order. The Minister of Finance and the member for Regina 
Elphinstone — the Minister of Finance and the other member 
— would you please refrain. I wish to bring this to the attention 
of the House, that if the hon. member from Melfort wishes to 
speak to the motion, we must have a seconder before we can 
address the motion. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I see no indication of a seconder there; I 
will move . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, is there a seconder for this 
motion? 
 
The Speaker: — Before the introduction of the motion we 
must have leave. So first of all I ask the House, is leave 
granted? We need a seconder for the motion. Is leave granted? 
Leave is not granted. 
 
Order, order. Would the House come to attention. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’m unsure as to whether 
the member seconded it or not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, he did. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — He did, all right. I’ll change it back, Mr. 
Speaker, to the member for Melville. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Leave was not granted for the hon. 
member to move the motion, therefore a seconder was not 
required. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you change the rules? 
 
The Speaker: — No. No, no, no, no. Leave was not granted. 
 
Order. I think that in a relatively simple issue, we are getting 
kind of . . . Now the member . . . the House was asked twice, as 
a matter of fact, if leave was granted. Members on this side of 
the House, on the government side, said no, so leave was not 
granted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I believe we dealt with the issue for some 
minutes after we had believed that there was leave granted. I 
want you to indicate who did not grant leave. Who was it who 
didn’t grant leave? because I assumed that leave had been 
granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, if I may speak to this point 
of order. Clearly leave was not granted on this side of the 
House. And, Mr. Speaker, the reason leave was not granted was 
that the member sent the motion over at 5 after 2. They talk 
about being not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order. I  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1841 
 
 

just want to outline for the Acting House Leader that this comes 
out of a meeting that was held in Melville where both members 
attended . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. We’re entering debate. We’re entering 
debate. I think that both . . . Order. I think we should just move 
on to the next order of business. Order. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Commitment to Building Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Pursuant to rule 16, at the end of my remarks I will be moving 
the following motion: 
 

 That this Assembly commend the Government . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
just finishing saying that I’d be moving the following motion: 
 

 That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its continuing commitment to . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. As I said earlier, I 
believe we’ve finished with the issue. We’ve just dealt with it. 
We’re on to motions under rule 16. The member for Yorkton 
has the floor, and let us allow him to continue with his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first 
time I’ve had applause from across the way, Mr. Speaker, from 
the seven years. I want to move: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its continuing commitment to building 
Saskatchewan and to creating opportunity and employment 
for its citizens through building; and further, that this 
Assembly condemn the opposition for their resistance to 
and obstruction of these projects. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very rare occasion that I, or any government 
member, has moved a motion of condemnation against this 
opposition. And it is so rare that I do not ever recall such a 
motion having been made by members of the government. But 
we find ourselves in the position because of the opposition 
refusing to compromise in regard to developing this province, 
and the absolute commitment of the opposition of obstruction 
for purely political purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me touch on, in these 15 minutes, a very few of 
the successful building exercises this government has been able 
to accomplish in its terms of office. And I will start small, Mr. 
Speaker, and work my way up as we go. 

In 1982 the Premier of Saskatchewan said he wanted to do two 
things. First, he said he wanted to protect people from things 
that they could not control, such as high interest rates. And 
second, he said he wanted to build this province so that there 
would be money to afford those protections, jobs to provide 
security and opportunity for our people. Those were his two 
objectives as he led a new Progressive Conservative Party to 
victory — building and protecting. 
 
And if you look back, Mr. Speaker, you will remember one of 
the first actions this government took was to lift the moratorium 
on the building of nursing homes. And with that one act, both 
building and protecting were started and were well on their 
way. 
 
A few hundred thousand dollars doesn’t sound like much for a 
nursing home, and it does not seem like a great deal of money 
to the opposition. And they say that what can you build for a 
few hundred thousand dollars? But this government went ahead 
building nursing homes, and that created jobs, brought incomes 
to our communities, and at the same time it provided protection 
for our people in their old age. 
 
And I can look at my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, major 
expansion to the Yorkton Union Hospital — new administration 
offices, a new emergency ward was set up, brand-new laundry 
facility, brand-new boiler heating system for the hospital. And 
there was in excess of $20-some-odd million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Victoria Place, a brand-new senior citizens’ complex with 
30 beds, was built in 1983. Then there’s Fisher Court, another 
30-bed senior citizens’ complex, a 40-bed new nursing home 
addition — nearly $3 million for that facility, Mr. Speaker. And 
just the other day I turned sod and helped in the sod-turning 
ceremony of another new 30-bed senior citizens’ complex at 
Anderson Lodge. 
 
So here in six years — and I can’t remember when anything 
happened prior to ’82 with your member in Yorkton — we have 
130 beds in the Yorkton constituency, plus the additions to the 
Yorkton Union Hospital. None of that happened before. The 
moratorium that you put on nursing home building just brought 
it to a standstill. And in that seven years we had these five new 
projects to look after the health needs of our seniors and the 
people of our community. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, even such a small start as that was 
important. And the astounding, the frustrating and angering 
things, Mr. Speaker, was that the member from Riversdale 
opposed even that. 
 
In 1985, three years after this government launched one of the 
most ambitious programs of building hospitals, nursing homes, 
and other similar facilities, the Leader of the Opposition had to 
say, and I quote from the Hospital Products and Technology 
Journal, the August-September issue, and I quote . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sure, we renovated the court-house for $2.3 
million and a bunch of new jobs in Yorkton as well. And we’re 
proud of the new court-house in Yorkton. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order! 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1842 
 
 

Mr. McLaren: — The former attorney general, and I quote 
him: 
 

. . . did not pull any punches when he told a large audience 
of hospital board members and administrators that if 
politicians try to cope with the sickness problem of our 
ageing population by building more hospitals or similar 
facilities, the cost would be prohibitive and the results 
disastrous, and building more hospitals is not the answer. 
 

And we have listened for seven years about the massive waiting 
lists at hospitals. I’d like to tell the member from Riversdale 
that I had people in my family that were on the waiting list back 
in the 1970s for months and months and months before they had 
their operations. The same thing happened when your people 
were in office, and it makes me sick to hear the condemnation 
of what we’re doing as far as nursing homes and hospitals and 
the so-called cut in health care which hasn’t happened. 
 
Do not build — that was the message from the lawyer from 
Riversdale, Mr. Speaker. And I say, shame on him. 
 
From projects of a few hundred thousand dollars we can move 
to projects of a few million dollars. And we look at the Gainers 
plant in North Battleford, an NDP constituency on top of that. 
This government said we would build on our agricultural 
foundation. Let’s get them processing our products here. And 
one of those products, Mr. Speaker, was hogs. 
 
So we invited proposals for hog processing, and an Albertan by 
the name of Mr. Pocklington said he would take up the 
invitation and build a bacon plant, and hundreds of jobs for the 
city of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP said no to 
every one of those jobs — no, no, no. That’s what we’ve heard 
for seven years. And why not, Mr. Speaker? Because they don’t 
like Mr. Pocklington. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know Mr. Pocklington either, and I 
really don’t care if I know him, but I do care about the hundreds 
of jobs that the working people in North Battleford have 
because there is a bacon plant there. 
 
We can move on, Mr. Speaker, from a few million to a few tens 
of millions of dollars. Let’s look at the Meadow Lake saw mill 
that is soon to be the foundation of a quarter billion dollars of 
investment. A quarter billion dollars for the community of 
Meadow Lake, and the opposition and the Leader of the 
Opposition said, no, don’t do it; don’t let this type of thing 
happen. 
 
Look at the list of projects that have occurred under this 
government, Mr. Speaker. Weyerhaeuser, hundreds of 
employees. The deregulation of the natural gas industry, 
responsible well in excess of a thousand jobs. The construction 
of the rural natural gas industry, responsible for hundreds and 
hundreds of jobs, protecting farm families from high input 
costs. 
 
And as an aside I would ask you to cast your memory back to 
1981 when the PC opposition first introduced a motion  

to build the rural natural gas program, and it was defeated by 
the NDP government of the day on the excuse that natural gas 
was, and I quote, “A system designed to serve urban 
Saskatchewan.” And that’s in Hansard, Mr. Speaker, in May 
19, 1981. I represent an urban riding, and I can tell you that the 
people of Yorkton know full well that if we do not build rural 
Saskatchewan there will be nothing left of urban Saskatchewan 
to worry about. 
 
So we built a gas distribution program over the opposition of 
the member from Riversdale and his radical colleagues. They 
said it couldn’t be done, that it was going to cost a billion 
dollars. We’re going to do it for 450 million. We built the 
Regina upgrader in partnership with the Co-op. We’re building 
up the Lloydminster upgrader in partnership with Husky and the 
federal government. 
 
We helped to build Canapharm industries. We built new 
facilities and buildings at the University of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve built and built and built, Mr. Speaker, and in every 
single instance the NDP said, no, no and no. They’ve derailed 
the Rafferty program, where the people of Saskatchewan want 
to manage their water. And that project will get built and the 
people of southern Saskatchewan will probably . . . hardly get a 
vote out of that area in the next election for the NDP opposite. 
They have shown that they care nothing for building this 
province, but we want to go back to the failed program of 
buying Saskatchewan. 
 
And the simple facts show that this government is prepared to 
use Crown corporations, use Crown investment, to build, if that 
is what is necessary. We are also ready, able, and willing to 
work with the co-ops and the private sector and to work, Mr. 
Speaker, with the people to build this province. 
 
The NDP do not want to build Saskatchewan. They want to buy 
Saskatchewan, which they were doing during the early years of 
their term in office. And for that they should be condemned. 
 
I am proud of our Premier and I’m proud to be associated with a 
government that the records show has built more than any other 
government before it, and I’m indeed proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — But I am ashamed, Mr. Speaker, that the 
state of politics is such in this province that we have an 
opposition that filibusters Bills it hasn’t seen yet, opposes jobs 
in their own constituencies, attacks the character of people 
associated with those projects for the sole reason that they are 
not NDP projects; claims to support job creation, but obstructs 
every attempt at job creation. 
 
We have to look around the province: the Hitachi plant in 
Saskatoon, building turbines for our province — never before 
has happened — new jobs for our province. We can look at 
Saskatchewan Place, a brand-new arena in Saskatoon which is 
capable of looking at somewhere down the road probably NHL 
(National Hockey League) franchises. Did they ever dream of 
building something like that? No, not on your life, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1843 
 
 

The agricultural college in Saskatoon. How many years was 
that college wanted by the agricultural people? And we’ve done 
that too, Mr. Speaker. The Wascana Centre, the new hospital — 
and I was pleased that I was in charge of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board at that time when we agreed to participate 
in the building of that new facility. And the review committee 
that went around the province every four years during their 
administration asked for that facility to be built, and did they 
get it? No, they didn’t, Mr. Speaker. It took a PC government to 
get it done. 
 
We look at the Buy Saskatchewan program where SaskPower, 
pleased to say, instigated that initial program. We literally had 
to hire two people to work with the people of our province to 
look at offering them projects and encourage them to build 
items for SaskPower. And what’s happened? What used to be 
80 per cent of those goods and services used to be bought 
outside our boundaries, Mr. Speaker, and 20 per cent inside, we 
have turned that completely around in six years where now 
Saskatchewan Power is getting 80 per cent of their services and 
facilities from people of the province. 
 
We have firms in Yorkton that are bidding on various projects 
and the needs for SaskPower and other facilities in the province, 
and being successful in winning the tenders to do that 
manufacturing. 
 
We look at Hunters in North Battleford . . . 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, my time is getting near the end, and I just 
want to move, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its continuing commitment to building 
Saskatchewan and to create opportunity and employment 
for its citizens through building; and further, that this 
Assembly condemns the opposition for their resistance to 
and obstruction of these projects. 
 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
feel strongly that the motion before this Assembly today is a 
very good motion, and that it sums up precisely the position of 
this government with respect to building in Saskatchewan, and 
with respect to our views on the stance that has been taken by 
the members of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a few moments today speaking to 
this motion and talking a little bit about the plan and the vision 
of this Progressive Conservative government when it comes to 
the overall economy of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I feel 
that that subject matter is important to not only the people in 
this legislature, but indeed to all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In order to outline that, Mr. Speaker, I think it very  

important that we talk a little bit, firstly, about what has 
transpired in this province over the last five or six years. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that with the events of the last few years, 
that it has become abundantly clear — abundantly clear — of 
the dependence that this province has on the backbone industry 
of our province, and that being agriculture. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you consider that over the last few 
years we have experienced droughts, and we have experienced 
the crash of the international grain markets, we have 
experienced high interest rates, and just a generally hard, hard 
farm economy. Mr. Speaker, what that has . . . And I say that in 
the context, Mr. Speaker, that not only have we seen very 
difficult times in the agricultural sector, but, Mr. Speaker, we 
have seen a Progressive Conservative government that has gone 
on to protect the farmers of Saskatchewan in all of these 
different areas as best as we could. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ve solved the problems in agriculture; I’m saying, Mr. 
Speaker, that we, as a responsible government, have taken some 
very real important measures to alleviate the effects of the 
droughts and the high interest rates and the crash of the 
international markets. 
 
But notwithstanding all of our good efforts — and I believe the 
vast majority of people of Saskatchewan agree and appreciate 
the efforts that have been gone to to help the farmers of 
Saskatchewan — notwithstanding all of that, Mr. Speaker, we 
have lost in the province of Saskatchewan a large number of 
jobs related to agriculture, directly and somewhat indirectly. 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that the figures in the last six 
or seven years are something like 17,000 people involved in 
agriculture, directly and indirectly, have left the 
agricultural-related industry. And, Mr. Speaker, those are very 
scary numbers, but they are facts, Mr. Speaker. A large number 
of people have left agriculture. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what does a responsible government do? A 
responsible government recognizes that our dependence on 
agriculture cannot be absolute, and that we should build and 
diversify this province into other industries other than 
agriculture; not taking anything away from agriculture, but 
saying, Mr. Speaker, let’s build and let’s diversify and let’s 
build on the strengths that we have. Let’s build in a reasonable 
and a responsible way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is precisely what this Progressive 
Conservative government has been doing over the last six or 
seven years. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, it has been in spite of 
— in spite of — the members of the NDP. It has been in spite 
of them, Mr. Speaker. And it has taken a courageous 
government to go on and build and diversify this province, all 
the while . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — . . . having the members of the NDP be 
against, against, against, Mr. Speaker. And we have seen all of 
that negativity throughout the last six or seven  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1844 
 
 

years, Mr. Speaker, and it has come to a point where I believe 
the public of Saskatchewan are fed up — I say, fed up — with 
the irresponsibility of the members of the NDP. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we are trying to do here is diversify our 
economy. What we are trying to do is create jobs, create 
investment, create a tax base, and create an opportunity 
whereby these businesses can go ahead and make a profit. And, 
Mr. Speaker, those are all good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these companies and this building, 
diversifying that we are attempting to do, Mr. Speaker, is of 
vital importance to the people, and it’s no longer a time for pure 
partisan politics. It is time, Mr. Speaker, for a responsible 
opposition to stand up and say: yes indeed, that is a good 
project. How can we help? How can we help create the right 
atmosphere, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I want to talk a little bit about the specifics of some of 
these projects, Mr. Speaker, and the building on the strengths, 
and the opposition of the NDP. And let us start with that great 
natural resource we have in the ground here in Saskatchewan, 
and that natural resource is called heavy oil — heavy oil, Mr. 
Speaker. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, that oil, the light oil is 
running out all across North America. Let us take that heavy oil, 
upgrade it here in Saskatchewan, make our own diesel fuel, 
make our own gasoline in an upgrader. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, we have Canada’s very first upgrader 
operating today in the city of Regina in spite of the opposition 
by the NDP. What was the NDP’s position on the upgrader in 
Regina? Against; no; against jobs. I say to you secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, we are as well, at this very time that we are debating 
here in the legislature, attempting to build another heavy oil 
upgrader within the city of Lloydminster and with the member 
of Cut Knife-Lloydminster there battling over the last few years 
to get a heavy oil upgrader in his city of Lloydminster, and we 
have succeeded in spite of the position of the NDP, in spite of 
the irresponsible, unforgivable position of the NDP who are 
against that upgrader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will recite example after example, and I will 
move on to the Weyerhaeuser pulp and paper mill outside the 
city of Prince Albert. There is a project, Mr. Speaker, that the 
NDP said would never be built. There is a project, Mr. Speaker, 
that the NDP said would create no jobs. But here is living proof, 
Mr. Speaker, of a good corporation in partnership with this 
government who has in the last few years built a first-class, 
world-class paper mill creating . . . and lord knows, Mr. 
Speaker, we use a lot of paper today within government and 
throughout the world. And why, Mr. Speaker, can we not build 
on that lumber resource we have in the province, take those 
forest products, upgrade them, and make first-class paper? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it has been achieved; it has been done. It is 
jobs for our people. It is a tax base. It is the creation of wealth, 
and Mr. Speaker, any reasonable opposition, any reasonable 
opposition would stand up today and say, yes, you were right; 
that is a good project for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We move on, Mr. Speaker, and when 
we’re on the subject of the forest industry, we move on to the 
subject matter of the new pulp mill and the associated 
chopsticks manufacturing plant that is liable to come up in the 
member for Meadow Lake’s constituency. 
 
There, Mr. Speaker, is a prime example, taking again that 
natural resource we have and using it and upgrading it and 
using local people, using local native people, Mr. Speaker, 
using employees of that firm to build and diversify and create 
jobs. How can anyone be against that, Mr. Speaker? How can 
anybody responsible be against it? Mr. Speaker, there’s an 
irresponsible position by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move on to other matters of building and 
diversifying, and I talk about within the city of Saskatoon. 
Within the city of Saskatoon opened just the other day is a 
turbine manufacturing plant built by the Marubeni and Hitachi 
corporations from the country of Japan. Mr. Speaker, everyone 
in Saskatchewan knows Marubeni and Hitachi. They’re 
well-known names. 
 
These are large, powerful, good corporate identities in the 
country of Japan, Mr. Speaker, that through the efforts of this 
government, and in spite of the NDP, we have been able to 
attract to make an investment outside of Japan, right here in 
Saskatchewan in the city of Saskatoon, a turbine manufacturing 
plant. 
 
And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, this is of significance. The 
very first heavy equipment plant of those two corporations 
located outside of Japan is right here in Saskatchewan, right in 
downtown Saskatoon, and that is good for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I asked you, Mr. Speaker, is that a tax 
base? Is that an investment? Is that jobs for people of 
Saskatchewan? Indeed it is. 
 
What is another one of the strong resources that we have been 
given here in Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
geography that lends itself to the cattle business, to the livestock 
business — cattle and hogs. Well, Mr. Speaker, what shall we 
do here in Saskatchewan — just grow our cows and grow our 
steers and grow our hogs up and ship them out, or shall we 
process them, shall we process them and cut them up and 
package them and create jobs and sell them around the world? I 
submit to you we should. It’s a strength we have, and let us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I found it very surprising when I read through the 
motion that the government had put on the order paper. I would 
want to say I found it, as well, disappointing. After days and 
days of argument in this legislature and confrontation, what do 
we see after a day of negotiation for compromise? Our side 
negotiated in a spirit of compromise to get the proceedings of 
this legislature moving again. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1845 
 
 

What do you see? What do you see from the government 
opposite? You see a motion condemning the opposition. It 
wasn’t a motion of compromise; it wasn’t a positive motion. It 
was a totally negative motion that was put before this 
Assembly. 
 
And why, I ask, Mr. Speaker, do members on that side want to 
escalate this war again that we’ve been having in this 
legislature? What are their motives? Could it be, Mr. Speaker, 
that they don’t want the people of this province to understand 
what their political agenda is — rather talk in other terms and 
raise other issues. I use as an example, public accounts this 
morning. Our side came in, in the spirit of co-operation, to do 
the business of this legislature, and what do you see? Mayhem, 
total mayhem caused by members on the government side of 
the House. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
understand who’s been holding up this legislature. And I want 
to say as well, Mr. Speaker, to speak directly to this motion, in 
terms of some of the phrases that I see before us — building 
Saskatchewan and creating opportunity — that the people of 
Saskatchewan know clearly what has happened in this province, 
and that there is a lack of opportunity. And that the key phrase 
and the little coin phrase of the PC government and the PC 
Party is nothing but a joke. 
 
They talk about building Saskatchewan and diversifying and 
economic development and such a bright future for this 
province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that I believe 
there’s a bright future for this province, but it’s not under a 
government that will amass a $4 billion deficit in general 
revenue. 
 
Because I want to tell you, loading the people of this province 
with more debt and more taxes to pay in the future is not the 
way to create economic stability, it’s not the way to create jobs, 
and it’s not the way to make a happy electorate in 
Saskatchewan. And I would suggest to you that if that 
government was looking closely at the polls, that I’m sure 
they’re doing on a daily basis, they would know that the people 
of this province don’t believe it’s the way to run a government 
as well. 
 
What’s been happening in this province under this “building 
Saskatchewan”? What’s been happening under this building 
Saskatchewan philosophy? Young people leaving this province 
by the hundreds and by the thousands — this minister from 
Melfort stands up and talks about the number of people that 
have been leaving Saskatchewan family farms, and he’s right. 
Of course he’s right. 
 
We see it in rural Saskatchewan. We see the small towns 
shrinking because there’s no future for the people of this 
province under this PC government. They’ve left a litany of 
economic mismanagement and corruption that’s been 
unparalleled in this province. 
 
I want to speak about some of the things that they’ve built. 
They’ve built an uneasiness among the people of Saskatchewan, 
an uneasiness with this government particularly, and, I want to 
say, with politicians in general. If you parallel what the 
Mulroney government in  

Ottawa’s been doing and what this administration has been 
doing in Saskatchewan, yes, they’re creating an uneasiness 
because they see some elements of dishonesty. And they see a 
lack of integrity by those government leaders on that side of the 
House. 
 
They’ve created as well, and what else they’ve built in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is insecurity. Young families no 
longer believe that this PC government is creating an 
environment in which they can afford to raise their families. 
That’s the kind of building that they’ve been doing in this 
province; that’s what they’ve been building in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
They’ve been building hardship for business men and women in 
small town Saskatchewan and in our major cities. They’ve been 
building hardships and economic problems that have made 
them close their doors and shut down their operations. The 
number of bankruptcies in Saskatchewan are a clear indicator 
that there is an uneasiness and that businesses are facing 
hardship. 
 
But what do we see in this motion? We see a self-flattering few 
sentences in the first part of the motion, trying to convince 
Saskatchewan people and the media and the opposition that this 
government has been responsible and has displayed 
competence. But those aren’t the facts, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
created mistrust. They’ve created uneasiness and insecurity, and 
that’s why the people are leaving this province by the 
thousands. 
 
But I want to say to you, in spite of what they’ve said about the 
obstructionism of the opposition side of this House, which the 
people of this province don’t believe — in spite of that, I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, they’re forgetting what they’re about. 
They’re forgetting what government in Saskatchewan is 
expected . . . what’s expected of government in Saskatchewan. 
And this motion is nothing but a self-flattering piece of 
literature that is not believed by the average Saskatchewan 
resident. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of my remarks I 
intend to move an amendment which will be closely, I believe, 
tied to what the feelings of Saskatchewan people are, not this 
self-flattering blarney that the minister from Melfort spoke of. 
They understand the truth, and that’s what they want dealt with 
in this legislature. 
 
They don’t want to talk about some hypothetical prosperity; 
they want to talk about the reality of what they’re dealing with. 
They want to talk about their children leaving this province, and 
why they’re leaving this province, and what government should 
be doing in order to maintain a reasonable economic 
environment in Saskatchewan so that they can make their living 
here and stay around their families. That’s what they want to 
hear from members on that side of the House. 
 
They don’t want to hear about GigaText and about millions of 
dollars going to Guy Montpetit in Montreal — millions of their 
tax dollars being squandered and wasted. That’s not what 
they’re looking for. I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, the polls 
indicate that they desperately want  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1846 
 
 

a chance to show this government that that’s not what they’re 
looking for, and I would wish this government would give them 
a chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Instead, of carrying on with this 
confrontation, Mr. Speaker, I ask that we get on with the job at 
hand, delivering sound economic policy. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
is why I want to move the following amendment: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to 
develop a sound economic strategy for the province and 
condemns the government’s policies of privatization and 
the sell-off of valuable provincial resources which are 
depriving Saskatchewan families of security and 
opportunity for their future. 
 

This amendment, Mr. Speaker, is seconded by the member from 
Regina North West. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleague has 
indicated that we’ve been through 56 days of sitting, and the 
government has failed to bring forward on the agenda the 
important business of the people of Saskatchewan. The member 
from Melfort stood in this House a few moments ago, on his 
feet, and he talked about the jobs they’ve created, and he talked 
about the investment that has been lured to this province. He 
talked about building the province of Saskatchewan under the 
PC government. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to share with you 
some of the building they’ve been doing. 
 
Since 1982 this government has built the fastest-growing 
operating deficit of any province in the history of Canada. We 
started in 1982, Mr. Speaker, with a balanced budget, a surplus 
in the bank, and a billion dollar Heritage Fund. We started as 
well, Mr. Speaker, in ’82, this government did, with Crown 
corporation debts of less than $2 billion. We had a net debt of 
about a billion dollars just seven years ago. 
 
What this government has done in the last seven years, Mr. 
Speaker, is they’ve built a debt of $4 billion in operating and an 
$8 billion Crown corporation capital debt. We’ve lost all the 
surplus that we’ve had. We now have a total debt of around $12 
billion, Mr. Speaker. That’s $1.2 million for every man, 
woman, and child in this province. And I think that that is a 
building that they should not be very proud of. 
 
We’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the member 
from Melfort has said, clear economic indicators which have 
shown the opposite. We have not seen a great deal of housing 
starts. As a matter of fact, at a meeting that I attended with the 
Regina Home Builders’ Association, they stated at their annual 
meeting that in 1982, 6,822 housing starts were commenced in 
this province. In 1988 there were not 6,800, there were not 
5,000, there were not 4,000, but indeed there were only 3,800 
housing starts in the province of Saskatchewan, which was the  

worst year on record since they kept track of housing starts in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a matter of fact, the latest statistics show that in the 
calendar year 1989 we’ve had less than half of the housing 
starts in this province than we had last year. So 1988 was the 
worst housing started record in the history books in 
Saskatchewan, and we see this year is going to be worse by 100 
per cent from last year. And that’s a record that can be 
attributed directly to the Government of Saskatchewan, the PC 
government opposite. 
 
We’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, a massive number of 
bankruptcies. We’ve seen 1987, for example, represented five 
consecutive years in which business failures had exceeded the 
300 level. In 1988, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that figure 
increased above the 450 level to 461 business failures, the 
highest number on record in this province. They’re building 
bankruptcies as well as they’re building vacant houses for no 
one to live in, as people leave this province. 
 
In 1988, as in 1986 and ’87, Saskatchewan had the second 
highest bankruptcy rate increase among all provinces, an 
increase of 28 per cent, Mr. Speaker. This is quite higher than 
the Canadian percentage rate increase of 4.9 per cent. As a 
matter of fact, it’s over 500 per cent greater. 
 
We’ve also seen, on a comparative note, Mr. Speaker, the 
number of bankruptcies in Saskatchewan under the last seven 
years of the NDP government. From 1975 to 1981 year end, we 
averaged about 94 bankruptcies each year. The last seven years 
of the PC government, we didn’t average 94 or 104 or 204 or 
304; we averaged about 340 each year. That’s 360 per cent 
higher over the seven-year period of the previous seven years, 
and the minister has the gall to stand in this House and say that 
they’re building the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also talk to you about some of the retail 
sales. We’ve seen farm implement dealers in this province 
decrease in numbers by 47 per cent between 1974 and 1988. 
They’ve gone from 450, in those late ’70s and mid-70s, to about 
275 in 1987, and 240, which is a big decrease, in 1988. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen about 24 rural 
hotels either closed or repossessed in Saskatchewan during the 
calendar year of 1988. That’s building the province, Mr. 
Speaker, throughout the province? Hardly. 
 
Retail sales is another economic indicator. We’ve seen, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan has not fared very well 
with that economic indicator either. The percentage increase in 
retail sales in this province has been substantially lower than the 
national average, ranking near or at the bottom in comparison to 
other provinces. As a matter of fact, retail sales growth in 
Saskatchewan was the second lowest in Canada. Only Manitoba 
was worse. 
 
Manufacturing employees — the member talked about 
increasing the number of jobs in this province. Well we’ve seen 
the unemployment rate double over the last seven years, which 
has not been doubled in any other  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1847 
 
 

province. Saskatchewan has the distinction of being the only 
province in Canada that has their unemployment rate doubled. 
 
We’ve seen as well, with regard to manufacturing employees, 
that the provincial economy has witnessed a drastic reduction in 
this regard. From a record high of 21,500 people employed in 
manufacturing in 1981, the province has now been reduced to a 
level of 19,000. That’s 1,500 employees in the manufacturing 
centre alone have lost their jobs. 
 
And we also see general economic indicators reflect very poorly 
on this government’s record. We’ve seen the unemployment 
average go from 1982 with 28,000 people unemployed, to about 
38,000 in 1988. We’ve also seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between 
1977 and 1982, total personal income in Saskatchewan 
increased in that five-year period by 100 per cent under the 
NDP government. Unfortunately, in the next five years under 
this government, we’ve seen personal income rise, not 100 per 
cent as it did under the NDP years, but a meagre 30 per cent 
over the five-year period. 
 
So what we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a government that has 
bankrupted this province. They have chased people out; we’ve 
seen the out-migration of people in an unprecedented level. We 
are the only province in Canada that has lost 1 per cent of their 
population in the first quarter of this year. And that is 
comparable to any other province in any other time of their 
history; they’ve never achieved that high of an out-migration, a 
net loss of population. 
 
And what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very clearly, is that 
this government has failed in their economic policies. They’ve 
failed to create jobs for young people. They have failed to keep 
businesses going in this province. They have been the authors 
of the fastest-growing deficit in all of North America. They’ve 
been the authors of the largest number of bankruptcies and the 
largest percentage increase on record. 
 
These are statistics, Mr. Speaker, that I would not be standing in 
this House bragging about if I was a member of the PC caucus. 
And of course they’re not doing that. They’re getting up here 
and they’re talking about all kinds of other things that don’t 
seem to reflect the economic indicators that their own statistics 
branch has clearly shown. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the motion that I’m 
standing and supporting, the amendment to the motion, that the 
government has failed to develop a sound economic strategy, 
and that we condemn the government’s policies of privatization 
and the sell-off of valuable provincial resources which are 
depriving Saskatchewan families of security and opportunity for 
their future. 
 
We have seen, in addition to all of these economic indicators, a 
rampant effort by this government to sell off all of the 
revenue-producing assets that we own, that the people of 
Saskatchewan own. They’re selling them off at discount prices 
to their friends outside of this province. 

We’ve seen Manalta Coal go; we’ve seen the Highways 
department crew and equipment go; we’ve seen Sask Minerals 
go. We’ve lost 6 or $7 million on the estimated asset value of 
Sask Minerals; that’s gone. We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, Sask Oil 
and Gas, which produced significant revenues for the treasury 
of this province to subsidize the tax base of this province, to 
subsidize programs like health care and education — that’s 
gone. That is now owned 75 per cent by people outside of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen the number of shares in Saskoil be reduced from 
100 per cent equity by the province to where now the province 
holds 25 per cent. In addition, we’ve seen the number of private 
shareholders in Saskatchewan, with regards to ownership of 
Saskoil, amount to 1.4 per cent — 1.4 per cent of all the private 
shares that are held in the markets today in Saskoil are owned 
by Saskatchewan people, and 98.6 of those shares are owned by 
people living outside of this province. 
 
That’s a record/ That’s building the province of Saskatchewan? 
That’s garbage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government should 
be ashamed of what they’re doing to the heritage of the people 
of this province and the families’ futures living here right now. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well, this government 
stand in this House on the hustings promise . . . 
 
(1530) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I’ve heard the two previous NDP members 
speaking from the other side of the legislature, the other side of 
this House, it reminded me of two members, and referring them 
to the children’s story of Chicken Little, and had been . . . is 
running . . . and the whole bunch of them are like Chicken 
Littles running around the province hollering to everybody that 
the sky is falling in on the province here. 
 
And I just want to relate to them that what they are saying is no 
different than . . . I can relate right back to 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
In the short seven years that we’ve been government in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can still see the anguish from 
the members opposite, from the NDP opposition. They still 
cannot accept that they are no longer government, and they are 
just ashamed to admit that good things are happening in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the member was waddling off his 
figures there, I mean it’s all a bunch of bunk. I’ll tell you why. 
I’ll say he doesn’t even have to go back very far, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. He can go back to 1988, where in the province of 
Saskatchewan there was over 4,000 new manufacturing jobs 
created in the province of Saskatchewan. I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the member just wants to waddle off some 
sort of indicators to make people believe that there is a whole 
bunch of job loss in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1848 
 
 

I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has never 
been in the history of this province other than that of a PC 
government here in the province of Saskatchewan, that this 
province has ever went over a million in population. And I want 
to say, it’s a far cry in thousands . . . I believe it would be 
something in the neighbourhood of around 80,000 more people 
in the province of Saskatchewan under this administration, 
under a Progressive Conservative government, more people in 
the province than there was ever under the NDP administration. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to tell me and the people of 
Saskatchewan that these 80,000 more people that came to the 
province of Saskatchewan are not working. Well that is 
absolutely incorrect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they know it. 
And I want to tell the people of this province that it’s a far cry 
from the truth when you hear members blurt out those kinds of 
statements in this Assembly. I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that when we talk about the facts of what happened since 1982, 
I want to just back up. 
 
The reason why the NDP were changed from government, from 
government, is because they refused to build; they refused to 
deliver jobs to the young people in this province. They refused 
and turned their backs on the farm community in this province; 
they refused to help. They foreclosed on farmers in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition, along 
with his other colleague from Saskatoon, foreclosed on farm 
families in the province of Saskatchewan, and I call that a 
shame act. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, they speak in their righteous 
manner, their righteous manner, but I tell you, I warn the people 
of this province not to take heed of what they’re saying because 
they will say anything, they will say anything to make you 
believe that they really believe what you, you know . . . want 
you to believe in them and that they care and all this kind of 
thing. I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they are so power 
hungry, are so power hungry, it is pathetic, and yet they are just 
out-of-hand, they are out-of-hand radicals over there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And they’re known as the radicals of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
building Saskatchewan, when we talk about building 
Saskatchewan, we talk about building a base here for creation 
of jobs, getting our resource sector going, getting our tax base 
built up so that we can build new hospitals, new schools, new 
nursing homes, new highways. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this has not taken a back seat to anything over the 
last seven years. 
 
We have had record building years. We had record building 
years in hospitals. We did not have a moratorium on hospitals. 
We never had a moratorium on nursing homes. We were 
building. We were building and decentralizing the nursing 
homes and hospital care in this province. We took the hospitals 
and nursing homes and put them back into the rural 
communities throughout this province and took the pressure off 
the cities, took the pressure off the more central locations in the 
larger  

centres in this province. 
 
And I want to say to you, it was the member from Riversdale 
and now Leader of the Opposition, he was the one that decided 
that this was the policy that should be taken in the province. 
I’ve got seniors now living in their own communities in the 
nursing homes and in being able to get their care in hospitals 
and everything and be close to family. 
 
I want to say that it never had been in the history of this 
province when there’s been as much job creation and road 
building done as there is and has been in the last years under a 
Progressive Conservative administration. Why, you can just 
travel between Saskatoon and Regina and you’ll see the 
twinning and the repairing and expanding of the twinning of the 
16, the Yellowhead route. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if people 
travel into the riding of Cut Knife-Lloydminster or into the 
Rosthern riding, they’ll see more twinning of the Yellowhead. 
You’ll see the upgrading of No. 1, Trans-Canada Highway. I 
want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these are all job creation 
measures, and people have to be working in order to have these 
kinds of things done. 
 
I want to say also that if a person had longer than 10 minutes 
you wouldn’t have to jump around and you could be able to 
stay kind of focused on various different things. And it’s a pity 
that these kinds of motions are broke down to a 10-minute thing 
because of the list. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Prince Albert, 
when he was up speaking here a little earlier, yes, I know he’s 
ashamed of Weyerhaeuser. He doesn’t want Weyerhaeuser in 
Prince Albert because that just sends a good message and it 
builds and it makes people feel good in their community, and he 
knows that he’s got something to worry about come the next 
election. He has . . . and I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, as the people 
in Prince Albert have been telling us, they can’t wait until they 
can get rid of that guy. And I’ll say, Mr. Speaker, that come the 
next election, he will be joining the member from The 
Battlefords, as both of them will be turfed. And those are the 
messages I’ve been getting from those two cities, from the city 
of North Battleford as well as the city of Prince Albert. 
 
I want to indicate at the same time, Mr. Speaker, that as the 
NDP have turned their back in the days of the high interest rates 
and the days of commodity prices going down to all-time lows, 
and when they turned their back on agriculture and small 
business when the interest rates were 23 per cent, 24 per cent, 
I’ll say to you, the people of this province are not going to 
forget. They’re not going to forget that they were more 
instrumental in trying to bring home a constitution at that time 
than being home in the province of Saskatchewan and looking 
after the people in this province. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when we brought in our home 
mortgage protection plan, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when you 
look at the stability in the market today, when you look at that 
stability, and people building a home and  
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1849 
 
 

knowing that they’re going to have a nine and three-quarter 
percentage on mortgage rates — and I’ll say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, then I would think that that comfort zone has created a 
real stability within that market and it has created many jobs in 
the construction industry — construction industry in hospitals, 
nursing homes, schools, highways, and you can go on — 
processing, manufacturing. 
 
I’ll say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is nothing from 
anywhere in this province here where this administration’s 
efforts to carry on and build jobs and diversify in this province, 
there’s nowhere in this province where it hasn’t been touched 
upon, where the jobs or the young people . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to talk on rule 16, to commend the Government 
of Saskatchewan for the commitment to building and creating 
jobs in Saskatchewan. I will be supporting this motion, moved 
by the member from Yorkton, seconded by the member from 
Melfort. 
 
I guess that is why it’s so important, like the Premier of this 
province always talks about and emphasizes, that we have to 
build and diversify, especially with the drought in 
Saskatchewan in the last few years. That is why it’s so 
important that we should be doing exactly this. There are many 
things we can do by building and diversifying, and I think we 
have the people in Saskatchewan that are here to do it — that is 
the private sector. They want to build; we don’t want to buy. 
And I think that’s what the people want. The people want to 
build it; they don’t want the government to be buying it and 
owning it. 
 
Why is it so important? Well I’ll tell you. I’ll just give you a 
few examples. We don’t have much time, like the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloyd said, to talk about the initiatives that are here, 
that we are creating in Saskatchewan. We’ll just go on to some 
of the things that I’m familiar, and that is happening in my part 
of the province. We’ll talk about the livestock industry. We 
have the oil industry, oil and gas, building, water management. 
 
Livestock industry alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the heart of 
our province down there. But it alone can’t support the people 
in southern Saskatchewan, so that is why it’s so important to 
diversify. 
 
We have the oil and gas industry down in our province that do 
create many, many jobs. Just to talk about one, we are in the 
initial stages of building a compressor station between Val 
Marie and Shaunavon, $31 million compressor station. Maybe 
not too many people know about it, but it is in the works. 
They’re going to be driving the piles this week or next week. 
That is going to create 100 jobs for one year, plus it’s going to 
have many permanent jobs. That is diversification, and that is 
building by the private sector. 

And that does help the industry down there, the agricultural 
industry, which is grain and livestock. The livestock industry 
alone, Mr. Speaker, six years ago there was no industry. We 
raised the cows; the cows had the calves; we shipped them out 
of the province. They either went east or they went west or 
south. Right now, Mr. Speaker, we’re diversified, we’re 
changing that. Six years ago there was 12 per cent of our calves 
stayed in the province — 12 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
stayed in the province; the rest went elsewhere. Today, 55 per 
cent of those animals stay in the province, are finished here; are 
finished here and shipped to the packing plants here. 
 
Talking about packing plants, the packing plants have increased 
their industry just for that reason — to help the agricultural 
industry. Without that industry there would be many, many jobs 
that wouldn’t be here. 
 
I guess it takes me to the subject of processing; the jobs are in 
processing. It takes jobs to feed cattle; it takes jobs to finish 
them off; it takes jobs to ship them out. But it takes more jobs to 
slaughter those cattle, but it takes more jobs yet to process 
them. Those are the things that we haven’t been doing; those 
are the things we’re talking about; those are the things that 
when we shipped our cattle out, everybody else benefitted by it 
except the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s about time we turned it around, and it is turning 
around. With the increase . . . the Intercon building, on to their 
building, Canada Packers — they have faith in this province. 
They have faith in this government and we have faith in them. 
That includes me to say . . . it not includes me, but it gets me to 
maybe mention a few things that goes along with this, and 
that’s your fertilizer industry. We’ve never had a fertilizer 
industry in Saskatchewan, but there is one coming — there is 
two of them coming. 
 
(1545) 
 
Those are the things that tie in to the feeding industry. They tie 
in to the grain farming industry, which is so important that you 
do have this industry here that when you need it, it creates jobs 
here. We don’t have to go to Alberta; we don’t have to go to 
Manitoba; we don’t have to go across the border, or wherever. 
It is created here. The jobs are here. It belongs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And along with that, I guess the most important thing that a lot 
of us overlook is water — water management. We always felt 
that, you know, water was free, but I guess maybe we all 
thought along the same line and never really took it for granted 
. . . never really took it serious. But water is not free. Without 
water you can’t do any of those things that I was talking about. 
 
I know we depend on the fellow that is so important to us, the 
fellow up above us and that has control over most of us, to give 
us the rain whenever we need it, but we don’t always get it 
when we need it. That is why it’s so important that we build on 
water management. 
 
There’s many, many things we can do to build for water 
management. Down in my part of the country, the last that there 
was ever done was in 1940. The last dam that was ever built for 
the storing of water was 1940 — that’s  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1850 
 
 

49 years ago. There was three dams built in that area down 
there. To this day, there’s still just three dams. 
 
But we do have between 40 and 50,000 acres of irrigation that 
we can’t utilize without water management. That is why it’s so 
important, and that is why we are looking to increase that, to 
upgrade the system that is there, to build, to store water. We 
have an international system down there that we share the water 
with United States. They too, at times, don’t want the water 
when it’s not being managed. So that’s why it’s so important 
that we manage our water at this end of it. 
 
A few more other things that this government has done to help 
my part of the province is the gas and oil industry; underground 
power; the gas lines to the farmers, which has been very 
important; the underground telephone lines — individual line 
service. That is something that we’ve always talked about 
which is so important. 
 
We always feel because we’re on the farm we don’t need this 
kind of service, but most farmers, they do have computers now. 
And as we say, maybe we’re second-class citizens, but we’re 
not. We’re all the same. I don’t care where you live or where 
we’re at. 
 
But it’s so important to have that kind of system and to be right 
on top of things. And for the younger generation, the younger 
generation are the people that are going to be running this 
country, and that’s why we’re building it. We’re building it for 
this next generation. We are here to help to generate it. They are 
going to carry on. And what comes after that will be their 
future, our future, and their grandchildren’s future . . . our 
grandchildren’s future, their children’s future. 
 
We’ll talk about a few other things — hospitals and schools. 
We have built the integrated system in our part of the province 
down there, which people appreciate, in the town of Mankota. 
That system was changed from an old hospital into an upgraded 
hospital and a nursing home. That system has made that part of 
the community feel like it’s part of the province. It is down . . . 
it is, you might say, kind of out of the way. But why should you 
leave just because a community is out of the way? Why should 
they not have the same facilities as the communities that are in 
the centre of attraction of everything in the province. 
 
Schools is another. Education is such a big program in this 
province. It’s a program that is increasing. It’s probably a 
program that I don’t understand any more because it’s getting 
beyond from when I went to school. But I am interested in 
education. 
 
In my part of the country we have communities that are very, 
very far apart, something like the North, maybe you might say, 
like the two members sitting from the North. But we just can’t 
say, well you can’t have a school; you’ve got to be trucked 85 
miles to school in a bus, or whatever. We have to have schools. 
 
We are building those schools. We have built three new schools 
in the last three years, Mr. Speaker. The people in those small 
communities appreciate that. 
 
At one time there was a rumour going around — this is a  

few years ago — maybe we shouldn’t have schools in small 
communities; maybe there should be no schools that only have 
60 or 70, 80, 90 or 100 pupils in that school. Maybe it’s 
something maybe that’s going to cost the taxpayer too much. 
But I don’t think that way. I feel that we’ve got to think about 
those communities. Those are small communities; we’ve got to 
look after them. We’ve got to keep the education in . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will be 
speaking in favour of the amendment put forward by the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and speaking against 
the motion put forward by the government members. 
 
I notice with interest that they talk about commending the 
government for its commitment to building Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to say to the members 
opposite is if you’re so proud of the government record of 
building Saskatchewan, then why don’t you co-operate with the 
provincial Public Accounts Committee and Provincial Auditor’s 
report and let us see where half the taxpayers’ money of 
Saskatchewan has been spent over the last year in these projects 
that you’ve schemed up, that you’re so proud to boast about? 
 
We have an auditor’s report that indicates to us that there’s been 
some very, very questionable activity going on by the 
government opposite. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been away for a 
few days, and I’ve come back here to discover not only that 
we’ve had the issue of the auditor’s report — which was in the 
works before I left — but also that the government has gotten 
itself tangled in with this terrible GigaText scam where money 
has gone out of the province carte blanche to someone who had 
a fantasy for a computer system that was going to translate 
English to French. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve been speaking in this legislature, 
I have often questioned the government’s attitude towards the 
high-tech industry, which is an example of the kind of 
promotion that the government opposite is doing of different 
projects without thinking them through, and without thinking 
through the implications for the people of Saskatchewan. I’ve 
been very concerned. 
 
And when I come back, I discover that they’ve been developing 
economic policies which, to me, through something like 
promoting the GigaText scheme, looks as if they’ve been 
developing their economic policies by watching the Star Wars 
movie through the bottom of a bottle of scotch, because it’s just 
totally unrealistic and totally a fabrication to think that 
something like that would be feasible. 
 
And to put money carte blanche into a scam with a person who 
has this sales pitch, this snake oil scheme that they’ve 
contributed to, just underlines the feeling of apprehension and 
concern that we have on this side of the House and our 
questions about the government  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1851 
 
 

policy about building and about where the province is going in 
the future. It highlights intensely the questions that we have 
about where we’re going. 
 
And when they now want to call us the NDP radicals, I say that 
if a radical is a person that wants to get to the root of the issue, 
which is how I understand the term, then I’m very proud to be 
called a radical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Because what I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is get 
to the root of the issues around what’s happening to the 
taxpayers’ money of Saskatchewan, where this government 
opposite will only let us see what’s happened to 50 per cent of 
it, and a concern about the rest. 
 
I want to know more about this GigaText scheme and some of 
the other things that this government has been promoting. I’m 
very concerned. The taxpayers’ money is the money that is 
collected from the people of Saskatchewan for the projects that 
the government endorses, and it’s obviously completely 
irresponsible in what it’s been doing in these examples and in 
many others that I’m sure will come to light in the future, and 
have been questioned in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very quickly then, I want to talk a little bit about 
how this government opposite talks about building and creating 
opportunity. But what we really have to talk about is the 
problem that has troubled Saskatchewan people for the past 
seven years and has now become critical in so many ways. It’s 
the economic failure of the PC government here in Regina. And 
the true measure of this failure is the toll of hardship imposed 
on Saskatchewan families. 
 
We’ve had lost jobs and lost opportunities, and this is the price 
that Saskatchewan people have been forced to pay for the PC 
government’s economic failures. I only have to think of the 
people in my constituency who’ve been put out of work, the 
workers that I’ve mentioned many times — the potash worker 
that I spoke to the other day, gone into a retraining program and 
doesn’t know whether he’s going to lose his home because he 
won’t be able to pay the mortgage. And you can boast about the 
mortgage payments, but if you haven’t got a job, you can’t pay 
the mortgage to start with. 
 
The failures of the government’s economic policies and their 
impact can be vividly illustrated in several different ways. First 
of all, investment. One of the basic tests of sound economic 
performance is the overall level of investment. And despite the 
PC government’s talk and despite its open business policy, total 
real investment has dropped sharply in Saskatchewan. 
 
In constant dollars the drop shows that the PC policy of 
megabucks for megaprojects is failing; it’s failing to sustain 
basic levels of capital investment, and this has forced the 
hardship of unemployment onto thousands of Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
In the past six years, the number of jobs created by this 
government has been a total disappointment. Mr.  

Speaker, from 1971 until 1981 there were an average of 9,100 
new jobs per year created in this province. And from 1981 to 
1988 that figure has dropped to an average of only 3,714 new 
jobs created each year. 
 
Unemployment, on the other hand, has almost doubled during 
the PC’s term in government. In 1981 the figure was 21,000 
unemployed; in 1988, 37,000. The unemployment rate in our 
province has soared from 4.1 per cent in 1981 to 7.3 per cent in 
1987. In the NDP years of government, unemployment was 
never over 5 per cent. In the PC years, it’s been never under 6 
per cent. 
 
The severe hardship of unemployment has been experienced by 
thousands of Saskatchewan families, and the government 
opposite has the nerve to pontificate about building the 
province. The government opposite builds for its own special 
friends and cronies, Mr. Speaker, and that is very obvious in the 
kinds of projects that have been approved by this government 
— their friends and their cronies. And the general economic 
indicators tell the true story of the failure of the PC economic 
policies. 
 
Youth unemployment among the age group 15 to 24 years is 
consistently higher than the province’s general unemployment 
rate. And the youth unemployment rate in May of this year was 
12 per cent. That’s almost twice the provincial rate of 7.4 per 
cent. 
 
Young people in rural communities and the towns and in our 
cities, cannot find jobs or opportunities for their future here in 
Saskatchewan. They are being forced to move away, taking 
with them their hope, their energy, and their ability. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan would be a 
lot higher were it not for the unprecedented out-migration of 
people from this province. 
 
The provincial government’s own figures on interprovincial net 
migration clearly show the pattern since 1982. Among that, the 
15- to 24-year age group, Saskatchewan now suffers net 
out-migration of more then 3,000 per year. 
 
Thousands and thousands of other people are also leaving the 
province, Mr. Speaker. Young families from rural communities 
and from our towns and cities are being forced to leave 
Saskatchewan to find jobs and opportunities elsewhere. Last 
year, for example, there were 13,346 more people who moved 
out of Saskatchewan than moved in. The PC performance, 
judged by that test, I say has failed dismally. 
 
Unfortunately economic conditions are little better for those 
who do find a job and do remain. As every family knows, 
Saskatchewan wages are just not keeping up. The latest figures 
from Statistics Canada show that the average weekly earnings 
in Saskatchewan are the second lowest in the nation. Only 
Prince Edward Island is worse. Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 
Newfoundland — provinces that we’ve always considered to be 
poorer then ours — are now ahead of us in the industrial weekly 
earnings average. 
 
Many of the people who are working are young people  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1852 
 
 

and women, and they suffer the most because their jobs are at 
the minimum wage or tied to the minimum wage. Since 1982 
their wages have fallen far behind the increases in the cost of 
living. Since the PC government took office, the Saskatchewan 
minimum wage has had the lowest increase in Canada. It’s 
worse then every one of the other 12 jurisdictions. 
 
Social assistance rates. There’s been a substantial increase in 
the number of families forced onto social assistance, and all 
across the province families in communities have become 
deeply concerned about food banks, child hunger, and the 
poverty that is the harsh PC reality. 
 
We sometimes hear the PCs defend their policies, the rising 
number of unemployed, the rising number on welfare, the low 
wages, by trying to argue that their policies are good for 
business. But that is cruel, it’s immoral, and it’s a divisive 
argument, and moreover it’s false. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to just realize that there are many 
bankruptcies in Saskatchewan to know that small business is 
suffering as well. The latest figures available from Statistics 
Canada show that in 1988, total retail sales growth in 
Saskatchewan was the second lowest in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are witnessing 
today a discussion about the actions of the government, the 
failure to create jobs, the fact that last year alone we drove . . . 
the provincial government drove . . . 13,346 people more left 
the province of Saskatchewan than came in. And that because 
of the failed economic policies of a tired and worn out 
government, a government that after seven sorry years has 
shown nothing but contempt for the people and has shown a 
dismal failure. 
 
Last year the top 170 corporations in Canada recorded a profit 
of $18 billion; that’s up from 11 billion. The year before . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 8 — Ramifications of Proposed Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present an argument 
for the motion on the order paper, item no. 3, which reads: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada its strong opposition to the proposed new sales tax 
which will cost the average Saskatchewan family at least 
eight hundred dollars more each year and further increase 
the onerous tax burden on low and middle income 
Canadians. 
 

I will move that motion, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks. 
The motion will be seconded by the member  

from Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of main regions of argument 
that I will be making with respect to this motion. If each one of 
our families on the average in Saskatchewan will be faced with 
a tax increase of 800 or more dollars, that requires considerable 
scrutiny on our part as legislators. And I ask the members 
opposite to pay careful attention to the motion and to the 
arguments because, Mr. Speaker, quite obviously every family 
in Saskatchewan will be affected. And it’s important that our 
arguments be made to our federal counterparts who will be 
responsible for implementing this rather large tax grab. 
 
I’m going to be making the argument, Mr. Speaker, from two 
points of view. First of all, that it’s a bad tax in terms of that it 
is a regressive tax, that it’s inflationary, and that it is really 
hardest on middle and poor income people. 
 
Secondly, the argument I’m going to make, Mr. Speaker, is that 
I don’t believe that the federal government, the federal PC 
government, is any more credible than this provincial PC 
government. And I strongly believe that any tax money that we 
collect in addition to what has already been collected from the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan will just be wasted the way that past 
tax increases have been wasted. 
 
The more money they get, the more they seem to spend. And 
I’m afraid that what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is people 
will eventually just get fed up with paying more and more tax 
money and we’ll have a tax revolt in this country similar to 
what was to happen in California a few years ago, and people 
will just refuse. And at that stage, a lot of the programs and 
some of the good programs that our tax dollars support will be 
scrapped, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is going to happen, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this tax, 
first of all from the fiscal point of view? If you put on a 9 per 
cent tax, a value added tax on all goods and services with some 
stated exceptions, what’s going to happen? Well Mr. Wilson 
himself has indicated that this tax is inflationary and it will 
cause inflation to increase by approximately 3 per cent — 3 per 
cent per year. 
 
Now if you put that on top, Mr. Speaker, of the existing 4.4 per 
cent of inflation that we have here now in Saskatchewan, you’re 
going to have an inflation rate which will bring us back right to 
those unacceptable figures of inflation over 5 and over 6 per 
cent. It will be 7.4 per cent. Now that, we know, is going to be 
cause for alarm, because part of the whole argument, 
particularly of the federal PC government, has been that they 
are trying to keep inflation under control. Yet while trying to 
keep inflation under control on the one hand, and providing a 
. . . instituting a tax on the people of Canada which will cause 
inflation to go up by 3 per cent, just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Not only will it be inflationary continually, but there will be a 
period of time during implementation when the inflationary 
costs and the cost to the consumer could be much greater. It’s 
my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that there is nothing — there’s 
no obligation for businesses or manufacturers to reduce the 13.5 
per cent manufacturers’ sales tax during the period of 
implementation of this tax. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1853 
 
 

So if that happens, we’re not only going to get the 13.5 federal 
sales tax, manufacturers’ tax, but we’re going to have this 
additional 9 per cent added on the goods and services . . . this 
goods and service tax. Now that’s going to mean really a double 
whammy in terms of taxation, and for a period of time that’ll be 
very inflationary. 
 
And we know also, Mr. Speaker, that any time a vendor has a 
. . . there’s a tax increase of some sort, usually the vendor will 
find ways of using this as an opportunity to add margin. Or if 
there’s a tax decrease, rarely do the taxpayers ever get it, and 
you know full well that farmers know how this happens. Any 
time the price of wheat goes up and down, it certainly isn’t 
reflected in the price of bread. The price of bread certainly 
continues to keep rising even though the price of wheat may go 
up and down. And here we have a change in tax structure, and I 
don’t expect that the prices are really going to decrease during 
that particular change in tax structure. 
 
What’s a government going to do? How is it going to react? 
How is the federal government going to react when this 
inflationary pressure hits the Canadian economy? Are they just 
going to laugh it off and say well, okay, that’s what’s happened, 
or are they going to behave as the way they did in the past? In 
the past, what we’ve done every time, every time that there’s 
been an inflationary pressure, they’ve used the monetary 
method of increasing the interest rates. And that has been 
devastating, absolutely devastating on the Canadian economy. 
Because when you increase the interest rates, the price of 
everything else goes up and you get into a spiral. And we well 
know that. The price of all the goods go up and eventually 
people get so that they’re paying more in interest rate, less on 
other goods and services, and the economy goes into a tail-spin, 
as we are into right . . . or have been for some time now, Mr. 
Speaker, with the exception of course of Ontario, where things 
are a little different. 
 
When interest rates went up in Saskatchewan, and since they’ve 
been rather high, they were the cause of a record number of 
bankruptcies. Those interest rates were at their worst perhaps in 
the early ’80s, but the spin-off of the difficulty from those 
interest rates is still being felt. And to this day we have 
governments now who are attempting to subsidize interest rates 
in certain places. 
 
Now we have a government that will be doing two things at 
once. We have a federal government that’ll be increasing the 
interest rates and, at the same time, other governments are 
trying to subsidize interest rates — a vicious circle which just 
doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. It needs to be addressed in a 
different way, and I will have some comments on that in a few 
moments. 
 
Now what will happen, Mr. Speaker, if our Minister of Finance 
doesn’t integrate the 7 per cent sales tax into the 9 per cent 
value added tax? And to date there is no agreement on the part 
of the province of Saskatchewan. Perhaps there is a secret 
agreement; we don’t know. I can only say, I hope there is, 
because if this 9 per cent is added and we have 7 per cent added 
to that, that’s going to be a 16 per cent tax on everything, 
everything in the province pretty well — everything that’s 
worth over 100 or $200. 

Now what kind of an effect, for example, will that have on 
home building, Mr. Speaker? The Canadian Home Builders’ 
Association, as well as the Saskatchewan Home Builders’ 
Association, have estimated that the new tax would 
immediately increase the average price of a home by about 
$10,000 — $10,000 as of January 1. Now that’s rather a 
devastating . . . in fact, our housing starts in Saskatchewan are 
next to nil right now, the way it is. What this would do, Mr. 
Speaker, is it would continue the difficulty the people would 
have right now in the home building program. 
 
The reason for this $10,000 is because this value added tax is 
added at several stages. It’s added . . . the person who buys the 
wood from the wood lot would pay a certain amount, and he’d 
have to pay a 9 per cent value added tax. That logger would 
then sell it to a mill. The mill would have to pay an additional 9 
per cent. The wholesaler buying it from the mill would have to 
pay an additional 9 per cent. The retailer buying it from the 
wholesaler would have to pay an additional 9 per cent. 
 
So when you add all of this together, and when the Canadian 
Home Builders’ Association and the Saskatchewan Home 
Builders’ Association add it together, for the average-priced 
home that’s being built in Saskatchewan right now, they’re 
saying it would add the cost of about $10,000. They’re very 
concerned about this, Mr. Speaker, and the issue needs to be 
addressed. 
 
Retailers: retailers are rather concerned about what the impact 
of this is going to be to their business, particularly how are they 
going to cope with the administrative details and administrative 
costs? Even the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
that staunch supporter of the Tory party, is uneasy about the 
effects of the goods and services tax on business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to notice that when the Tories first started 
talking about this tax, this value added tax, they said it was 
going to be revenue neutral, which meant that once it was 
implemented, there would be no more tax collected than is 
collected right now. And they used phrases like, this tax reform 
would result in more “fairness for Canadians.” 
 
And yet on May 4 of this year Michael Wilson told the finance 
committee of the House of Commons that this goods and 
services tax will collect $6.5 billion more than what the federal 
government will collect in sales and excise taxes just prior to 
this tax being implemented. He said it should collect an 
approximate amount of $23.5 billion from the people of 
Canada. And that represents a figure of $6.5 billion more. 
That’s hardly, hardly revenue neutral. 
 
It points out, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government just 
doesn’t have any credibility when it comes to tax reform. It’s 
very related to what . . . very much akin to what this 
government in Saskatchewan has done when they started 
talking about tax reform. We heard budgets introduced in this 
House; they were called the most intelligent budgets. And we 
all know that the tax reform in the end simply means more 
taxes. 
 
It amounts to really a tax grab, Mr. Speaker, and I want to  
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1854 
 
 

. . . a tax grab. And I want to compare it for a moment with the 
tax grab that was instituted in the province of Saskatchewan; 
that is the flat tax, which was first set at 1 per cent and now is 
up to 2 per cent, not to mention the increase in the sales tax 
from the 5 to the 7 per cent, and, of course, the gas tax that’s 
been instituted here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we increase taxes we expect either an 
increase in service, or perhaps a reduction in debt, or perhaps 
just to keep up with inflation, one or the other, when we 
increase taxes. But what’s happened in Saskatchewan is we’ve 
had things going exactly the opposite way, and I’m afraid that 
this particular tax grab at the federal level will do the same 
thing. We’re going to continue to see increased taxation, we’re 
going to continue to see reduced services, and we’re going to 
see continued increase in debt. 
 
(1615) 
 
The rationale that the federal government has been building up 
over the last year or two has been that we have to get a hold of 
the deficit. And that’s quite true; we have to get a hold of that 
federal deficit. It really is quite a massive thing. And if you take 
a look at some of the numbers on it, which I propose to do now, 
to take a look at the rationale, I can agree, and I think every 
member can agree, that we have to do something to take a look 
at the deficit. 
 
Just how big is the federal deficit that we’re trying to attack 
here, Mr. Speaker — just how big, and where did it come from? 
And I will answer that question shortly. 
 
First of all, I want to say that the federal deficit amounts to 
about $13,000 per capita — $13,000 for every woman, child, 
and man in this country. Every child that is born is born with a 
price tag of $13,000 on his or her head that mom or dad have to 
pay off. And at the rate the Tories are creating the deficit, it will 
never be paid off. It’s those youngsters that are going to have to 
pay it off. 
 
Now that’s just the federal deficit; that has nothing to do with 
the provincial deficit, which is at $3,900 per man, woman and 
child right here. How was it created? In Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan deficit was created since 1982 by the members 
opposite. The federal deficit was created by two successive 
governments — two successive governments, largely, the 
Liberal government, which preceded the Mulroney government 
— and if you take a look at the records starting back in 1976, 
the federal deficit was created at this rate: 6.2 billion in 1976; 
12.6 billion in 1978; 1979, 11.5 billion; and 1982-83, 27.6 
billion; and Mr. Lalonde’s last budget, ’84-85, the record 138.3 
billion. That was a Liberal government, federal Liberal 
government. 
 
If you average all those out, Mr. Speaker, it comes out to about 
roughly 22 billion per year, the deficit. That means that deficit 
was added to on an average of 22 billion per year. Well, the 
Tories said that this was just not right thing to do, and 
everybody agreed with them; it wasn’t the right thing to do. It 
was going in the wrong direction. So then what did they do? 

Well, since the Tories have come in and the figures that I have 
here, Mr. Speaker, are: in 1986-87, Mr. Wilson’s first budget 
was 30.6 billion. His next one was estimated to be 29.3 billion, 
I think it came in higher then that, and the following one was 
for ’88, was 28.9 billion. And when you add this year’s, which 
is another 29 billion, I believe, you’ll find that that average — 
the average deficit of the federal government created by this 
federal Mulroney government averages far more than the first 
22 million per year, which was bad enough, but now we’re 
much closer to an average of 30 billion per year adding to the 
deficit. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one way of looking at the deficit to put it 
into a . . . I guess another perspective would be to think of the 
deficit as a portion of how much money a person earns. You 
see, Mr. Speaker, if . . . take any person — your neighbour, 
perhaps, or my neighbour — and if a person has got a $10,000 
debt, now that person’s got a $10,000 debt on a salary of 
$100,000, then he’s got a debt ratio of 10 per cent; that is, 
10,000 over 100,000. He could probably manage that debt, but 
when you take that same debt over a net income of only 
$50,000, if a person, or a family’s got a $50,000 annual income 
and they’re carrying a $10,000 debt, then you’re looking at a 20 
per cent ratio. If you’re down to a salary or an income of 
$20,000 and still have the same kind of debt, then a person . . . 
then you’ve got a $50,000 . . . pardon me, a 50 per cent debt 
ratio. 
 
Now think of which case is the worst scenario, Mr. Speaker — 
the person that’s carrying a $10,000 debt that has an income of 
$100,000, or $50,000, or $20,000. Which one is in the worst 
situation? And the answer is quite obvious. It’s going to be very 
difficult to carry a $10,000 debt load if you’ve only got a 
$20,000 income, because your debt load is about 50 per cent. 
 
And when you take a look at what our nation’s debt load is, 
compared to the gross domestic product, that is the value of all 
the goods and services produced by the citizens of this country, 
we get into exactly that situation. We find that the figures are 
that we have an estimated gross indebtedness right now of 
about 55 per cent — 55 per cent is our ratio. That is the ratio of 
the debt to the total income of the country. And the problem 
there, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s been growing. It’s been growing 
continually since about the early 1950s. It’s about 10 per cent 
higher than it was in 1984-85, and growing. 
 
There is one precedent — or a time when it was worse, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was a time right after the war. And we’re 
certainly not coming out of a war, and we certainly don’t have 
all types of young soldiers and young people coming back 
home to do a lot of work and to pay off the debt. That’s not the 
situation. We have an ageing population in our country right 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m making this point, Mr. Speaker, because I want to say 
that when we have a tax increase of 8 per cent being imposed, 
the value added tax, that’s going to yield quite a bit of money. 
Now that should at least do something to pay off the deficit. It 
should reduce the deficit if anything, because our ratio of deficit 
is just too high in this country right now. It’s getting to 
proportions which are alarming. We’re at 55 per cent. Now the 
. . . and if the people of Canada had some faith in the 
government that they would  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1855 
 
 

actually be able to take this money, this extra money, and use it 
to pay off the deficit so that we wouldn’t have a growing and 
mounting debt, then it may be better accepted. But at this rate 
it’s not very well accepted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the . . . what the government should be 
doing prior to instituting any kind of a tax, any kind of 
additional tax, is taking a quick look to see what is happening to 
the deficit; why is it growing; what’s happening to it? There 
have been several myths perpetrated — among them have been 
the cost of the social service programs that we have, namely the 
old age security program and the family allowance program. 
 
These have been brought to the fore, Mr. Speaker, to mask what 
I say are the true causes, because those are not the true causes of 
our debt. They may add to it slightly, but only if you add that to 
the very end. But there are other things that can be done in a 
much fairer way to reduce the deficit, and I want to address 
these briefly. 
 
The main one, the one that I want to spend the most time on, is 
that there is a certain element of society, a certain group in 
society that is not paying the tax that should be paid. And that is 
the corporate structure, the corporate monopolies in Canada or 
that are operating in Canada. They just are not paying what they 
should be doing. 
 
What has happened? If you look at the figures, Mr. Speaker, 
what’s happened is that the source of revenue has dropped 
considerably — considerably — from a peak in the mid-70s of 
26.2 per cent — 26.2 per cent of all tax revenues used to come 
from corporations in Canada. What is it now? It’s down to 15.6 
per cent. Now that’s quite a difference. That’s a drop. If your 
taxes or my taxes were dropped from 26 per cent to 15 per cent, 
from that rate to the lower rate, I think we’d be feeling pretty 
good, Mr. Speaker. We could be walking around with our heads 
up high. 
 
When did this come about, Mr. Speaker? It came about since 
the mid-70s. We had a slow erosion because we have an 
increasingly powerful corporate monopoly, and we have a 
government that is unwilling to stand up to the lobby of that 
corporate monopoly. And as a result, the taxes are being shifted 
away from the corporate monopoly, more to the individual 
taxpayer and to the individual property owner. That, I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, is one of the biggest things that should be looked 
at when we’re talking about tax reform of any sort. 
 
It’s interesting that we just went through an election, a federal 
election, and we had the Tories on the side of the corporate 
monopolies, on the side of free trade. The effects of free trade 
are going to be, Mr. Speaker, to even reduce that corporate tax 
structure more in the direction of the 15.6 per cent, more in the 
direction from the corporates paying a fair share, to the 
corporates paying a smaller and smaller share of the Canadian 
tax dollar. 
 
There are a couple of other reasons why our deficit is at a fairly 
high rate, Mr. Speaker. Another one is that the employment rate 
is just unacceptably high, and it’s pretty hard for a company to 
make money when part of its work-force is not working. It’s 
very difficult for any kind of  

a small business or a family business to make good money if 
the entire family isn’t working. And it’s also very hard for a 
nation to keep its books straight if the nation isn’t working. 
 
Now it’s the nature of the free-market system and corporate 
capitalism that there should be some unemployment. It desires 
it. It desires unemployment because that unemployment can 
keep the wages down, can help the corporations keep the wages 
down. And until you address the high unemployment situation, 
Mr. Speaker, I say that we will never be able to address our 
deficit situation. And until our deficit situation is addressed, I 
say we shouldn’t be asking people to shell out more taxes. 
 
I’ve already talked about interest rates, Mr. Speaker, about the 
effect that they have on the deficit structure in our country. 
What could we do, Mr. Speaker? Well we could do exactly the 
opposite of what is happening to reduce our deficit. And we 
could do it without, first of all, adding in any kind of a value 
added tax, any kind of a 9 per cent added tax. 
 
You could regain some credibility, governments could regain 
some credibility. And that’s why I’m asking this government, 
the government opposite, to join us in this particular motion to 
oppose the value added tax, because there are things that we 
should be doing first to address the matter of the deficit. And 
I’m going to mention a couple of them now. 
 
The first thing that should happen, Mr. Speaker, is we should 
take a really hard look at the interest rate policy of this country. 
The interest rate policy should not be used as it is being used to 
try to counteract inflation, because it is inflationary in itself, and 
there’s plenty of evidence for that. And if it was eased slightly, 
ever so slightly, we know that it would decrease the deficit. We 
know that because the interest rates went up this year, that the 
federal deficit increased a greater amount than Mr. Wilson 
expected it to. 
 
There is now a preferential treatment, Mr. Speaker, for those 
that get money from capital gains. That loophole should be 
closed. With the exception of people who are in small 
businesses and on farms, that loophole of capital gains tax 
should be closed. There’s an extraordinary amount of money 
that could be collected, and it could be collected fairly, and it 
would keep the tax structure more fair if it was done that way. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the effect of the lobby, the 
corporate lobby that I’ve referred to earlier. Mr. Speaker, just 
think that if instead of having corporations hiring lobbyists, as 
they do by the dozen in Ottawa to lobby various ministers to 
change policies and directions of the corporations; if the Tory 
government had some kind of an annual conference and where 
they brought together representatives of business and labour, 
and if people from regions of all sections of Canada, including 
Saskatchewan, where we could have a bit of a public dialogue 
on this; and instead of having the lobbying done behind closed 
doors, we had a public dialogue where we could come to an 
agreement, I’m quite convinced that the taxpayers of Canada 
are willing to pay fair taxes. They just  
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1856 
 
 

don’t want to see the tax dollar disappearing and being used up 
for things that they don’t approve of, particularly the waste that 
we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had plenty of that in this 
government. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to corporations, we’re aware that in 
1986 there were a large number of profitable corporations who 
paid no tax at all. There were 89,000 profitable corporations in 
’86 who paid no tax at all in Canada. There was $21 billion in 
corporate profits which was not taxed at all in Canada — 
loopholes. Those loopholes exist, yet the federal government 
wants to bring in an 8 per cent value added tax, and so far the 
government opposite has been supporting that. 
 
There is at least 60,000 profitable corporations, according to the 
Department of Finance, the federal Department of Finance — 
there are at least 60,000 profitable corporations which will 
continue to be non-taxpaying following the full implementation 
of this so-called tax reform. Now if there was some kind of a 
minimum corporate tax that was put on, I say we could go a 
long way without having to go on with this regressive 8 per cent 
value added tax. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Canada in 
general favour an imposition of higher taxes on corporations. 
This has been documented in The Globe and Mail in a poll that 
they took, and it’s an issue that I believe is about three weeks 
old, from The Globe and Mail. It’s by Les Whittington, and the 
title says, “Tax corporations to reduce federal deficit, 82 per 
cent say.” What do they say? 
 

An overwhelming majority of Canadians want the federal 
government to impose higher taxes on large corporations 
to help ease the deficit, according to a poll released today. 
 

And the poll does show broad support for the idea of cutting the 
$29 billion federal deficit. 
 
The public would be in favour of that, Mr. Speaker. It would be 
a very popular move. It’s been spoken by members of our side 
repeatedly, many times — they’re polling to back that up. The 
government members would be advised to take a look at that; 
fill some of those loopholes before we add another tax, another 
8 per cent value added tax to all goods and services in Canada. 
 
There are other loopholes, not just corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
There are 6,250 individuals . . . There are some people in this 
country that do quite well, that earn over $50,000 — 6,250 
individuals that earn over $50,000 that don’t pay any tax, don’t 
pay any income tax. That kind of loophole should be closed, 
Mr. Speaker. Then we should go maybe for additional tax, or at 
least then it would be credible to go for additional tax. There are 
over 100 people in the country that earn a quarter of a million 
dollars or more and don’t pay any tax. Somehow that just 
doesn’t seem fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A tax system, to be accepted by the people, needs to be fair. 
And when you look at some of the things that are  

happening in the country, it’s no wonder that we’re close to a 
tax revolt on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn once again to this item on debt, net 
federal debt, so that I can just bring the comparison back to 
something that is fairly easy to understand. 
 
When we look at a debt deficit and we talk in billions and 
billions of dollars, it’s very difficult to relate to a person who is 
earning an ordinary income, an average income, say, from 
20,000 to $40,000, or whatever it might be. But if you take the 
federal debt and you look at it from the point of view of 
$13,000 per person — that’s what the federal debt is now, 
$13,000 per person — and then you look at it, also add to that 
the provincial debt of $3,900 per person, you can see that 
there’s a massive debt. 
 
When you add to that another scenario and say that of our debt, 
of the total production of the country is only twice as big or 
slightly less than twice as big as our national debt, then you 
know you’ve got troubles. If any household had a debt ratio to 
what they earn of 55 per cent — that’s what our country is — 
we know we have to take a look at the deficit. 
 
And the argument that I’m trying to make here, Mr. Speaker, 
about this 8 per cent value added tax, is that the Government of 
Canada shouldn’t be looking at just this 8 per cent value added 
tax; it should be looking at where it’s spending the money. Now 
I’m saying that it’s misusing the money very much like this 
provincial government is, and I want to give you a couple of 
examples. 
 
Here is an article from The Financial Post of June 10, 1989, 
and the headline is, “Ottawa gears up for GST launch.” That’s 
the goods and services tax launch, Mr. Speaker. The 
sub-headline says, “Implementing the new sales tax means 
hiring thousands, spending millions.” Now somehow we know 
that if you’re going to try to cut the deficit, you’ve got to try to 
reduce spending. But what’s going to happen when they 
implement this tax? The article as it reads: 
 

The federal government is gearing up to hire thousands of 
extra staff and spend millions of dollars on a public 
education campaign in preparation for the new goods and 
services (sales) tax. 
 

So they’re going to have to hire thousands of staff just to look 
after this tax, which in itself will absorb a lot of the money. 
 

Government officials say the extra staff is needed by 
Revenue Canada to administer the broad-based tax, which 
will replace the federal manufacturers sales tax Jan. 1, 
1991. 
 

So it’s bad enough that it’s going to cost us more to do that, but 
now what we have to do is we have to be convinced, or at least 
the federal government thinks we have to be convinced of the 
fact that we should have this tax. 
 
So what are they doing? Well they’re budgeting some  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1857 
 
 

money to privatize this . . . or pardon me, to advertise this. 
There’s some similarities there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re going to be budgeting millions to promote this tax deal. 
The best indication we have of how much it’s going to cost us is 
going to be that the last campaign of this type, that is the 
campaign to publicize the free trade deal, cost the Government 
of Canada about $13 million. Now if it’s going to cost another 
$13 million in advertising, we’ll be having a government which 
is wasting its money on advertising very similar to what this 
government in Saskatchewan has done. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are not very fond of paying tax 
money for advertising, particularly not fond of having more tax 
money raised so the government can advertise more. That’s like 
paying somebody to buy a whip and then leaning over and 
being whipped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Government of Saskatchewan you will recall 
spending in the vicinity of 35 to $40 million in advertising. The 
SaskTel bond issue itself cost this government about three and a 
half million of advertising. Before the government was brought 
to its senses by the opposition here, they were talking about 
advertising the SaskPower privatization and the potash 
privatization. Now if the bond issue costs about three and a half 
million to advertise, what would it cost to advertise those other 
two? Tremendous amount, tremendous amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My main tenets, Mr. Speaker, of the entire argument that I’ve 
made then is that the taxation that is going to be levelled at the 
federal level should not be levelled until the government has 
found some way of containing itself in its waste and 
mismanagement. People of Saskatchewan know better what’s 
happening right here. And by comparison, we know that the 
government has mismanaged to a great extent. Most recently 
we’ve seen $4 billion . . . well, a little over $5 billion wasted on 
this GigaText contract, wasted. 
 
We’ve seen money that’s caused the deficit to rise being spent 
on a birthday party that nobody wanted. We saw a dam, a 
Shand-Rafferty dam which has been put on hold, because it has 
not passed the environmental laws that the government itself 
set. And there’s a pile of money being wasted there, Mr. 
Speaker. The total cost could run as high as a billion; I think at 
this stage we’re well into the $200 million mark. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the 8 per cent value added tax is a bad deal for 
two reasons then. First of all, we shouldn’t be putting any tax 
. . . shouldn’t be asking the taxpayers to pay any more tax until 
the government cleans up its mess. Secondly, it’s just the wrong 
kind of a tax to put on. It is not a progressive tax; it shouldn’t be 
issued that way. 
 
Mr, Speaker, accordingly, I move and seconded by the member 
for Regina Centre: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada its strong opposition to the proposed new national 
sales tax which will cost the average Saskatchewan family 
at least $800 more each year; and further, increase the 
onerous  

tax burden on low and middle income Canadians. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to join my colleague, the 
member from Prince Albert, in the debate on this particular 
motion. And as you have just said to the public that are 
watching this this afternoon, that what we want to be able to do 
here today is communicate to the Parliament of Canada, and 
specifically to the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Mulroney, 
and to the Finance minister, Mr. Michael Wilson, that our 
Legislative Assembly is opposed to the proposed national sales 
tax on goods and services, that would amount to about a 9 per 
cent increase on goods and services that would come into effect 
on January 1, 1991. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as all members of this legislature have . . . 
members of the small-business community are extremely 
worried and concerned about what this sales tax will mean to 
their businesses and what sort of impact it will have on the 
revenues that they generate to keep people working in their 
stores and shops and places of work. They’re concerned about 
their profit margins decreasing as a result of this sales tax. 
 
So I think it’s important that all members of the legislature 
support this motion and convey to the members of the 
Government of Canada, the Conservative Government of 
Canada, that this Legislative Assembly, this Legislative 
Assembly here in Saskatchewan, is opposed to this new tax on 
goods and services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, virtually all goods and services in our 
country will be taxed. There are very few exemptions, 
according to the papers that have been provided by the federal 
government and according to the reports in the newspaper. The 
services that will be tax free, or will not have this 9 per cent tax, 
are basic groceries, and we’ve not yet had a definition of basic 
groceries conveyed to the public. Another item that will be 
exempt from this tax is prescription drugs. I understand that 
medical and health services will be exempt, as will child care 
and legal aid services and educational services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have long recognized that 
there are inequities in the existing sales tax system here in 
Canada. However, unlike the Conservative parties in Canada, 
both here in Saskatchewan and at the national level, our 
objective has been to reform the system. That’s been our 
objective, not to heighten the regressive nature of this particular 
sales tax that we have before us. 
 
Now the economy of Saskatchewan can ill afford the 
possibilities of even greater and higher interest rates caused by 
the 9 per cent goods and services tax. 
 
Purely speaking, Mr. Speaker, that this is a tax grab on the part 
of the Government of Canada. This tax grab, as I understand it, 
will mean that it will cost the typical Saskatchewan family of 
four approximately 850 to $1,000 in more taxes. That in fact is 
the case. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1858 
 
 

(1645) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where’d you get that number, pray tell. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now the Minister of Education says where, 
pray tell, did I get that number. That number comes out of some 
of the briefing documents provided by the Minister of Finance 
at the federal level. That information has come from your own 
colleague in Ottawa, Mr. Minister of Education, if you’d care to 
read some of the newspapers and briefing items that are 
available . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Would you allow 
the hon. member to continue without constant interruption. 
Order, order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Now as I was saying, 
this particular 9 per cent increase in goods and services tax, or 
the new national sales tax, comes into effect January 1, 1991. 
From a purely tax point of view, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
regressive tax and it can only be seen as a tax grab. 
 
Now in 1984, when the Conservative Government of Canada 
came to power, the federal government at that time collected 
about $26 billion in sales and excise taxes. Today the same 
government, the government that promised to reform the tax 
system in our country, is collecting in excess of $20 billion on 
the sales and excise taxes. It is estimated that each 
Saskatchewan family has had to pay an additional $950 in sales 
taxes alone under the federal Conservative government in 
Ottawa. 
 
Now consumption taxes have gone up by 55 per cent. That’s 
how much consumption taxes have increased in our country 
since the PC government in Ottawa came to power in 1984. 
That’s compared to a 33 per cent increase in personal income 
taxes and a 17.7 per cent increase in corporate income tax. And 
it’s quite typical of how this government and how the 
government in Ottawa views the tax system. 
 
They’re quite prepared to have millionaires and welfare mothers 
pay the same sales tax. It costs the millionaire the same amount 
of money in terms of the sales tax to go out and buy a bag of 
Pampers as it costs the welfare mother. It costs the billionaire 
the same amount of money to go out and purchase a 
lawn-mower, if that’s what’s necessary, as the person on social 
assistance. And so what we’ve always said is that the sales tax 
is a regressive tax. 
 
Now this government in Ottawa, and this government here in 
Saskatchewan, continues to increase personal income taxes, and 
yet when you look at what’s happened to corporate taxes, 
corporate income taxes in this country and in our province, very 
little has happened. We have people who are generating 
millions and millions of dollars in profits, and yet those people, 
those corporations, aren’t being adequately taxed. 
 
And so what we think needs to happen is a proper review of the 
tax system in this country, not just personal income taxes, but 
also sales taxes and corporate taxes has to  

occur in order that we can have a tax system that properly 
reflects what’s really happening in this country, and in order to 
have a tax system that’s fair. 
 
We think that the reliance on a consumption tax makes very 
little sense, and in fact what it does is it makes the overall 
system more regressive. It’s not fair. And now what this 
government in Ottawa wants to do is go even further and 
introduce an additional or a new goods and services tax. This 
tax is clearly inflationary, and even Michael Wilson, the federal 
Finance minister, has indicated a few weeks ago that once this 
new tax is imposed, we can expect to see a 3 per cent increase 
in the inflation rate. 
 
Now for those people living in Saskatchewan who are presently 
facing a 4 to 5 per cent inflation rate, what we will see, come 
1991, is a 7 to 8 per cent inflation rate. And obviously that has a 
number of people concerned, particularly small-business people 
who, as you know, Mr. Speaker, are having a very difficult time 
generating revenue in this province because people simply 
don’t have the change in their pockets to go out and purchase 
the kinds of goods and services that they once were able to 
purchase. 
 
And small-business people are concerned that once this new 
national sales tax comes into effect, or the value added tax, or 
the goods and services tax, however you want to describe it, 
that that will have a serious impact on their business. They 
suspect that revenues will drop off, and obviously that will 
impact on the number of people that they’re able to employ. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, even the Bank of Canada, the governor for 
the Bank of Canada, John Crow, has admitted that a new sales 
tax would add to the inflationary pressures faced by the people 
of Saskatchewan and our country. The simple truth is, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Bank of Canada has consistently responded to 
increases in sales and excise taxes on the part of the 
Conservative government in Ottawa since 1984. 
 
Bank annual reports have made reference to indirect taxes as a 
key component of increased inflation rates, to which the Bank 
of Canada responds to in terms of increased rates on money that 
we borrow. And as all Saskatchewan people know, interest rates 
in this province are having a serious impact upon 
small-business people, farmers, people who are involved in 
consumer loan borrowing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m having a very difficult time speaking with all 
of the noise, and I’d ask you to call the members to order. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member has indicated she’s having a 
difficult time being heard. Order, order. Order, order. That goes 
for the member for Regina Centre as well. If you will just 
co-operate and allow the member to continue her remarks. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just remind the members that 
if they want to visit with each other, they can step out the back 
door and have a . . . 
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1859 
 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Let’s just carry on with 
the debate and not belabour the point. And I’ll ask the hon. 
members once more to allow her to continue, and let’s get on 
with the debate. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. 
 
Now as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy 
can ill afford to have any kind of increase in the interest rates. 
And we believe that the introduction of this new national sales 
tax will have serious impact on inflation. will have serious 
impact on inflation rates. And we think, in fact, that this 
increase will cause the Canadian economy, and has the potential 
to cause the Canadian economy, and particularly the 
Saskatchewan economy, to go into a recession. 
 
This particular sales tax will have a serious impact on low and 
middle income Canadians, particularly people here in 
Saskatchewan, as I’ve said. Now the toll ultimately, Mr. 
Speaker, will mean that low and middle income families will 
not have the kind of money to spend on some very basic goods 
and services that are necessary in order to keep house and home 
together. 
 
We believe and we understand from the National Council on 
Welfare, that the sales tax will take approximately 11.5 per cent 
of the incomes of Canadians earning under $10,000; that this 
sales tax will take about 6.7 per cent of the income of families 
earning under $40,000; and this sales tax will only take about 
4.4 per cent of the income of families earning $100,000. So as 
you can see from the National Council on Welfare, their 
statistics show that this sales tax will have a serious impact on 
lower and middle income Canadians, and it will have very little 
impact on Canadians earning large sums of money. 
 
Now the government has said over here that they’re pro-family, 
and that their job is to protect low income and middle income 
Canadians and people living here in Saskatchewan. We believe 
that if they really take their job seriously that they should vote 
on this motion so we can convey to the people of Canada, and 
to the people in Saskatchewan, that this Legislative Assembly is 
absolutely opposed to this national sales tax which will take 
money out of the pockets of low and middle income people 
living here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So what I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, is give the members 
opposite an opportunity to vote on this motion because we think 
it’s seriously and extremely important. I would like to give 
them the opportunity to support this motion. And I’m sure all 
members of the House will support this motion because of its 
devastating affect on small-business people, on working people, 
on farmers, and on people who have low or very little income. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will take my chair and ask all members of 
the Legislative Assembly to vote on this motion because, as you 
know, none of these motions ever get voted on. We usually talk 
out the clock. We have a few minutes left before five, and I 
would urge all members of this Assembly to vote on this motion 
so we can convey a message to the Prime Minister of Canada, 
and to the  

Finance Minister, that this Legislative Assembly, on behalf of 
all people living in Saskatchewan, is opposed to this national 
sales tax of 9 per cent which comes into effect on January 1, 
1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite — and I don’t say this in 
any partisan way — the motion is somewhat premature, in my 
view, because we are expecting from the federal Department of 
Finance, perhaps even by the end of June from the indications 
that we’ve had, a detailed technical paper from the national 
government as to what, I believe, the specific implications of 
the national sales tax are. 
 
And I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, I and the government have 
serious reservations and concerns about the national sales tax, 
but we should put a couple of things in perspective as it applies 
to Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
There are some beneficiaries in Saskatchewan businesses with 
the national sales tax. Our resource companies, for example, 
benefit by the reduction in the manufacturing sales tax that’s 
now in place, and manufacturing businesses. Many processing 
businesses will benefit by the shift to a national sales tax. I 
think we have to, in fairness to an overall look at the provincial 
economy, get the details of the national sales tax so we can have 
a more definitive view as to what the pluses and minuses will 
be on the Saskatchewan economy. And from that perspective, 
I’m talking about how it affects different areas of the 
Saskatchewan economy, and I’m not talking about the 
consumers at this point. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You haven’t done that yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we can’t, because we don’t have the 
specifics from the federal government. We can take all sorts . . . 
I’ve given you some indications that some could benefit. I’ve 
listed three areas now of Saskatchewan business sectors that 
could in fact benefit by the national sales tax. 
 
The other side is the question of consumers. And many of the 
points raised by the opposition, and some of the impacts, may 
be quite valid. But what is not answered . . . and the hon. 
member who spoke in moving the motion and introducing the 
motion talked about, for example, housing. And it’s interesting 
now that the housing industry are saying that they can live with 
the assurances that they have from the national government, 
because some sectors — and we have the example in New 
Zealand where the national government imposing a value added 
tax had expenditure offsets. And if, for example, the tax on a 
home is 2,000, or whatever figure you want to use, and the 
federal government has a grant program to new home buyers to 
offset that, the tax flows through — it may not have the impact. 
 
It was well received in New Zealand when it was imposed, and 
I take a look, not at the Draconian message that you referred to 
in the legislature, but by more recent statements of the home 
builders, saying that they are prepared to look at the assurances 
given by the federal  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1860 
 
 

Minister of Finance that the impact could be perhaps modest. 
 
So there are a couple of areas where there will be expenditure 
offsets to minimize the impact . . . That includes things like tax 
credits. Whether the tax credits are adequate enough — there’s 
debate on both sides of the issue whether tax credits are the 
correct way to go. Again, all I can indicate to the hon. members, 
in my view it would be preferable to get the technical package. 
 
And I, with a caution, say that I’m hoping that the technical 
package is a very broad technical package that in fact will have 
how the expenditure offsets will affect various people, specific 
by category. And I move leave to adjourn debate . . . ask for 
leave to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


