


















































June 15, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 15, 1989 
 

1909 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Education, the member from Weyburn, I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the legislature, 25 grade 8 
students from the Stoughton Central School in Stoughton. They 
are here to take in question period and visit Regina. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Lloyd Morrison; 
chaperons Bruce MacDougall, Linda McElroy, Gail Taillon, 
and Ruth Linklater. They are located in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I wish them a pleasant welcome to the legislature. It will be my 
pleasure, on behalf of the Minister of Education, to meet with 
you for pictures and an informal talk a little later. I would ask 
the members of the legislature to assist me in welcoming them 
to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure today 
to introduce 20 grade 4 students from Montmartre that are 
situated in your gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Sandi Brown, and teacher aide, Helen Baumgartner. 
 
And I understand there’s a number of parents that I would like 
to introduce that are with them today, drove the young people 
in: Rick and Pat Sebastian, Vida Stevenson, Wanda Buesis, 
Sherry Quam and Lea Fisher. We welcome you people from 
Montmartre here today. I hope you enjoy the proceedings of the 
House, and I look forward to meeting you on a nice day like 
this out on the lawn after question period. Welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s also 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of 33 grade 6 six students 
from Russell, Manitoba. They are with the Major Pratt School. 
And they’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
accompanied today by their teachers Wayne Dunham and Jan 
Shauer, and chaperons Judy Preston and Dianne Lovas, and 
their bus driver is Ivan Derbowka. 
 
If I’m not mistaken, Wayne, I think this is about the third year 
in a row that you’ve brought students to the Assembly, and we 
want to thank you very much for considering to come to 
Saskatchewan and, of course, Regina and to the Assembly to 
watch the proceedings. 
 
I want to wish them every success in their exams. We hope you 
enjoy your stay here at the Assembly, and we want to say that 
we’ll also meet with you at 2:30 for some refreshments in room 
218. 
 

So I would ask all members to please welcome these students 
from outside our boundaries from Russell, Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Purchase of Lambda Computers 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Deputy Premier and it concerns the GigaText scandal. 
Mr. Minister, on May 30 in this House you said, and I quote: 
 

 we conducted all of the normal investigations into the 
principals who owned this technology . . . 
 

Taking you at your word, Mr. Minister, can we assume that you 
were aware that in January of 1988, shortly after Mr. 
Montpetit’s company, Systems, purchased the American 
computer firm, LMI, that Systems made a decision to scrap the 
Lambda line of computers because they couldn’t sell the 
technology? Are you aware of that, or are you not aware of 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps this is the 
appropriate time to answer some questions that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The hon. member has 
asked a question, and I’m afraid I can’t allow the minister to 
bring his answers to notices taken a motion of at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, 
the Lambda computer — the Lambda computer that members 
opposite say that GigaText paid altogether too much money for 
— they paid, I think they suggested $2.9 million was what 
GigaText paid for the computers, the Lambda computers that 
that particular member is talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to give you, for comparison’s sake, for comparison’s 
sake, some computers, Lambda computers, Mr. Speaker, that 
were sold to various people in Canada. One of them, Mr. 
Speaker — and these are similar in configuration — one of 
them was sold to a numbered company, 148840 Canada 
Incorporated. Those were sold, Mr. Speaker, for $158,546. 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, sold to the same company, 158,546. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here is another one, here is another one, and 
this one was sold in 1986, Mr. Speaker. This one was sold to 
Norlus in Winnipeg. The expenditure had to be approved by the 
federal Department of Communications and it was sold, Mr. 
Speaker, for $97,000; another one to the National Research 
Council, Mr. Speaker, to the National Research Council for 
$142,000.22, and there will be some difference in these because 
of the configuration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then there was another one, Mr. Speaker, that was sold to the 
Defence Research Establishment. Now this is a little  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1910 
 

different configuration, but it was $234,853, Mr. Speaker. Now 
here’s one that was sold a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I have another question, Mr. Speaker, for 
the Deputy Premier, and Mr. Deputy Premier, so you can follow 
me in what I’m saying, I’m going to send over a chart for you. 
And this chart that I’m sending you is prepared by the 
court-appointed inspector from the chartered accountant firm, 
Thibault Marchand Peat Marwick. It was filed in the civil action 
in Montreal last week as an exhibit, exhibit four from volume 
one of the inspector’s final report. 
 
Mr. Minister, you must have been aware that Systems, after 
taking over LMI, found itself with 20 Lambda computers which 
did not appear in the inventory sheet. And then they got a firm 
owned by one of Montpetit’s employees, Edubi, to supply the 
Systems company with an invoice for $1.5 million to give the 
machines a resale value, because prior to that, sir, they had 
none. Systems then sold the computers to Lisp, another firm of 
Montpetit’s, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. The hon. member 
I think should get to his question. He’s had plenty of time to set 
the stage for it, and I’d like him to get to the question now. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — In light of these facts and further facts, 
they stayed in Lisp for five months and then Lisp sold them to 
GigaText. And you sharp business operators . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. I’ve asked the hon. 
member to put the question. I’m going to ask him once more. 
Please get directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is this: in light 
of the fact that GigaText paid almost double — your 
investigation told you that, didn’t it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things being 
investigated by the RCMP is whether or not the Government of 
Saskatchewan got value for the money on the Lambda 
computer. We believe they did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Simon Fraser University, for instance, spent $148,000 for 
theirs, Mr. Speaker — Simon Fraser. Bell-Northern Research 
— not pikers in the research world, Mr. Speaker — they spent 
$204,000 for their Lambda computer. And the National 
Research Council, Mr. Speaker, spent $199,000 for theirs. 
 
Now what did GigaText pay for theirs, Mr. Speaker? They paid 
$152,000 for each one, for a total of 2.9 million, I’m told by 
members opposite. And he talks about: these are the facts as 
filed in evidence in Montreal, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he says. 
 
Let me tell you what else he says was a fact filed in evidence in 
Montreal. I’m told yesterday that that member stood in his place 
and said that the Deputy Premier, among others, flew on a 
private jet from Montreal to Boston to New York to Montreal. 
Mr.  

Speaker, I have never flown on a private jet from Montreal to 
any place in the world except Regina. Mr. Speaker, it’s the 
same old NDP style of justice. Hang them, give them a fair trial, 
and damn the innocent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I have a new question for the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, regarding the cost of the Lambda 
computers, you know full well how rapidly computer 
technology changes. And I want you to explain how 20 
computers that you bought in 1988, outmoded, delisted, and a 
very cold item on that market, appreciated by 100 per cent in 
the space of five months. Do you see that as a common 
occurrence in the computer field? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t accept anything 
that members opposite are advancing relative to this matter. I 
don’t accept anything. Obviously the guy was misleading the 
House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when he talked about me taking 
a private jet from Montreal to Boston, because it’s simply not 
true. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Would the Minister of 
Finance and the member for Regina Rosemont, Minister of 
Finance and Rosemont please come to order so the House can 
proceed. There’s been some bedlam here and difficult to 
understand what anybody’s saying. Order. Member from 
Meadow Lake and Regina Victoria, let’s allow the Deputy 
Premier to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
prepared to accept what members opposite advance relative to 
this case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — But I am quite prepared, Mr. Speaker, 
as most fair-minded people would be, I am quite prepared to 
rely on the police investigation that is going on right now that 
was called by this government, this investigation initiated by 
this government the moment that the civil action started in 
Montreal, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s fair and reasonable that we 
should rely on that police investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, how dare you accuse the members on 
this side of the House of being misleading. Your name is named 
on the flight manifest, signed by a pilot, that was tabled as an 
exhibit in a Montreal court-house with your name on those 
flights. Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the pilot is lying? 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1911 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t care what was 
filed in evidence in Montreal. I don’t care what was filed in 
evidence in Montreal, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you, and I can tell 
this House, and I can tell anybody that’s prepared to listen, that 
I have never been on a private jet from Montreal to any place in 
the world except Regina. 
 
I’ve already told the House about that one, Mr. Speaker. I filled 
up an empty seat in a plane that was coming here in any event, 
and saved the taxpayers of Saskatchewan some significant 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Affairs of GigaText 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A new question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order. Let’s 
just start over. The member for The Battlefords. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A new question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, the court appointed inspector in 
Montreal has also been able to ascertain that $300,000 of 
GigaText money, Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money involved in 
the computer sale, went directly to Mr. Montpetit’s personal 
bank account. Your colleague, the minister responsible for 
SEDCO, has admitted that Mr. Montpetit had sole signing 
authority for GigaText from the time it was set up until long 
after he had run through our $4 million. 
 
Did anybody in your government ever notice, or did you ever 
question, a cheque signed by Guy Montpetit to Guy Montpetit 
for $300,000? Was there a board minute approving that? And 
would you maybe think that that could have possibly been theft, 
Mr. Minister? And has that also been referred to the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — We now know why Roy’s ducking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
probably that is why the Leader of the Opposition has put some 
distance between himself and members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really feel bad for members opposite because 
they don’t know, they simply don’t know how people can be 
hurt by irresponsible statements like members opposite are 
wont to make, Mr. Speaker. And they say anything and know 
no shame, Mr. Speaker, absolutely. Now there may well be 
$300 million paid to Guy Montpetit . . . $300,000. There may 
well be. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, it is the subject of a police 
investigation. The police have full access to all of that, Mr. 
Speaker, and member opposite calls it theft. Well if it is, the 
RCMP will discover that, Mr. Speaker, and they will report it to 
the Minister of Justice, and the Minister of Justice will take 
appropriate action, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker, the same 
minister. Even if there was the odd person in Saskatchewan that 
didn’t believe us, everything here being said is credible because 
it’s involved in the court in Montreal. And the court-appointed 
auditor, are you questioning that individual too? Look at the 
flow chart that was presented as an exhibit in the court. That 
validates the information we’re putting across to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, let us get this straight. Although 
you claim to have done a full investigation on the people 
involved in this company, you know nothing of the history of 
the 20 computers you purchased. Are you not at all surprised 
about the little flip that increased their value by 100 per cent? 
 
Mr. Minister, you may remember the Oerlikon land flip, 
another adventure involving Quebec Tories where the land 
travelled through a number of parties; it increased substantially 
in value each time it moved. There, however, there were a 
number of transactions involved before the price actually 
doubled. It took you people one. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Minister. The people involved 
in the Oerlikon land flip must be looking on in dismay. Who 
conducted the extensive investigation, and has that person been 
fired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the member hasn’t 
changed his attitude since the previous question. He’s still 
making all kinds of wild allegations. And he says, Mr. Speaker, 
that simply because this is filed in the court it is fact. That’s not 
necessarily true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason they’re in court is because there are two sides to the 
story. Members opposite are standing up and saying, Mr. 
Speaker, it was theft; it was a criminal offence. What, Mr. 
Speaker, if the judge or the RCMP, or whoever, says it is not. 
Will they then get up, Mr. Speaker, with some degree of 
humility and say, I’m sorry I called you a crook, Mr. Speaker? 
These people, Mr. Speaker — no integrity at all. Any wild 
allegation for a headline, Mr. Speaker. And I mean, can you 
imagine the bow that that member is trying to stretch by tying a 
Lambda computer to the Oerlikon affair. My God, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve never such a weak attempt to try and get a headline. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. I certainly think that the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan will believe the accountant and the pilot before 
they believe you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think we should just kind of sum this up for 
today, Mr. Speaker. First off, Montpetit finds himself with 20 
computers carried on his inventory with a zero market value. He 
can’t sell them, so using a president of  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1912 
 

Systems, which Montpetit owns, he gives them a fake value of 
$1.5 million by selling them back to himself. 
 
Now thirdly, he can’t get anyone to buy them at that price 
either, so he sells them to your people at $2.9 million. He takes 
some of the proceeds . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. It is very, very difficult for the 
Chair to really judge what the member is up to and how long 
he’s going to speak with a preamble. It seems like he’s right in 
the middle of a preamble, and he’s already taken quite a bit of 
time, as he realizes, and I think he should be getting to the 
question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that. It’s 
a very complex affair and I wanted to lay it out. If the minister 
could just follow the flow chart done by the accountant, he will 
understand the scam that went on here, and the flip increasing 
the computers’ value within a few months by over 100 per cent, 
costing us $2.9 million. 
 
My question to you is: what is the possible justification that you 
can offer to the people of Saskatchewan for allowing Guy 
Montpetit to sell you 20 computers for twice what was clearly a 
fictitious value to begin with, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the National Research 
Council, Bell-Northern Research, Simon Fraser University, 
Defence Research Establishment, National Research Council, 
Norlus Incorporated and several others, Mr. Speaker, believed, 
Mr. Speaker, that they got value for their dollar when they 
bought these very specialized computers. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that GigaText . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Let’s allow the Deputy Minister 
to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
GigaText got value for their dollar. And members opposite, 
they sit there and they rub their hands with glee and they pray, 
they pray that GigaText will not succeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I can tell you, this very day, Mr. Speaker, this very day we 
have at GigaText an independent expert doing an analysis as to 
the business opportunities of . . . And we’re going to do this, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do this so that it’s there for all to 
see, and independent of government, independent, absolutely, 
completely. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, next week, next week we have an 
independent expert associated with a major university, a 
linguistics person with excellent credentials, Mr. Speaker, 
coming in to do his analysis as to the translation ability of this 
system. And following that, Mr. Speaker, we will open the 
doors. 
 
I know that members opposite have been invited to go over and 
look at this, Mr. Speaker, but they have not. They prefer to 
stand in here, Mr. Speaker, and defame any  

name that crosses their lips, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d just like to bring to the 
attention of the member for The Battlefords that it is not 
parliamentary for him to be challenging the Chair just because 
he decides he doesn’t agree with something. 
 
It’s a long . . . Order. And the member for Quill Lakes, the 
member for Quill Lakes, I’ll call him to order as well. The issue 
of challenging the Chair, I will not tolerate any longer. I’m 
bringing it to the members’ attention and I’m going to ask the 
member for Battlefords to rise and apologize to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I apologize to the Chair. 
 

Construction of Hospital at Gravelbourg 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, this evening in Gravelbourg, various service clubs 
from that community and the surrounding area are having an 
emergency meeting. I understand the reason for the meeting is 
to show support for construction of a new hospital facility in 
that community and put an end to the rumours being spread by 
the government and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
that there is not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Would the 
Minister of Finance allow the member to put her question? 
 
Ms. Simard: — And the rumour’s being spread, Mr. Minister, 
that the community is not in agreement about the hospital 
facility. Mr. Minister, will you give your undertaking today to 
this House that you will watch what takes place at that meeting 
and that you will act upon it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, without question I’ll 
watch what takes place at the meeting, but I should set the 
record straight, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the newly elected member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, has been in consultation with the 
people of Gravelbourg and the people associated with 
Gravelbourg hospital, as well as the long-term care centre in 
Gravelbourg, as well as neighbouring communities like 
Lafleche. 
 
And it’s important work that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is doing and bringing communities 
together to discuss with each other, communities that have not 
discussed with each other for a good long time their health care 
needs on a wider area than just the one area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
who the member over here brought into the question, has 
worked very hard on this and is well accepted in that 
constituency, as the election results showed, when he said, your 
hospital will not close, and they said it would. 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1913 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
people of Gravelbourg have good reason to doubt your word. 
They feel betrayed in the worst possible way. And in June 12 in 
the Gravelbourg Tribune, there was a story I’d like to quote, a 
quote rather from Dan Lamarre of the Gravelbourg Kinsmen 
club in which he said: 
 

During the election I was approached personally by (the 
Premier) and he said plainly enough to me that if he 
(meaning the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) was 
elected, we would get our hospital. 
 

That was your government’s promise — vote for us and you’ll 
get your hospital. And now it isn’t even mentioned in the 
budget, Mr. Minister, and you appear to be backtracking on it. 
Will the people of Gravelbourg get their new health care 
facility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a continuing source of 
amazement to me — the nature of that question and regarding 
Gravelbourg — and all member in this House will have been to 
Gravelbourg in recent months and certainly during that election. 
She says that there is a quote in the Gravelbourg Tribune about 
someone who was approached by the Premier. I believe that’s 
the way the question was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hundreds of people in that area were approached 
by that member, and especially her leader, and all of those other 
members over there saying, if these guys are elected, if that 
member that now sits in our benches, proudly, if he’s elected, 
all five hospitals in here will close. That’s what they said. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s elected, and those hospitals are not closed, 
and Lafleche is having one built. And we’re still discussing it 
with Gravelbourg and Rockglen and Coronach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Order. Order. Order, order. 
I believe . . . I believe question period is over. The questions 
can be continued tomorrow, but let’s now move on to further 
business. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Forty-seven 
thousand Saskatchewan people have joined the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan since it was introduced three years ago. This 
steady growth in membership is indicative of the public support 
that the plan enjoys. By providing a means of retirement 
savings to those with little or no access to other plans, the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan fills  

an obvious gap in retirement savings plans. 
 
This government remains committed to providing security for 
our residents. We are continually looking for ways to improve 
the delivery and the operation of the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan. The proposed amendments to the plan legislation will 
enable us to meet these objectives. 
 
Many plan members have suggested that portability be 
incorporated into the plan. Recognizing that portability would 
make the plan more attractive to Saskatchewan residents, and 
particularly young people, we are requesting an amendment to 
the Act which would give members who leave the province the 
option to continue to contribute to the plan. 
 
These members would not be eligible for the government 
matching contribution, however, but would be able to continue 
building for their financial future. In conjunction with this 
improvement is a provision to charge an administrative fee to 
non-resident contributors to cover any incremental costs that 
may be incurred. 
 
Another amendment to the Act will allow for regulatory 
authority to establish how the matching government 
contribution is determined. Application of the existing formula, 
given recent changes to the Canada Pension Plan, is not 
consistent with the government’s intent to assist low to middle 
income earners in saving for their retirement. 
 
We want to ensure that the plan continues to assist those for 
which it was originally intended. A made-in-Saskatchewan 
basis for determining government matching contributions will 
ensure the needs of our people are met. 
 
Another amendment allows for the inclusion of the standard 
government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Vote against it. 
You’ve been opposed to it from day one. I just challenge the 
members opposite who are highly critical of the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan to vote against it, Mr. Speaker. All of them are 
opposed to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Let’s just 
allow the Minister of Finance to continue, and then those who 
wish to speak on the Bill will have their opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We want to 
ensure that the plan continues to assist those it was intended for. 
A made-in-Saskatchewan basis for determining 
government-matching contributions will ensure the needs of our 
residents are met. 
 
Another amendment allows for the inclusion of the standard 
government clause appointing an auditor for the plan. Further 
amendments are of a housekeeping nature and will assist in the 
efficient operation of the plan. 
 
In summary, portability will make the plan more attractive and 
accessible to all Saskatchewan people. A 
made-in-Saskatchewan basis for determining matching 
contributions will ensure the plan serves those it was 
established for. The remaining changes will allow for the  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1914 
 

efficient operation of the plan, Mr. Speaker. I move second 
reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I’m going to be 
relatively brief; our caucus will not be opposing this. 
 
What we find dismaying, Mr. Minister, is that this government 
is so quick to come to the assistance of people who don’t need it 
and so insensitive to those who do. I’d remind the Minister of 
Finance that approximately two weeks ago the galleries were 
filled with single parent families, mostly women, and the 
Minister of Human Resources was insensitive enough and had 
the gall to suggest that there is no such thing as poverty. 
 
I say that, Mr. Minister, because those insensitive and crude 
remarks are in contrast to what you’re doing now. This pension 
plan provides a scheme for women, many of whom are not 
really on the lowest economic rung. Many of the people who 
use this probably have other means of support. This government 
has done a good deal for the middle class, if I may put it that 
way, but you’ve done virtually nothing for women in need. 
 
Most of the women who sat in this gallery two weeks ago on 
International Women’s Day, the vast majority of those women, 
Mr. Speaker, will live in poverty once they’re finished working. 
Their old age will be spent in poverty. My criticism of this 
current scheme is that it does nothing for them, absolutely 
nothing for them, and does a good deal for the middle class, 
many of whom don’t need it. 
 
In fact, some of the women who are participating in this thing, I 
suspect, would embarrass the minister if he’d release the 
statistics. I suspect there’s women who are taking advantage of 
this whose husbands enjoy, and therefore whose family enjoy, 
very comfortable incomes. It’s possible, Mr. Minister, for a 
woman to participate in this, whose husband makes a very good 
income. And children as well, as some members point out. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the proof of the fact that this scheme is a 
little skewered in its priorities, the proof of that is that we have 
asked for statistics on this scheme and you don’t give it to us. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ve released them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You have not. The minister stands up and 
gives us a lot of blather, but will not give us the statistics on 
who’s utilizing this. I say, Mr. Minister, it would be very 
interesting, because I think it would establish that this is doing 
nothing for those who need it most. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, our criticism of the Bill is what’s 
not in it. We don’t have any real criticism of this amendment as 
such, and we will therefore not be opposing this amendment. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Mineral Resources Act, 

1985 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the 
Minister of Energy, I rise on second reading of Bill 27, An Act 
to amend The Mineral Resources Act. 
 
The amendments are of an administrative nature, and the 
amendment authorizes a reciprocal exchange of information 
agreement to be entered into with the Government of Canada or 
the government of any province or territory with regard to the 
enforcement of taxation. 
 
Much of the information required by legislation to be reported 
to the department by those individuals that are actively 
exploring, developing, or producing the mineral resources of 
this province are very confidential. That is why The Mineral 
Resources Act contains a provision requiring that this 
information be kept confidential. 
 
In administering the statute, my department officials are highly 
sensitive to the confidential nature of the information received. 
However, Mr. Speaker, there is a growing recognition by taxing 
jurisdictions that information exchange relating to the 
administration of taxation statutes makes a significant 
contribution in improving the enforcement of taxation 
legislation. 
 
There is also a recognition that many of the problems 
encountered today are national in scope, and that assistance 
from other jurisdictions in assembling information for tax 
enforcement is necessary. Not only does the taxing jurisdiction 
benefit from this information exchange, but the taxpayer also 
benefits from a more equitable application of the taxing 
provisions, particularly where the operations are carried on in 
more than one jurisdiction. 
 
The information that is exchanged between jurisdictions is used 
only for the purpose of aiding in an audit or an investigation 
under the respective mining tax and royalty provisions. 
Furthermore, each partner to the agreements will be required to 
keep the information and documents maintained pursuant to 
these agreements confidential in the same manner as if 
information or documents were obtained directly from the 
taxpayers themselves. Several of the provinces, Mr. Speaker, 
are now exchanging information, and this is helpful to both the 
taxing jurisdiction and to the taxpayer. 
 
I urge the support and approval of this amendment by members 
of the Assembly, and I move second reading of Bill No. 27, An 
Act to amend the Mineral Resources Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m not going to make any comments on 
this, Mr. Speaker, other than to point out that our critic in this 
area is not in the House at the moment. And we are going to 
therefore adjourn the debate, and when our critic is back they 
will no doubt have comments to make on this. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this legislation increases the 
tax on a package of 25 cigarettes from $1.42 to $1.67, effective 
March 31, 1989, and the tax on one gram of fine  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1915 
 

cut or pipe tobacco goes from $2.30 to $2.70. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are minor increases in the tax 
rates in cigars. The tax increases from 16 to 17 cents for cigars 
retailing for less than 20 cents. The tax on cigars retailing in the 
21 to 40 cent category increases from 32 to 34. And for the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . member from Saskatoon, the tax on cigars 
retailing in the 41 to 60 cent category increases from 48 to 51 
cents for a cigar. For those cigars that retail for more than 60 
cents, the tax rate increases from 80 per cent of the retail selling 
price to 85 per cent of the retail selling price. They’re expected 
to yield an additional $16 million in 1989-90. 
 
Consumption of tobacco has been declining, Mr. Speaker, in 
recent years, and much of this has been through people adopting 
healthier life-styles. However, higher tax rates have played a 
part in reducing consumption. In the past, organizations such as 
the Canadian Medical Association, the Canadian Cancer 
Society have appreciated the efforts of this government for 
increasing the tax rate on tobacco. 
 
I move second reading of An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax 
Act. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, one’s view of the wisdom of 
this tax depends very much on whether or not you smoke. 
Those who do are noticing that taxes are getting very stiff 
indeed on tobacco. Those who don’t think that no one should, 
and therefore the tax is appropriate. Suffice it to say with 
respect to all consumption taxes, these are retrogressive taxes, 
taxes levied without any regard to a person’s ability to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been moving in this country away from 
corporate taxes and away from personal income taxes, which 
are by and large based on ability to pay, and towards 
consumption taxes, which are not. I think that’s an unfortunate 
trend, and it continues to be unfortunate, even although the 
product which is being taxed is, in the eyes of many, an 
undesirable product. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that we will not be voting against this. It 
does not make a great deal of sense to be voting against this 
particular tax. We are, however, opposed to the increasing 
consumption taxes at the expense of corporate tax and other 
taxes based on the ability to pay. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading 
of Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. This 
Bill increases the tax on gasoline and diesel fuel from 7 to 10 
cents per litre effective March 31, ’89. 
 
In order to protect Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, the tax 
is fully rebatable for their personal use fuel purchases. And we 
continue to be the only province to provide such a rebate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, farmers and other primary producers of renewable 
resources who hold fuel tax exemption permits may continue to 
purchase their fuel, tax free, in bulk from bulk fuel dealers. If 
they purchase their fuel, tax paid, in bulk or at retail, they may 
apply for a rebate. The tax changes are expected to yield an 
additional 62.1 million in 1989-90. 
 
The Bill also establishes a 2 cents per litre non-rebatable 
environmental surcharge on leaded gasoline. The surcharge on 
leaded gasoline will generate about $12 million revenue in 
1989-90. The surcharge should reduce the incentive to use the 
higher pollutant leaded fuel before its sale terminates in 
December of 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Environment and Public Safety 
will, after consultation with established groups, introduce 
legislation to tax environmentally harmful products. The 2 cent 
per litre environmental surcharge will be imposed under that 
legislation when it’s introduced; until then the surcharge will be 
imposed under The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 
 
This measure is one of many measures our government is 
taking to protect the natural environment for future generations, 
Mr. Speaker. Our social programs are an important part of the 
fabric of our society in Saskatchewan. This government is 
committed to protecting and enhancing these essential 
programs. The revenue measures outlined in this Bill will allow 
us to protect these programs so future generations will be able 
to enjoy the same benefits we cherish. 
 
I move second reading of an Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 
1987. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks on this Bill, I will be moving an 
adjournment of the consideration of this statute. 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, it would have been very difficult, had 
you not heard the opening paragraph of the minister’s remarks, 
to know what subject he was talking on, I think with good 
reason. This particular tax is unwise, it is most unfair, and I can 
assure the minister that we will be speaking against it and we 
will be, probably in due course, voting against it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to make reference to the minister’s 
comments with reference to the environment. The minister 
suggested that the increasing tax on leaded fuel was making 
some sort of a contribution to a cleaner environment. As is so 
often the case with the Minister of Finance, what he said is utter 
balderdash. 
 
The federal government has phased out, and has done so many 
months ago, phased out the use of leaded gasoline at the end of 
this year. Everybody who’s at all interested in the subject has 
known that leaded gasoline will disappear on December 31, 
1989. It was the case long before that tax was introduced. And 
so for the minister to claim that he somehow or other had made 
a bold, innovative step in cleaning up the environment is just 
nonsense. 
 
Mr. Minister, the gas tax is a tax which falls most unfairly on 
small businesses. Farmers do not pay it, by and large,  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1916 
 

do not pay it at all. They pay some of it, but not a great deal of 
it. Individuals can get a rebate. The vast majority of this tax is 
being paid by small-business people. Small-business people, 
which often service rural areas out of Regina, Saskatoon, and 
the other cities, contribute the vast majority of the tax. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the fuel tax . . . The 
amount raised in ’88-89 in the fuel tax was $148 million. In 
1989-1990 it’s estimated that there’ll be 204 million raised, an 
increase of $56 million, or well over a third — approximately 
40 per cent increase. 
 
Most of this tax is paid by small-business people, and many of 
them are not in a position to pass it on. This government 
sometimes, not often, but sometimes makes passing reference to 
the importance that small-business people play in this province. 
But you sure wouldn’t know it from their actions, as distinct 
from what they say. 
 
This is a tax which is most unfair. I would point out, Mr. 
Speaker — let me give you some examples. A trucking firm 
with 12 diesel units will now pay 107,000 per year in fuel tax. 
Bus company with 12 buses will pay 19,600. It’s going to cost 
the school boards 2.6 million per year in gas tax, and it’s going 
to cost the municipalities a good deal more than that. 
 
This is a tax, Mr. Minister, which does not fall on everyone 
fairly — certainly bears no relation to the use people make of 
the roads, no relation to people’s ability to pay. It’s simply a tax 
that this government thinks will not cause a good deal of outcry. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Minister, business people in this province are 
getting impatient. They’re getting impatient with the level of 
taxes they pay, Mr. Speaker. I have been out of Regina and on 
Main Street in some smaller community at least once a week in 
connection with my role as Finance critic. The most common 
complaint by far and away on Main Street is taxes. It depends 
upon the kind of business. Sometimes it’s property taxes, but 
sometimes it’s gas taxes. 
 
This government has been loading taxes on small businesses, all 
the while pretending to be their friend. Well I say, Mr. Speaker, 
the business community in this province is going to judge this 
government by their actions, not by their words. And this 
government’s actions have been downright hostile to small 
businesses. It’s they who are paying this tax. It’s called the fuel 
tax. It might be styled, the tax on small businesses, because it is 
small businesses that pay this tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that there are others in our caucus who 
have concerns about the gas tax. I know there are others who 
will want to speak on it. We will certainly want to review the 
minister’s comments in his claim to be protecting the 
environment. 
 
I therefore, Mr. Speaker, move that debate on this Bill be 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act respecting the Implementation of 

the Grasslands National Park Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
stand today to move second reading of Bill No. 35, An Act 
respecting the Implementation of the Grasslands National Park 
Agreement. Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow the province 
to implement the Grasslands National Park agreement, and it 
will pave the way for the establishment of the Grasslands 
National Park by the Government of Canada. 
 
The idea of a Grasslands National Park has been the goal of 
many residents, including conservationists, naturalists, wildlife 
enthusiasts, people who love the outdoors, Mr. Speaker, people 
who love that area of the province, since the late 1950s. That 
includes many members of the opposition. 
 
This park will be the first grasslands park to be established in 
North America and I think that is very noteworthy, Mr. 
Speaker. It will serve as a representative landscape of the 
short-grass prairie, and of course that is an area very dear to 
Saskatchewan. The prairie captures the spirit and the 
imagination of all who visit it. 
 
The Grasslands National Park will ensure that many rare and 
endangered species are protected. Wildlife species found in the 
park area include the burrowing owl, peregrine falcon, piping 
plover, plains pocket gopher, prairie long-tailed weasel, greater 
prairie chicken, prairie rattlesnake, and prairie dogs. And as 
most members would be aware, Mr. Speaker, recently we 
introduced the swift fox to this area of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of signing the Grasslands 
National Park agreement on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan last September, along with the Minister of 
Environment Canada. This Act will authorize the Government 
of Saskatchewan to fulfil its obligations under that agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to support this initiative and 
to participate in the establishment of the Grasslands National 
Park so that a unique area of Saskatchewan can be protected as 
a national park for the enjoyment, not only of this generation 
but, Mr. Speaker, future generations. 
 
I now move second reading of The Grasslands National Park 
Act, 1989. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course, Mr. Minister, we welcome this legislation which I 
indicate to you is long overdue and probably 10 to 15 years 
overdue. And one of the main stumbling blocks for 
implementing this park has been a major hold-up from your 
government for insisting on retaining certain rights over 
minerals and water resources within the designated national 
park — gas, oil, and exploration and water in the Frenchman 
River. 
 
As you indicate, this park is going to be a great asset to 
Saskatchewan, and most certainly we can use more parks, I 
have always indicated, and my priority over the Grasslands park 
would have been a national park in the Clearwater valley. Of 
course, that has not come to be. But  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1917 
 

I would sincerely hope, Mr. Minister, that you will take a look 
at continuing on and creating more national parks. 
 
And the Grasslands National Park, as you indicate, is habitat for 
many wild animals such as you indicate — the kit fox, which is 
a new species that’s been reintroduced into this province, and I 
sincerely hope that it is successful. And of course there’s the 
burrowing owls, which is another species of bird that has to be 
watched very closely because it is coming close to extinction. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in closing this off I say that we welcome this 
announcement and we sincerely hope that it proceeds as fast as 
possible. Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 
 
Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation Reorganization Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise today before this Assembly and propose second 
reading of a Bill to introduce The Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation Reorganization Amendment Act, 
1989. 
 
As the hon. members of the Assembly will recall, Cameco 
(Canadian Mining Energy Corporation), a Canadian mining and 
energy corporation, was incorporated on June 19, 1987, 
pursuant to the Canada Business Corporations Act, in order to 
accommodate the then-planned merger of SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) and 
Eldorado Nuclear, a federal Crown corporation. 
 
To facilitate this merger, this Assembly passed The 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Reorganization Act, which 
was given Royal Assent on June 29, 1988. Included in this 
legislation were provisions such as the requirements of Cameco 
to maintain its registered and head office in Saskatchewan, and 
the establishment of a special share to be issued to the province 
of Saskatchewan to preserve and protect the province’s interest 
in this new entity. 
 
Subsequently, SMDC and Eldorado Nuclear sold their assets to 
Cameco and created the operating entity that we know today. At 
the time of the sale of SMDC’s assets to Cameco, SMDC had 
certain partnership arrangements which, for business reasons, 
neither they nor their partner wished to dissolve. There has been 
some question expressed that an assignment of SMDC’s 
partnership interest to Cameco might trigger an unintended and 
unintentional dissolution of these partnership interests. In order 
to allay these concerns, the amendment contained in this Bill is 
proposed to the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore do move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 
Reorganization Act. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, a few comments. We will not be 
opposing what appears to be a technical change, but I  

had a lawyer examine the change. There was some uncertainty 
as to exactly the explanation that the minister gets, so that there 
was a bit of . . . more, I guess, a question, a series of questions 
which I will raise in my short comments. 
 
I guess, number one, in regards first of all the general outlines, 
you’ve made very clear, Mr. Minister, that this was one of the 
privatization of Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation, and in a seven-year period it would be privatized 
to Cameco. 
 
And the facts were very clear, Mr. Minister, in regards to the 
privatization process which started last year. And I would say 
off the bat that we were talking in regards to assets that ranged 
anywhere from 1.5 billion to 1.8 billion, you know, depending 
on who made the estimated figure on the assets. 
 
And we were also talking to a yearly production of 
approximately a billion dollars. And we also recognize that the 
profit margins of SMDC were very clearly in the high range of 
a good business. And we were looking at a business profit of 
SMDC, on the year prior to its reorganization, of $60 million. 
Last year I looked at the transfer to Cameco figures and it was 
$52 million clear-cut profit. 
 
And one of the major questions we had raised at that time, 
which I thought for a moment that the minister may have 
considered, was the question of jobs. And although the minister 
had said that no jobs would be lost during the privatization 
process, we recognized this year that 100 jobs were lost in 
Rabbit Lake, and also the fact that 250 lay-offs would be there 
for a six-month period, and also 14 jobs with an office closed 
down in La Ronge just this past week. 
 
So that these are the general parameters of which we are talking 
about in regards to the specific technical amendment of section 
38. 
 
Now as I looked at the amendment, I thought first of all that 
there must be something major in regards to this. But the 
conclusion that come out of it, Mr. Minister, was again one of 
incompetence. I felt that this should have been done already 
during the reorganization in 1988, you know, rather than a year 
later. And I thought that this was another prime example of 
PC-styled incompetence. 
 
And when I looked at the particular question, I thought maybe 
that it wasn’t only incompetence but that the government had 
made another major error. And when I checked with the lawyer, 
there was two basic questions to this. And he thought that 
maybe it was a question of having to do, not only with a 
partnership Act but also a question relating to the Income Tax 
Act. And we couldn’t figure out whether or not it had to do 
exactly with a partnership connection and the fear of dissolution 
of the original member in a partnership when it changes hands, 
because technically if there are two partners and one is 
dissolved, then you don’t have a partnership any more; you only 
have, you know, one business. So we thought that maybe that 
was the original reason. 
 
But the other reason that was raised was that some tax  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1918 
 

authorities will argue that it may have something to do with the 
Income Tax Act. The explanation though that the minister 
makes is that it is one, you know, due to the dissolution of it. 
 
So I would say overall, Minister, Mr. Speaker, that we will not 
be opposing this Bill, basically because it appears to be one of a 
technical nature, although I might conclude that this is just 
another example of long-term incompetence by this 
government. And it raises the point that the auditor raised 
earlier on, that mixed corporations cannot be accessed in terms 
of dollars, and maybe this is what this has to do with, but we 
will be raising these and other questions, you know, in the 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hodgins that Bill No. 2 — An Act 
respecting Railways in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I spoke briefly before on 
Bill No 2, an Act respecting Railways in Saskatchewan, and 
I’ve had a chance now to examine the minister’s comments in 
moving the Bill more thoroughly. As I read through the 
minister’s comments, I notice that he remarks that the member 
for Redberry, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, and one of 
the other members, the member for Morse, have been 
significant fighters against rail line abandonment in 
Saskatchewan. He says they’ve been standing alongside the 
farmers at the rail line abandonment hearings and fighting to 
retain rail lines. 
 
Well I think if we don’t have the benefit of a historic 
perspective on what happened in rail line abandonment in 
Saskatchewan, some day that historic perspective will be here, 
and people in the future will be able to look back to see who 
was part of the problem and who was part of the solution on rail 
line abandonment in the province of Saskatchewan and on the 
prairies. I believe that the historians will conclude that the 
members for those three constituencies and their political party 
were part of the problem with regard to rail line abandonment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This particular piece of legislation which I spoke on before, Bill 
No. 2, The Railway Act, which allows the growth of private 
railways under the Bill, in Saskatchewan, is really an 
inadequate response to rail line abandonment in Saskatchewan. 
I think that will be recognized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bill No. 2 allows an opportunity for CN (Canadian National) 
and CP (Canadian Pacific) to sell off their failures. They’ll be 
selling off their failures to local private operators. And this is 
not too much different, when you compare it, to the creation of 
VIA Rail in Canada. VIA Rail was set up to sell off an 
operation which the railways, CN and CP, didn’t wish to carry 
on — to dump it all in an area called VIA Rail and design the 
thing for failure. 
 

This is exactly what’s happening with regard to rail line 
abandonment in Saskatchewan. The CN and CP are avoiding 
their obligations. They’re selling off their failures to the private 
operators, whoever those operators may be. 
 
We will want, in due course, to examine the minister in 
committee on this Bill to find out what kind of cushion the 
minister’s going to provide for the private operators, and what 
access the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, will have to 
information about the kind of provisions the minister will make 
in this cozy arrangement for private operators. That will be 
something of interest to us. 
 
Bill No. 2 allows the federal government to continue to evade 
its obligation to move grain to the markets. That’s what Bill No. 
2 does. Bill No. 2 allows the Saskatchewan taxpayers, as 
opposed to the Canadian taxpayers, to assume more of the 
financial burden which should be paid by the taxpayers of 
Canada in general. That’s what Bill No. 2 will do. 
 
Bill No. 2 is a sop to the Manalta Coal. It makes it very 
convenient for Manalta Coal to improve their operations. 
Manalta Coal, as members will know, is an operation which 
assumed, at cut-rate prices, assets of the Government of 
Saskatchewan which they are turning to their advantage at the 
detriment of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Manalta Coal is 
obviously one of the ones who’s going to want a private rail 
line; it’s going to be one of the private operators, or some such 
arrangement with Manalta Coal. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this Bill raises a 
number of questions which I know I will be wanting to ask a 
number of detailed questions about when we get into committee 
on this Bill. And I hope that the minister has appropriate 
answers, because we’ll be asking a number of questions about 
rail line abandonment and the inter-relationship with the growth 
of private railways in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that the majority of railways in Saskatchewan are 
protected until the year 2000. However, after the year 2000, 
which is not too far away, Mr. Deputy Speaker, up to 50 per 
cent of those railways could be abandoned. We’ll want to know 
what the government . . . how the government is aiding and 
abetting the abandonment of rail lines in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The branch line rehabilitation program concludes in 1988 . . . 
1990 year, and I’ll want to know in committee, when the 
minister’s dealing with the detail of this Bill, what kind of 
financing commitment has been made to the province of 
Saskatchewan with regard to rail line rehabilitation, whether 
that commitment has been exhausted, and other terms with 
regard to the railways in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
What the private operators will be doing, as I said in my initial 
remarks, will be taking over the failures of the CN and the CP 
in rural Saskatchewan. We’ll want to know what kind of 
provisions will be made for these failures to be made valid 
operating entities in rural Saskatchewan to  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1919 
 

get our grain to market. We’ll want to know how all parties will 
be protected when this legislation’s put into effect, and how the 
private operators will have to answer to the public for the 
movement of public goods. 
 
So I serve notice on the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation that there are a number of questions that will 
have to be asked when this Bill gets into committee. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too would 
like to enter in this debate. There’s a number of areas that we 
have to look at in this Bill, and one of those being how this Bill 
is going to affect the national rail policy that is so necessary to 
have in place, especially for Saskatchewan, being the 
land-locked province, and how that will relate to the movement 
of grains and products out of this province that benefit Canada 
as a whole, not just Saskatchewan. 
 
We have to look at the process that we are possibly going 
through where . . . In the past, you’ll know that the government 
in Ottawa is trying to cut their transfer funds into 
Saskatchewan, and in turn the provincial government is passing 
on to municipal government, and eventually, of course, the 
taxpayers have to pick up that tab. 
 
In the whole movement of grain and the short-line railways, we 
have to remember that there are a number of instances in 
Saskatchewan where, through political manoeuvring, and 
through meeting with all the people involved, that it is being 
determined where the elevators are going to be located and 
where they won’t be located. And we have to ensure that the 
process that we’re going through now will not affect how and 
where elevators are placed, how lines are upgraded, and how 
elevators are upgraded. 
 
So there’s a number of areas of concern that I have in this area. 
But for right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hodgins that Bill No. 3 — An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Railway Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have very little to 
say on this Bill, which is consequential on the previous Bill 
we’ve just discussed. However, I think it’s suffice to say at this 
point that the main Bill that we’ve completed talking about at 
this point, completed second reading on, is the Bill that should 
be considered first, and the consequential Bill should follow 
afterwards. If that order is followed, I see no problem with the 
second reading of this particular Bill, and we’ll get into the 
main Bill in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Schmidt that Bill No. 9  

— An Act respecting Adoption be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a number of concerns about this 
piece of legislation. We’re not able to support this legislation in 
its current form, and I say that for a number of reasons. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are two parts of this Bill which are 
particularly objectionable. One part is a proposal for the 
Saskatchewan government to allow the establishment of private 
agencies that will handle, particularly, infant adoptions in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And clearly what the government’s agenda is, Mr. Speaker, is to 
have established two, or at the most three, private agencies in 
the province of Saskatchewan which will assume responsibility 
for a large portion or perhaps all infant adoptions in this 
province. 
 
And we have objections to that on a number of accounts, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, we have a concern about the ability of 
rural people and northern people to adequately access adoption 
services in the province of Saskatchewan. At this point in time, 
the people of Saskatchewan are well served through a number 
of regional offices of the Department of Social Services, where 
if they want to apply to be an adoptive parent or if they in some 
other way want to avail themselves of the adoption services 
offered by the Department of Social Services, they are able to 
do that, and they are able to do that without driving significant 
distances. 
 
In effect, what the result of this Bill and the changes that are 
being planned by the PC government and the Minister of Social 
Services, the member for Melville, in effect what will happen, 
Mr. Speaker, is that two or three private agencies will be 
established in the province of Saskatchewan which will have 
responsibility for handling the large bulk of infant adoptions in 
this province. And we are talking, Mr. Speaker, not about a 
large number of children. We’re probably talking about less 
than 100 children a year. 
 
Now the concern that we have about that, Mr. Speaker, is that 
clearly these agencies are going to establish in the major urban 
centres of the province of Saskatchewan. They will establish in 
centres like Regina and Saskatoon. In fact, we already have one 
private non-profit agency operating in the city of Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the result will be that we will see no more, I suspect, than 
three private agencies operating in this province. And that will 
mean that anyone who lives in Rockglen or who lives in La 
Ronge or much further north in this province will be at a very 
real disadvantage when it comes to accessing infant adoption 
services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Because in effect, it appears from all the planning that has gone 
on in conjunction with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that the agenda of 
the Minister of Social Services is to have the Department of 
Social Services basically get out of the infant adoption field. 
 
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1920 
 

Now that reality, Mr. Speaker, leads to a number of other 
important concerns. Because if you look at the way that the 
private agencies may well operate, and you realize that rural 
people are not going to be able to access adoption services and 
access the services delivered by those agencies as easily as 
urban people are, then clearly rural people and northern people 
are going to be at a disadvantage when it comes to adopting 
children. 
 
And I say this with a great deal of concern. And I’ve heard the 
Minister of Social Services, because I’ve raised this issue on 
previous occasions, say absolutely nothing to rebut it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You look at the way that Christian Counselling Services, for 
instance, in Saskatoon operates right now. And one can’t help 
but notice that the large majority of people who are on the 
waiting list for Christian Counselling Services in Saskatoon to 
adopt a child are, naturally enough, from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
But the question becomes, how will people in rural 
Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan adequately access 
these adoption services? And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they 
will be at a significant disadvantage. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a second concern with respect to 
the establishment of private agencies, and our second concern 
relates to the very real possibility that these agencies will 
charge a fee for their service and that in addition to that, as a 
result of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, the adoptive parents will 
have to pay legal fees and significant amounts of legal fees in 
order to complete the adoption process and adopt a child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all with respect to agency fees, the 
Minister of Social Services has already indicated that he would 
have, as I’ve understood it, no objection to private agencies 
charging fees. I find that, Mr. Speaker, and members on this 
side of the House find that to be very disturbing because, in our 
view, the ability to adopt a child should not depend on one’s 
ability to afford that adoption, Mr. Speaker. Instead, whether or 
not someone becomes an adoptive parent should depend solely 
on whether or not that family would be a good family for a 
child to be adopted into. That should be the sole criterion under 
which adoption takes place in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Social Services and the 
PC government wants to introduce into the equation is the 
question of the adoptive parents’ ability to afford an adoption. 
And what that will mean, Mr. Speaker, is that those who are 
well-to-do or at least middle income will be able to afford 
adoptions, and those who are of lower income will not be able 
to afford or at least easily afford to adopt a child — another 
two-tier system in the province of Saskatchewan that this 
government has become well-known for with its record over the 
last seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to elaborate on this concern, because 
although the agencies to be licensed, the private agencies to be 
licensed specifically under the Bill are to be non-profit 
agencies, obviously those non-profit agencies, private 
non-profit agencies will experience very significant costs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

First of all, there’ll be the cost of staffing the agency; the cost of 
renting a location; the cost basically of doing all the business 
that it will be responsible for with respect to the processing of 
the adoption. And, Mr. Speaker, that cost can only be handled if 
the Government of Saskatchewan is prepared to fully pay the 
agency for all those costs. And we have seen no indication from 
the Minister of Social Services that he is, in fact, prepared to 
cover those costs for the agencies that will establish. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you look at the record of the one 
agency that is operating now, namely Christian Counselling 
Services in Saskatoon, I am informed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
even Christian Counselling Services, although it’s been a pilot 
project, has not had its costs of undertaking the adoption service 
that it offers fully covered by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
It has had to pick up some of the costs itself through other 
moneys that it’s able to raise. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, even this pilot project was not fully 
funded by the Government of Saskatchewan. I think therefore 
that there is every reason to think that other private agencies 
that are established will not have their costs fully funded either. 
And if those private agencies don’t have all their costs covered 
by the Government of Saskatchewan, they will have no choice, 
Mr. Speaker, but to charge adoptive parents a fee for their 
service. And that, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable. It’s clearly 
unacceptable to members, at least on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I said that I believe that 
these private agencies will have to charge a fee and that the 
Minister of Social Services has no objection to that. 
 
And another reason, Mr. Speaker, why we are unfortunately 
confident that the minister fully intends for private agencies to 
charge a fee, is that recently, over the last 18 months, the 
Minister of Social Services has changed a number of the 
regulations governing post-adoption services in this province to 
require that adoptive parents and adoptive children and birth 
parents are all charged fees by the Department of Social 
Services when they take advantage of post-adoption services in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Social Services 
is the first Minister of Social Services in Canada to set fees, to 
charge fees to people for the provision of personal information 
about themselves when it comes to the post-adoption registry in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
If you, for instance . . . right now, a person wants to find out 
what the heritage of their birth parents were. If an adoptive 
child wants to know some information about their natural 
mother or their natural father, Mr. Speaker, if they want to 
know what their hair colour was or what their eye colour was or 
what their heritage was, do you  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1921 
 

know the Minister of Social Services charges $60 for that 
information, Mr. Speaker? — information that is only available 
through the Department of Social Services, information that no 
other province in Canada and no other minister of Social 
Services in Canada charges for, but this Minister of Social 
Services has sought to charge for that. Mr. Speaker, that 
information used to be free. It was free when the NDP was in 
office, but it’s not free under a Tory government in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if an adoptive child wants to make contact with 
their natural birth mother or their natural birth father, do you 
know, Mr. Speaker, that even if the Minister of Social Services 
and his officials know where the natural birth mother or natural 
birth father are, there’ll be a charge to the adoptive child of 
some $300 for them to make contact with their natural mother 
or father, even if the location of the natural birth mother or 
father is fully known by the Department of Social Services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that kind of charge is inexcusable, in our 
judgement, in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s inexcusable 
for the government to charge people for personal information 
about themselves and their natural family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now a government that is willing to charge people for that kind 
of personal information, which this government is willing to do, 
will have no hesitation at all to require that private adoption 
agencies charge adoptive parents for adoption services in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I fear that when this legislation is 
law, we will see private agencies take over the infant adoption 
services in this province. They will not be fully funded by this 
government. They will be forced to charge fees, and often, I 
believe, prohibitive fees to adoptive parents. And low income 
adoptive parents in this province will find the process of 
adoption very difficult in light of those charges. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see if that comes to pass. And I will be 
asking the Minister of Social Services detailed questions on this 
matter when we get to Committee of the Whole. But I have no 
doubt, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the agenda of the Minister of 
Social Services, and I believe that we will see that come to pass 
in the months after this Bill unfortunately becomes law. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the prospect of an agency fee, 
of the private agency charging a fee to adoptive parents for 
adoption services in this province, it’s also clear from this Bill 
that adoptive parents are going to have to pay legal fees, 
because this Bill rightly requires, in the case of, for instance, 
dealing with an agency, that an adoptive parent get independent 
legal advice. Now we have no problem with the notion that 
adoptive parents ought to get independent legal advice. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in our view the Department of Social Services should 
pay for that legal advice, not the adoptive parent. 
 
But that’s not what this Bill says. This Bill says that adoptive 
parents will be required by law, on several occasions during the 
adoption process, to get independent legal advice, and on each 
of those occasions, Mr. Speaker, they’ll have to pay for that 
advice themselves. That will undoubtedly come to several  

hundred dollars, and that’s something that many adoptive 
parents will not find easy to afford. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when someone becomes a parent, whether a 
natural parent or an adoptive parent, they take on a very 
important responsibility to society. Adoptive parents, Mr. 
Speaker, also perform a very important function for this society. 
They take on the responsibility of raising a child from the time 
of birth to 18 years, and in reality take on a responsibility that 
goes for many years beyond that. And that’s a responsibility 
that no adoptive parent takes lightly. And that’s a responsibility 
that society should express appreciation for. Society, I believe, 
appreciates adoptive parents taking on that task. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in my view, the least that the Department of 
Social Services can do is ensure that adoptive parents aren’t 
encumbered by significant amounts of expense, legal expense, 
during the process of adoption. And yet what does the Minister 
of Social Services choose to do? He chooses to place that 
expense clearly on the backs of adoptive parents, Mr. Speaker, 
and we on this side of the House believe that that’s 
inappropriate and unacceptable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have several other concerns with respect 
to this Bill, and I want to comment on them at this point. A 
second concern we have, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to the 
process as it relates to independent adoption. And I want to 
make it clear right now, Mr. Speaker, that I’m not referring to 
the process of step-parent adoption. It’s quite common, Mr. 
Speaker, that in the event of a death among a husband and wife, 
if the husband or the wife dies, it’s obviously not uncommon at 
a future date for the remaining partner to remarry. 
 
And it’s natural, upon that situation occurring, that the 
step-father or the step-mother will want to formally adopt the 
children of the previous marriage. And that’s perfectly 
understandable and very appropriate, and obviously we want to 
support that. And should that occur, Mr. Speaker, we on this 
side of the House don’t see any need for a detailed home study 
to be done before that adoption goes ahead. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House do believe that 
it’s very important for an independent home study to be done 
for all other kinds of independent adoption. It’s not good 
enough, Mr. Speaker, just to leave it to the discretion of a judge 
as to whether or not a home study and detailed research into the 
ability of a prospective adoptive family to adopt children should 
be . . . it’s not good enough to leave it up to a judge to decide 
whether or not that kind of research and that kind of home study 
should be done, which is what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker. This 
Bill does not require home studies to be done in the event of 
independent adoptions, and that is a very serious concern. 
 
For those members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, who are not 
familiar with what an independent adoption is, it very simply 
means a situation in which the natural mother or father, usually 
the natural birth mother, makes a decision, Mr. Speaker, about 
who will become the adoptive parent. In other words, the birth 
mother decides  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1922 
 

who will adopt her child. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, independent adoptions have been going on 
for some time in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ll 
continue to go on as a result of this Bill. And there is nothing 
wrong at all with that process except, Mr. Speaker, that before 
that adoption is completed, there ought to be a home study 
done. 
 
We should not just assume, Mr. Speaker, that the birth mother 
has made the right choice with respect to prospective adoptive 
parents without some kind of independent assessment taking 
place first. And in 95 per cent of cases, Mr. Speaker, the birth 
mother will have made the right choice. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there should be a check done, for instance, to 
make sure that the prospective adoptive parents don’t have a 
criminal record. There should be a check done to make sure that 
there are not other serious social problems within the 
prospective adoptive parent family that would make the 
placement of a child inappropriate in that family or with those 
adoptive parents, Mr. Speaker. We require, by law, independent 
studies to be done for all other forms of adoption in the 
province of Saskatchewan, but the Minister of Social Services 
wants to exempt independent adoptions from that process, Mr. 
Speaker, and we believe, on this side of the House, that that’s 
inappropriate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are two or three more minor issues 
that we would want to raise with respect to this Bill. One is, Mr. 
Speaker, that I note with some concern in the Bill that there is a 
provision in this legislation for independent legal advice, which 
is good, except it should . . . the cost should be covered, as I 
mentioned before, by the Department of Social Services. But 
there is no provision in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
independent psychological and emotional counselling for birth 
parents and, if necessary, for adoptive parents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is it that the Minister of Social 
Services thinks that getting independent legal advice is so 
important but that there is no importance attached to 
independent psychological and emotional counselling, which is 
just as important, in our view, as the legal advice when it comes 
to the adoption process, Mr. Speaker, because this is above all a 
social process rather than a legal process. And yet there is no 
assistance offered and no provision for covering cost of 
assistance offered in this Bill for social, emotional, and 
psychological counselling, Mr. Speaker, and I think that that 
should be covered. It should be provided for under this Bill. 
Those sorts of services really ought to be offered by the 
Department of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, and yet we see 
nothing in the Bill with respect to that. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I also note with some concern that the 
Minister of Social Services has chosen to change the Bill that he 
originally brought in last year, in 1988, respecting adoption in 
one very important area. And that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
he has chosen to change the period of time during which a birth 
mother can revoke a consent to adoption. 
 
Now I think this is an important issue, Mr. Deputy  

Speaker. A decision by a birth mother to put her child up for an 
adoption is obviously a very major, major decision. It’s not 
something that any birth mother does lightly. And we’ve seen 
fit in this legislature and as a society to put in place a provision 
whereby birth mothers can change their mind after they’ve 
consented to the adoption, within a reasonable period of time. 
And the period of time that was provided in the legislation that 
was brought in in 1988 was a period of 30 days which, in my 
judgement, was reasonable. 
 
Now there is a good deal of hardship created, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when a birth mother does change her mind with 
respect to consenting to an adoption and revoking the adoption 
order because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the adoptive parents, 
during that 30-day period, have obviously begun to bond with 
the child that they’ve adopted. And it’s very, very hard on 
adoptive parents in the event that a birth mother does choose to 
revoke her consent to adoption. It’s very hard on those adoptive 
parents, and no one wants to diminish the impact that it has on a 
couple who’ve just adopted a child, when they suddenly find 
out that that consent to adoption has been revoked. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a very major 
decision for any woman in this society to make the difficult 
decision to put her child up for an adoption. That is always an 
extremely difficult decision, and it’s a decision that should 
never be taken lightly. And it’s a decision that people 
sometimes have serious doubts about, and in some cases, Mr. 
Speaker, upon having serious second thoughts about it, it’s a 
decision that they choose to change. 
 
Now what the Minister of Social Services is doing under this 
Bill is he is reducing the amount of time that he was originally 
proposing for this consent to adoption to be revoked. He’s 
reducing it from 30 days to only 14 days. In other words, 
following the adoption and the consent to adoption, a birth 
mother has only 14 days now, under this Bill, to change her 
mind. 
 
(1545) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that her decision to put her 
child up for adoption is such a major decision in her life that she 
has a right to have a period of 30 days to change her mind and 
to revoke the consent to adoption if she chooses to do that. And 
I don’t think that the Minister of Social Services should take 
that away from her, Mr. Speaker, which is what’s being done 
under this Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say then that on at least four accounts this 
Bill is wanting, and on two accounts, very seriously. First of all, 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill 9, on adoption, is objectionable 
because it proposes to place the process of infant adoption in 
the hands of private agencies rather than the Department of 
Social Services. And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Department of Social Services was, generally speaking, doing a 
fair and equitable job in terms of offering quality adoption 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Clearly the agenda of the government is to move the adoption 
services into the hands of private agencies. And  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1923 
 

as I said, Mr. Speaker, we find it objectionable that there will be 
only two or three private agencies in the province of 
Saskatchewan that will handle these infant adoptions, and that 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, adoption services will not be accessible 
to the people of rural Saskatchewan and the people of northern 
Saskatchewan who will be at a significant disadvantage, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to accessing adoption services in the 
province. Because the private agencies will be located in 
Saskatoon and in Regina and will be able to provide service to 
people in those cities, but people in Rockglen and in Buffalo 
Narrows will no longer be able to access infant adoption 
services in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ll no longer be 
able to rely on their local regional office of the Department of 
Social Services; they’ll have to go to the private agencies, and 
therefore will have unequal access to adoption services in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that’s our first 
concern. 
 
Our second concern, Mr. Speaker, is that we object to the 
principle that adoptive parents should have to pay legal fees for 
adoption services and should have to pay what may well be 
hefty agency fees for adoption services. And this Bill ensures 
that adoptive parents will have to pay legal fees on at least three 
occasions when they adopt a child, which will run them several 
hundred dollars at least. And we object, Mr. Speaker, to the 
notion that private agencies should be allowed to charge fees to 
adoptive parents in the province of Saskatchewan, which will 
clearly happen once this Bill comes into force. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, we object to the provision in this Bill which 
fails to ensure that when independent adoptions take place in 
the province of Saskatchewan, there will be a home study done 
before the independent adoption is completed. And as I 
mentioned, we’re not talking here about step-parent adoptions; 
we’re talking about other independent adoptions. What this Bill 
in effect does in my judgement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it 
makes independent adoptions easier in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it makes no provision at all for home studies 
to be done before independent adoptions go ahead. And that, in 
our judgement, is highly inappropriate. 
 
There is no basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for saying that all other 
adoptions will be subject to a home study but independent 
adoptions will not be. We believe that the Bill should be 
changed to ensure that whenever an independent adoption is 
done, a home study will be done first. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, we object to the provisions in this Bill 
which will continue to allow the Government of Saskatchewan 
to charge unreasonable fees for post-adoption services in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We find it, Mr. Speaker, highly 
objectionable that adoptive parents should have to pay $60 just 
to get some information on the medical history of the birth 
parents of the child that they’ve adopted. 
 
We find it objectionable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that an adoptive 
child should have to pay hundreds of dollars to make contact 
through the Department of Social Services with her natural 
father or natural mother, particularly when the Department of 
Social Services already has the location of the birth parents on 
hand in their office. 
 

We think it should be a basic principle of this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, that adoptive children, birth parents, and adoptive 
parents should not have to pay for personal information about 
themselves or about the child that they’ve adopted. And this 
Bill will ensure that that continues to be the case in the province 
of Saskatchewan, the only province in Canada that charges 
people hefty fees for personal information about themselves 
when it comes to the adoption process. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we object to the fact that there is no 
provision in this Bill for people to get independent counselling 
during the adoption process or prior to or after the adoption 
process in the province of Saskatchewan. Surely, if it’s 
important to get independent legal advice prior to an adoption 
being completed, it’s only reasonable that people should also 
have access to independent counselling, and yet this Bill makes 
no provision for that at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that the Department of Social Services should be 
paying for the legal costs, not the adoptive parent. We believe 
that the Department of Social Services should be paying for the 
counselling advice, not the adoptive parent. It should be a basic 
rule in this province, Mr. Speaker — and this gets to the heart 
of the Bill and the fundamental difference that we have on this 
side from members opposite on the government side, and that is 
that we believe that the sole criterion for adoption in the 
province of Saskatchewan should be whether or not the 
prospective adoptive parents would make good parents for the 
prospective adoptive child; whether they would be a good 
family for a child to be adopted into and to live with for the rest 
of their childhood life, until they become an adult; and that 
what should not be a criterion is whether or not those 
prospective adoptive parents have the ability to pay for legal 
costs and agency costs and counselling costs during the 
adoption service. 
 
And the government members opposite have chosen to place 
the burden for those costs on the adoptive parent, rather than 
those costs being covered by the Department of Social Services, 
as they are now. And we take strong objection to that, Mr. 
Speaker. We take strong objection to that, and for that reason 
we will be opposing Bill 9. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 11 — An Act to 
amend The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I have a number of concerns I want to raise when we get into 
the Committee of the Whole. But first of all, in respect to it, I 
hope you will assure the House that in moving the amendments, 
that you have had contact with the various groups that are 
interested in respect to the compensation paid under this 
particular Act. 
 
And I note that the Law Reform Commission has basically 
recommended, Mr. Minister, that governments should  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1924 
 

compensate crime victims for their suffering, even if they’re not 
totally innocent. That was the recommendation of the Law 
Reform Commission, and I don’t see that provision being 
adopted within the legislation. 
 
In fact, I think there are some positive aspects to your 
amendments, but also there are some which I think are less 
favourable to the victims seeking compensation under the Act. 
 
I see where you indicate that there can be interim payments 
made, which wasn’t provided before. And I think that makes 
good sense, interim payments before the board has made their 
final ruling. 
 
The difficulty that I see is that after they reasonably satisfy 
themselves that there’s likely to be an order made in favour of 
compensation, that the board then can go back, in the event that 
they should rule the other way, on the recovery of that money. 
That puts those people in very, very difficult circumstances, 
because why the money is being granted in the first place, one 
of the considerations is the financial position of the individual, 
where their financial needs are very great, and that’s why the 
interim is put into effect. But it’s just like welfare payments. 
Once granted by the department — and then for financial 
reasons — and then if it’s reasonably substantial and then if the 
board should decide otherwise, you say they can come back and 
recover that money. That puts them into a very, very difficult 
situation. 
 
I think a couple of other aspects of that. I note in the Bill, and I 
don’t want to go section by section just on the general 
principles, but I notice that you have also included the right of 
the subrogation similar to the compensation board. And I take it 
that provision was not there before. And I guess I don’t disagree 
with that, but the provision which I take a little exception to, I 
think, is in respect to where an individual has received a 
compensation and then subsequently he is the actor or causes an 
injury to someone else, then you have a situation where you 
deduct any payments to the extent of the previous compensation 
that he received. This is really in respect to section 39. 
 
I would have thought that the merits would be based on the 
particular facts there and would not relate back in respect to a 
previous offence, that he may have caused compensation to be 
paid. I don’t know why you relate the two in respect to that, that 
that’s really basically section 39. 
 
Those are our general comments. I want to go into some of the 
specific details of your amendments . . . generally supportive of 
those, with some explanations in respect to a couple of the 
issues that I have raised, Mr. Minister. And further, whether or 
not and why you have not, in fact, considered the Law Reform 
Commission’s recommendation, and whether or not that report 
could be made public in order to see whether or not those 
recommendations are somewhat consistent with the other 
amendments that you have made in respect to the Bill. Other 
than some specific questions on a few of the specific sections, 
we will be supporting the amendments. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Is that the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan, the Law Reform Commission? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, yes. Yes, the Saskatchewan Law Reform 
Commission. And it made that recommendation that 
government should compensate crime victims of their suffering 
even if they’re not totally innocent. And that was the 
recommendation of the Law Reform Commission. 
 
With those comments, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to support 
the amendments, and we’ll deal with some of the specifics in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1600) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 12 — An Act 
respecting Regulations be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
respect to the amendments to The Regulations Act, well 
actually the Act may be cited as The Regulations Act, 1989. 
 
As the minister has indicated here, and we’re in concurrence 
with it, is that the major purpose of the Act is to introduce what 
is termed "the key word test" to determine what a regulation, in 
fact, is. 
 
Under existing Act, a regulation is defined as a regulation, rule, 
order, or by-law of a legislative nature. And what is happening 
now is that there is going to be a clear test decided by the 
Legislative Assembly, I take it, as to determination of what 
really is a regulation. We concur with that. 
 
I note also that Manitoba has introduced similar clarification. I 
believe Alberta is working on it and British Columbia. So in 
that respect, we are in concurrence. 
 
I take it that the recommendation for the "key word test" was 
recommended back in 1983 by the uniform law conference and 
forms part of the uniform regulations Act. 
 
I think generally it’s a step forward. There’s a couple of items 
which we’ll deal with in clauses. And the potential for the 
retroactivity of regulations, I want to raise that, and why you 
would seem to need retroactivity in regulations. And that 
potential is set forward. 
 
One other aspect that you have changed, and we’re not hung up 
on it a lot, but the minister here now appoints the registrar of 
regulations, rather than the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
I note also in looking at a couple of the other Acts, they have 
also adopted the right of the minister to appoint the registrar. I 
don’t think it’s a big item, but perhaps we could have your 
rationale in respect to that. 
 
But generally speaking, we will be supporting the  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1925 
 

amendments . . . or the Act, and have those specific questions 
during the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 13 — An Act 
respecting Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting 
from the enactment of The Regulations Act, 1989 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill is 
consequential in respect to The Regulations Act which we just 
discussed, and subject to the comments and the clarifications in 
The Regulations Act that I raised with the minister, we will be 
supporting that. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, with the 
indulgence of the Clerks, if we could move to item number 11, 
Bill No. 19, and deal with that, and then deal with item number 
10, Bill No. 16, The Clean Air Amendment Act. Only in the 
sense that the hon. member has had then the four Bills that he’s 
dealing with and they’re somewhat related. If you could do that, 
please. 
 
The Speaker: — With leave of the House, we can do that. Is 
the House agreed? 
 
Okay, then we’ll do that. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 19 — An Act 
respecting Victims of Crime be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve taken a look at 
the new Bill, The Victims of Crime Act. I want to note that this 
Bill is being passed . . . or being submitted here in 
contemplation, I take it, of an amendment to the Criminal Code 
which is going to be putting a surcharge in respect to levies or 
fines imposed on those who have committed a crime. 
 
We will want to discuss whether or not this overlaps in respect 
to the crime compensation Act or whether it has a separate 
defined purpose. In looking at the purposes of this, it seems to 
be somewhat akin to what is being covered under the previous 
Act that we dealt with, and therefore we want that clarification. 
 
Also I guess what we would like to know whether you have any 
knowledge, Mr. Minister, in respect to the anticipated surcharge 
that is likely to be imposed. Our understanding is that it’s 
somewhere around 15 per cent. I don’t know if that’s accurate 
or not. But other than that, clarification as to whether or not 
there’s overlapping, we will want to know those particular 
inquiries. But in principle, I think we would be prepared to 
support you again in respect to the legislation. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Swan that Bill No. 16 — An Act to 
amend The Clean Air Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s not in his seat; he cannot 
speak. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
critic, I would move that we adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to enter into the 
debate on Bill No. 20, the potash corporation reorganization 
Act. And I want to say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
indicated our concern in respect to the government’s obsession 
with privatization and indeed the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a situation that we’re dealing with, the privatization 
which this Bill would in fact effect at a time when the industry 
has turned around. 
 
This year the government was able to report that the people of 
Saskatchewan benefitted by the potash corporation to the tune 
of $106 million — $106 million into the coffers of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And indeed if you look at other 
Crown corporations, you will find that, not only with potash but 
others, that this government has been able to raise a very 
substantial amount of revenue for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that the people of Saskatchewan should be concerned 
with what is happening because the record of this government 
in respect to privatization is not one that is to be envied. And in 
this Bill here, Mr. Speaker, what the government proposes to do 
is to sell some 55 per cent of the potash, that amount which they 
decide to sell, to privatize — 55 per cent of it can be sold to 
residents. But within that definition of residents, it means all 
Canadians. 
 
And we here, here we see a contradiction, a very major, basic 
contradiction in the government. On the one hand they’re 
saying everything is being given to eastern Canada; that’s 
where the industry is; we have to diversify; we have to build. 
And in the next step what we’re doing is allowing eastern 
Canada to take control of our economic destiny by the 
privatization which this Bill purports. 
 
There’s no doubt that a large proportion of the equity in this 
potash corporation, if privatized, will be owned by eastern 
Canada. And it seems to me, as we have been saying on this 
side of the House, that we have to be in control of our own 
economic destiny here. And one way of doing that was to use 
joint ventures and Crown corporations. And I’ve always said, 
Crown corporations — I don’t believe in total ownership by 
government any  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1926 
 

more than the members on the other side do. But we have to 
analyse how we develop our economy, and it seems to me that a 
Crown corporation having a window to the industry is of 
immense value to the people of this province. 
 
And all I can say is in respect to . . . I want to say in respect to 
using the analogy of Saskoil, we had a window into the industry 
and that Saskoil gave to the people of Saskatchewan in ’85, I 
believe, the last year it was not privatized, $44 million. And that 
was operating on the same ground rules as the privates. And so 
we knew we were being reasonable in our taxation policies and 
that we were getting the maximum amount for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now those that say it has to be all privatized, one, disregard the 
difficulty that we have had in the laborious efforts that we’ve 
had in order to build a strong economy here in Saskatchewan to 
increase the population growth. And I think by the total 
privatization, basically the people of Saskatchewan will be 
losing control of a very important industry. 
 
I think if the government was serious that they’re dealing with 
the people of Saskatchewan in privatization, and I would concur 
with some notion along these lines. But if you wanted to, over a 
period of years with Saskatchewan people, totally 
Saskatchewan people, setting up an entrepreneurial group that 
can run potash mines, that we do that. But for us to take what is 
making piles of money — $106 million this year — and 
suddenly saying, for the sake of privatization we’re going to 
turn it over to the financial barons down in Toronto and 
Montreal and it’s going to be better for the people of 
Saskatchewan, I’m not one that believes that. 
 
I say that the people of Saskatchewan have worked and used all 
of the cylinders of development of the economy, and potash 
demonstrates that. The records will show, Mr. Speaker, if you 
go back you will find that during the years that we were in 
government from 1976 to 1982, every successive year, millions 
of dollars were poured into the province of Saskatchewan — 
millions of dollars — over $400 million during those period of 
time, benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s over and 
above paying those same royalties as private companies. 
 
Now where do you suppose that profit would go if it was owned 
in Montreal or in Hong Kong or in China? It not necessarily 
would be reinvested here in the province of Saskatchewan. Not 
necessarily, in fact, not likely. 
 
And so what we’re saying here, I think we had the best of both 
worlds. We had public participation in about 40, 45 per cent of 
the production. And that has gone up a little, perhaps up to 48 
per cent of the productive capacity under public ownership. 
And I’m not saying that we have to be frozen at that level, but if 
you’re going to divest, surely there can be a plan that the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan can have over a period of time, 
rather than turning it loose to the outside interests. 
 
(1615) 
 
It baffles my mind to see the Premier and the Minister of  

Finance take their trip to the Far East and come back here and 
say: Japan is excited about buying in; China is interested in 
buying in; Taiwan wants to buy in; Korea wants to buy in. Well 
can you imagine why they want to come over to Saskatchewan 
and buy in? 
 
Two reasons: one is they want to have control of a major 
resource to supply their own market through their investment; 
secondly, investors don’t invest unless there’s profit. Major 
corporations don’t invest unless it’s a relatively good deal. And 
under this government, I’ll tell you, under their privatization 
kick it’s the best deal that money can buy. 
 
Because what they do here in privatization is to undervalue the 
asset, set the valuation way low, make it enticing for those to 
purchase shares, and they get an asset twice the value of what 
they’re being offered to the public. And of course there will be 
takers. And then after they get that set up, they say, well it’s 
going to be 60 per cent government and so much privatized. 
Well isn’t that a great deal. 
 
Because just like with Saskoil, the same thing will happen with 
potash. With Saskoil we were going to have 60 per cent, and 
then it was down to 40 per cent, and now it’s down to 20-some 
per cent. You know what they’ve done? They’ve allowed the 
shareholders, the private shareholders, to go out and raise 
additional money through share offerings, and as a 
consequence, the equity by the provincial government, who 
receives nothing, is decreased and we’ve gone from 60 per cent 
down to somewhere in the 20, 24 per cent equity in Saskoil. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Crown corporations here 
in Saskatchewan, and indeed potash, have brought many 
benefits to this province. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, would there 
have been the headquarters of an oil company in Regina like 
Saskoil if it had not been for the Blakeney administration 
founding Saskoil? I ask you, Mr. Speaker, would there be a 
head office for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan if we 
did not have the vision and the foresight of wanting to develop 
industry which should be developed here? 
 
We brought, by public ownership, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to Saskatoon. And don’t tell me that hasn’t been 
a tremendous asset to Saskatchewan and to Saskatchewan 
people and to Saskatoon. It never otherwise would have been. 
By the very nature of having some considerable investment in 
the potash by the people of Saskatchewan, it also indicates 
clearly by having that investment that the people of 
Saskatchewan are the ones who get the benefits. 
 
I looked at one of the pocket manuals that were put out by the 
party opposite, the PC Party of Saskatchewan. And this was 
back in about, I believe, 1982, their pocket . . . Speaking of 
points, that’s what it was. 
 
And we get into privatization, and the question is asked in 
there: are you going to privatize the potash? Are you going to 
privatize Crown corporations? And the answer in the manual: 
why would we want to privatize a corporation which the people 
of Saskatchewan already own? That’s what they said in their 
own manual. That’s  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1927 
 

what the Tories were telling the people of Saskatchewan. Why 
would we privatize Crown corporations? — this is when they 
were trying to get elected — because the people of 
Saskatchewan own them, they said. And now they go with 
privatization. 
 
Do you know what they give to the people of Saskatchewan, 
their share in privatization? They give the potash mines — they 
intend to — to foreigners and outside Canadians in Bay Street 
in Toronto. Do you know what they give to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Bonds, just like Canada Savings Bonds. And 
they call that participating in the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that this debate in respect to potash is certainly 
one of the most important. And certainly during the debate 
under the Blakeney administration when we were getting the 
public investment into the potash, that debate lasted some 72 
days, somewhere in that neighbourhood. There was no talk then 
by the premier because it was an important economic decision 
being made. There was no decision that they were going to cut 
off the debate. That debate carried on on a major issue in 
Saskatchewan for a considerable length of time — about 70 
days, somewhere in that neighbourhood. 
 
And what I am saying, that this is another major step. And on 
the record of the government of this day, on their steps that they 
have taken so far in privatization, there is no earthly way that 
we can in good conscience allow more of the assets of the 
people of Saskatchewan to be squandered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Because that is what’s happening under this 
administration. It’s a squandering of our heritage, it’s a 
squandering of our resources, it’s a give-away to outsiders. And 
I’ll tell you, we intend to debate as heavily here in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, as the opposition did when we went 
into the public ownership of some of the potash mines. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is an historic debate for the 
people of this province. And we can turn our back on our past 
and on our history and on our pioneers. And we can turn our 
backs on something that worked so well in Saskatchewan under 
the previous administration. This province, for the use and the 
development of its resources, both publicly and privately, was 
the best managed province in all of North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — This province, under that administration, with 
Crown corporations, with private investment, with joint 
ventures, with co-operatives, had the lowest per capita debt in 
all of the nation. This administration, under Allan Blakeney, 
with the use of the potash corporation — which we’re talking 
about giving away to foreigners because it’s making too much 
money, says the Tories . . . As the leader said the other day, 
there’s two reasons why they want to privatize potash: one, it’s 
not making enough money; and two, it’s making too much 
money. 
 
That’s the Tory argument. Two reasons for giving it away.  

And so I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we can go back and we can 
transplant Margaret Thatcher’s right-wing philosophy here into 
Saskatchewan, and we can bring in her hired hands to tell us 
how to run our province, but I’ll tell you, the record is there. 
This province was well run under the administration of Allan 
Blakeney, and it was the admiration of every other province in 
Canada. And it was balanced budgets, not $13 billion in debt as 
we massively continue to privatize and get no benefits. That’s 
the Tory record in this legislature and during the last six years. 
 
Privatization. And what have we got? Have we got jobs? We 
got 42,000 people unemployed. We got almost 12 per cent 
unemployed in Saskatoon. We got massive debt — $4 billion of 
debt just on this Consolidated Fund. 
 
And these amateurs are going to now turn around and tell the 
people of Saskatchewan: let us continue to do the good things 
for you. Privatize a little more, they’ll say. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So much more we can be. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, so much more we can be if we listen to 
the rhetoric of the members opposite. 
 
What a flop. Has anyone ever seen a government in seven years 
do more damage to a province than this government has done? 
You give me one single sign of making steps forward. And 
there are none. There are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What are we to expect that we’re going to get 
out of the privatization of potash under that administration. Can 
you believe it? Are our tills going to be filled here? Is the 
services going to be increased for the people of Saskatchewan? 
Well I ask the people whether they are better off having 
privatized what has been privatized here in the province today. 
 
Are we better off with SaskTel . . . of SaskTel, portions of it 
being privatized? Are we better off having privatized Saskoil? 
Well I’ll tell you, we made $44 million in 1985, but I’ll tell you, 
that government cannot point to having made that much money 
out of Saskoil since they privatized. But I’ll tell you, there are 
some people making money, but it’s not the people of 
Saskatchewan that are getting the benefits. 
 
And here’s what they want to do. And they say, let the good 
times roll. Let’s change the map of this province. In fact, the 
Minister of Justice said this is more than just economics; what 
we want to do is change the people sociologically. We’ve got to 
change their thinking of working together and building as they 
have before. We’ve got to get them thinking like the Tories, that 
everyone is a capitalist and everybody buys shares and 
everybody becomes rich. What a myth, perpetrated. But they sit 
at 23 per cent in the polls and are whining now because the 
people of Saskatchewan have turned on them, and turn on them 
they should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, privatization is going to do it for us. When 
we took public ownership into the potash, you  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1928 
 

know what the Tory line and the then Liberal opposition line? 
— you’re buying holes in the ground, they said, worthless holes 
in the ground we’re buying. So what do they do now? Suddenly 
that worthless hole in the ground is worth over $2 billion in 
assets. 
 
How can they have so much to give away to their friends on 
their privatization scheme if there wasn’t success in building 
during the 11 years of the Blakeney administration? How can 
there be billions of dollars of assets to squander off to their 
friends if there had not been building under the New 
Democratic? Building we did, and we provided the best 
services to the people of Saskatchewan, and you can’t deny it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Privatization, they say. Yes. We’re going to be 
great for the people as they leave the province by the thousands. 
That’s what’s happened. Every time they privatize, there’s 
fewer opportunities. 
 
I think in the first five months we have close to 14,000 people 
that left this province — in the first five months. And these 
people can try to convince the people of this province that they 
have an economic policy that works. Well I say it’s rubbish, and 
I say the people of Saskatchewan no longer trust this 
government, no longer trust the judgement, no longer trust the 
management of their affairs to the people opposite. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say, we can mortgage the future 
of our people and of our province. The Premier of this province 
says he has a vision of the future. This vision of the future is 
simple and it’s very succinct. And I want to be fair in this 
debate. I want to be fair of the simple political gamesmanship 
that is being played. 
 
So I will describe the vision of the new Saskatchewan in the 
words of the Premier himself. He said, Mr. Speaker, at a news 
conference to announce the final figure of the Saskatchewan 
Power bonds, these words, Mr. Speaker. These are his words; 
this is his vision. This is the kind of leadership he wants to 
provide to our province. This is our future and our children’s 
future, as seen by our Premier. And I quote: 
 

We will turn this province over to everyone who wants to 
participate. 
 

We will turn this province over to whoever wants to participate, 
disregarding the rights and the work and the effort of the people 
that have built it. 
 
Here is a man that . . . the Premier that was prepared to go to 
China prior to the revolution taking place, who had almost 
committed a sale of 25 per cent of our potash resources to the 
communist government of China. That’s what he promised. 
And now he says, well we can’t do that. Suddenly there’s a 
revolution, these guys are bad now; he didn’t know that before. 
So now he says, but we can go ahead yet with potash. We can 
go ahead and privatize it because, you know, he said there’s the 
Japanese that will buy in, or Taiwan, or Korea, or Hong  

Kong money. You bet they’ll buy in. 
 
But I ask the people of Saskatchewan, and I ask the Premier: 
why do we have to have the Japanese come in and buy into a 
resource as valuable as our potash and have them take it over 
and do the selling for us and become a middleman? Why can’t 
we keep the profits here for the people of Saskatchewan? And 
certainly privatization of the potash will reduce the profits to 
the people of this province — no doubt. 
 
But the Premier’s vision — and I want to state it again: "We 
will turn this province over to everyone who wants to 
participate." So she’s wide open regardless of their 
philosophical . . . or whether or not they’re a stable government, 
or whether or not we could do it better ourselves. We are no 
longer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, open for business. Our province is 
up for sale, and it’s cheap. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is not a vision. This is a nightmare to the 
people of Saskatchewan and the people that have built this 
province. 
 
I’d like to preface my remarks with a brief economic history of 
our province and of Canada. The members opposite will 
understand some of this information because one of their 
colleagues, Sir John A. Macdonald developed what he called a 
national policy. And key features of the policy was a protective 
tariff, western settlement, and a transcontinental railway. And 
I’ll tie this in to this debate. And as a result of this policy, 
Ontario became the major manufacturing centre for Canada and 
western Canada became a major resource centre for central 
Canada, and to a significant extent became dependent upon the 
vagaries of weather and of the international price of wheat. 
 
A second significant factor that emerged from the national 
policy was the establishment of branch plant economy in central 
Canada. As U.S. producers jumped over the tariff wall and set 
up subsidiaries in eastern Canada, as a result of . . . as a result, 
significant sectors of the Canadian economy have a substantial 
degree of foreign ownership, and the development, Mr. 
Speaker, of what has been called a branch plant mentality 
within our business community. 
 
Well as the West developed, it became apparent to most people 
residing here, Mr. Speaker, that while we couldn’t do much 
about the weather, we could certainly do more to control our 
economic destiny. And so we did. We had, as I said before, 
people working together, building together, the co-operative 
movement, public enterprise, private enterprise, joint ventures. 
And that’s always a necessary mix in western Canada, for all 
too often eastern business leadership did not want to participate. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the history of our efforts here in western 
Canada, here in Saskatchewan, is one of going it alone. Did the 
business community in eastern Canada help us when we 
established our co-operatives and our wheat pool? I say, no. No, 
Mr. Speaker, they did not. They weren’t interested in 
participating. 
 
I ask: did the banking community of eastern Canada come to 
help us to establish our credit unions here in  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1929 
 

Saskatchewan? No, credit unions were established because the 
banking community of eastern Canada had no interest in 
western Canada. No, Mr. Speaker, the banks did not. They 
weren’t interested to participate. 
 
And I ask you again: did the steel industry in eastern Canada 
help us to establish when we founded Ipsco here in Regina? The 
steel industry did not. They weren’t interested in participating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of this province is a history of our 
people working together to build our solutions for our 
problems. And we did a good job. The people of our province 
can look with pride at our achievement, and they look with 
horror at the emergence of the so-called privatization ethic 
espoused by the members of the government. Privatization runs 
counter to values held by most of the people in this province 
and certainly the recent polls have indicated the opposition to 
the privatization. 
 
If we take a look at the recent Reid poll, over 50 per cent of the 
people that were polled indicated clearly that they were opposed 
to the privatization of potash. Close to 70 per cent said they 
were opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
And so here in Saskatchewan we have a long history, a growth 
in our development of how we can better build our economy. 
And it happened through the efforts of our pioneers and the 
former premiers of this province, other elected officials, the 
credit union, the co-op movement. And it took place because of 
public investment. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the people of 
our province can look with pride at our achievement. 
Privatization runs counter, as I said, to the values held by the 
people of this province. Privatization did not build this 
province, but privatization Tory-style is going to help destroy 
this province. 
 
I can really say, Mr. Speaker, with all sincerity, I was born and 
raised in this province. My parents homesteaded in 1905. We 
have a great attachment to the development of this province. 
And I can honestly say what I’ve seen during the last seven 
years of the waste and mismanagement and the misguided 
policy of privatization is doing great harm to this once very 
proud province. 
 
As I said, we’ve been privatizing, and now we want to privatize 
more of the potash corporation — more. And what have we 
achieved, Mr. Speaker? The problem is that we have not been 
achieving anything for the people of Saskatchewan because as I 
said, the statistics doesn’t support that. 
 
If privatization, Mr. Speaker, had been the prevailing economic 
orthodoxy here in Saskatchewan, virtually every institution we 
know today would be non-existent. Privatization, in my view, 
and private ownership, is done solely for one reason, and that is 
profit. And I’m not against profit, nor am I against the purpose 
that private companies have as their motive. But I’ll tell you, 
you cannot build a strong western Canada or a strong province 
simply by allowing outside capital to come in  

and to rape our resources and give nothing in return. And that’s 
what has been happening. 
 
I talked to a farmer friend of mine on Monday, a large farmer 
with his sons. They farm 50, 60 quarters of land — and good 
supporters, by the way. They believe in initiative and they 
believe in ownership, but they also believe that the government 
has to have an economic policy that is decent for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And they said, this government is out of tune; 
this government is out of tune with the people and the desires of 
the people of this province. That’s what they’re saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When you look at Saskatchewan and the people 
who built this province, the architects of Saskatchewan, we see 
the farmers and we see the workers and we see the professional 
people and we see politicians, but with a common cause, and 
that is to build and to make this a better place for its people and 
for the children of those parents. 
 
Look at the people who back privatization. Look at them. Well I 
guess it’s the media buyers will support privatization. 
Investment dealers will certainly support privatization. 
Communication advisers will support privatization of potash. 
Underwriters will support it. Consultants, bankers will. 
 
But I ask, Mr. Speaker, how many people do you really believe 
are going to be able to be in a position to really participate in 
buying shares that are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange? 
Very, very few people in this province have shares in 
companies. And do you realize that regardless of the ratio that 
they set — 55 per cent Canadian content or ownership, 45 per 
cent foreign — you know as well as I do, Mr. Speaker, and 
members opposite, that doesn’t matter a whit what percentages 
they put in. 
 
Let’s go back to a Saskatchewan-based company that this 
government supported. Let’s take a look at Pioneer Trust where 
people throughout this whole province bought shares. Do you 
think those shareholders really had a say as that company was 
driven into the ground by a few of the executive officers that we 
have discussed in this House before? Of course they didn’t. I’ll 
tell you, the executive branch runs the large corporations, and 
they run them to their interest and not to the interests of the 
people of this province, and the taxpayers. 
 
But as the Tories said before the election, why would we 
privatize potash, or why would we privatize SaskPower. After 
all, the people own them already. Well then they told the truth. 
But then they got into government and suddenly, suddenly they 
decided that they would have to go privatization of the potash 
corporation. 
 
Let me come back, Mr. Speaker. As I said, these were the 
builders of the province. These people made no bones about the 
nature of their work — buy or sell, up or down, just keep them 
trading. That’s what the stockbrokers say. They just pile up 
commission and margins as the players vie against each other 
over control, completely detached from the real world of goods 
and services. And this, Mr.  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1930 
 

Speaker, for the members opposite, is the new Jerusalem, their 
vision of what they want to see here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I prefer to see Saskatchewan for the people 
of Saskatchewan, ordinary people working together, building 
together, creating together Saskatchewan solutions for 
Saskatchewan problems and for real participation of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1645) 
 
It’s our future and I think the people of Saskatchewan have a 
right to be involved in the direction of the building of our 
economy. I say we have to build for our future which is made in 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people and by Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
In the privatization that the Tories are spewing to the people of 
this province, they try to use the British experience. And I want 
to go into a little bit of the British experience to indicate to the 
people of Saskatchewan the major, major risks that they take in 
allowing this government to go any further in the wrecking of 
the economy of this province. 
 
If you’re getting a fair deal, if they were business men, if they 
had competence, if they were up front, if they had advisers that 
we in fact could have confidence in, that’s one thing. But look 
what has happened in this House just over one small deal — the 
4 million, $5 million that have been blown, sucked out of this 
province. And you guys couldn’t even manage $5 million with 
one single Quebec French Canadian business man from 
Montreal — took you to the cleaners. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are going to have this same 
bunch, this group of incompetents, deal with their resources . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Initially, my friend, they did. They 
said yes, we’ll go along with you. But the people of 
Saskatchewan have seen enough. And what has frightened them 
off is the massive incompetence and waste of this government. 
There is no competence. And you cannot allow and we cannot, 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, not attempt to prevent 
the further squandering of our future. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, I want to give a little history to the 
people of Saskatchewan who have been somewhat brainwashed 
by the glowing reports of the Margaret Thatcher privatization 
success. Well my wife happens to come from England, and she 
visits England every couple of years to go and see her parents 
and her aunts and her sisters and brothers. And she has seen 
England under privatization Margaret Thatcher, and she also 
saw England prior to Margaret Thatcher. 
 
And I’ll tell you, there are two classes of people left in England, 
the rich and very, very poor. The northern half of England is a 
national disaster — thousands and thousands of young people 
without hope. Constantly generations are now going on the 
welfare roll, no hope, and that’s privatization Margaret Thatcher 
style. 
 
But let’s see what some of the people that have analysed this 
so-called new economic revolution that they talk  

about. This is not new. This is Adam Smith laissez-faire. Why 
do you say it’s new? Because you know what? You people 
can’t build anything. You couldn’t build anything. And the best 
excuse for economic development is to sell it off and pretend to 
the people of Saskatchewan that it’s a new economic 
development course. 
 
Well, as I say, Mr. Speaker, this government likes to brag about 
the new economic revolution taking place in Great Britain, 
under that wonderful woman, Margaret Thatcher. And this 
government has even brought in, as I said, at great expense to 
the taxpayers of this province, some of her advisers to tell them 
how to go about changing this economy — I say wrecking this 
economy. And they spend a great deal for that advice and they 
ignored much of the advice, but they have still managed to do a 
disastrous turn to the economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at that British experience. 
As the British business magazine Management Today put it: 
 

The ideology of privatization tends to assume the private 
section is a paradise replete with fountains of technological 
creativity, wells of customer services and streams of 
production innovation in which case one might be forgiven 
for wondering why Britain’s industrial performance, 90 per 
cent of which has been the responsibility of those 
green-fingered private hands, has been so poor. 
 

This is the business magazine, Management (Today). But, Mr. 
Speaker, these are the people who will show us how it is to be 
done. These are the people in whom the Premier confides in. 
These are the people in whose hands the Premier has placed the 
economy of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, give me 
Saskatchewan folks any day when we come to building 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . over those Hong Kong or Margaret 
Thatchers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the magazine’s point is simply: Britain has been, 
above all, a private enterprise failure for millions of people. 
And as you know, and the members in this House will know, 
the massiveness of unemployment in Great Britain is a national 
disgrace. Those with wealth are increasing; those on poverty are 
increasing substantially. There is no in between. They’re losing 
the middle class which we prided ourselves here in Canada, and 
we were able to do it with the mixed economy here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, Great Britain’s experiments has been a 
failure that began in the 1880s, long before there were public 
enterprises and a socialist party to blame. And I ask why did it 
happen there and why will it happen here? One of the main 
reasons, a lack of business enterprise and innovation vigorous 
enough to attract capital. This happened when London was the 
world’s leading financial centre of the world. 
 
And these, Mr. Speaker, are to be the new movers and shakers 
in Saskatchewan. These are the people who the  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1931 
 

Premier brings in so that he can plaintively ask, please sir, could 
you tell me some more about privatization. 
 
I want to say, I wonder if the Premier did in fact ask why it was 
that the British steel industry which was publicly owned was 
making a profit, while at the same time in the United States the 
free enterprise steel industry was running up huge losses 
brought about by excess capacity, short-sightedness, poor 
management, inefficiency, and managerial incompetence. 
 
So what I’m saying here, Mr. Speaker — we’re talking about 
potash privatization, and we have to know what’s happening, 
and they can’t sell it without an analysis of what is happening 
because we have the advisers from Great Britain here — and 
what I’m saying is it hasn’t been working in Great Britain, 
despite the reports. And what we’re heading for here in 
Saskatchewan, and indeed in Canada if Tory governments are 
allowed to be re-elected again, is the same type of society. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that we as the official opposition 
who are responsible for giving to the public of Saskatchewan a 
great share in the ownership of potash, we find ourselves here 
not on an ideological basis, but on a truly principled method of 
developing this province. We oppose Tory-style privatization of 
any kind. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, as I said, between 1976 and ’81 made close to a 
half a billion dollars for this province; this last year, $106 
million in profit. And now at the height when it’s turned 
around, what does this government want to do? They want to 
divest the ownership of the potash from the people of 
Saskatchewan to outsiders. 
 
And that will not bring security to this economy. What it will do 
is that the resources here will be taken off, the profits will be 
skimmed off, and those profits will be used in other parts of the 
world, rather than the development of programs and policies for 
the people of this province. 
 
But I want to continue, Mr. Speaker, with what I was discussing 
in respect to the experiment and how it does not work — 
privatization — and will not work here in Saskatchewan. I want 
to say . . . I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, did the Premier ask why, 
once the enormously difficult and successful adjustment had 
been made by the nationalized industries to get the British 
economy back on its feet, why the British private enterprise 
should get these same money-making public companies as a 
prize for their own historic failure? 
 
And that’s really what’s happening here. We have had 
tremendous success in the public sector of the Saskatchewan 
economy, and now, when we have gone through the growing 
pains and we have built up some expertise of Saskatchewan 
people, the Premier of this province says our economic policy is 
now to divest the people of their interest in the potash 
corporation. 
 
I think one thing that I have learned, Mr. Speaker, about this 
government is that if it doesn’t make sense, if in the face it is 
guaranteed nonsense, then this government seems to adopt it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let us examine some of the key aspects of this 
government’s privatization philosophy, built up and copied on 
the British model. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’d just like to bring to 
the member’s attention that he has to be careful in his 
wide-ranging analysis of privatization, because while that’s 
certainly an aspect of this, we are actually debating Bill No. 20, 
An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have before the House, Bill 1, An Act to establish the 
Public Participation Program, which probably is closer to what 
the hon. member might want in a wide-ranging discussion of 
the effects of privatization. So I just bring that to his attention 
so that he focus his remarks more closely to Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I will. And 
certainly the people of Saskatchewan can make an assessment 
in respect to this Bill, this privatization Bill of the potash 
corporation. 
 
And one of the ways they’re going to determine whether or not 
they’ll support it is by comparing what has happened in respect 
to other privatizations. That’s the point I make in discussing this 
Bill and whether or not we’re supporting it. 
 
We have to look also at the record of this government, the 
dismal record. And if there’s dismal record in other aspects of 
their privatization — that’s the point — then what confidence 
can the people of Saskatchewan have, that when they step into 
the reorganization and the privatization of potash, that they’re 
going to be successful or they’re going to get any benefits? 
 
I say the people of Saskatchewan have decided. The people of 
Saskatchewan have indicated that they have had enough and 
that they will not be supporting even the privatization and the 
reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly, it’s germane, it seems to me . . . I want to keep on the 
Bill. I’m not challenging your ruling. I appreciate that. 
 
But when you talk about what they are proposing to do in the 
Bill here is to have 55 per cent ownership in Canada or Bay 
Street, Toronto, and 45 per cent foreign, and if they say they’re 
only going to sell off 60 per cent as they did in Saskoil, 
logically what is likely to happen in respect — once they 
proceed with the privatization of the potash, is the repetition of 
what has happened in respect to Saskoil. And therefore it’s 
relevant in that context, and that’s the context that I’m using 
those comparisons. I’m not trying to get off the debate. 
 
And then I’m saying is that they’ll set up this initial 
privatization of a portion of the potash corporation. They’ll 
undervalue the asset. They’ll get people . . . of course, I 
presume that they have the money set up already for the 
privatization. I don’t think it’s dependent upon what’s going to 
happen in the market. I think the deal is so good that the Bay 
Street boys are going to be breaking down the doors to get in 
there, telling them to get on with  
  



 
June 15, 1989 

 

1932 
 

it just like the Yankees are saying down in the United States. 
Get on with the damn thing, he said. It’ll sell fast . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Being 5 o’clock, the House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


