


















































June 6, 1989 Hansard


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 6, 1989 
 
 

1671 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, a group 
of 44 students, grade 7 and 8, who are, I believe, in the 
Speaker’s gallery, from the Kitchener School. They are here 
today with their teachers, Fran Ethier, Rick Ast, and John 
Schepers, who have come to the Legislative Assembly today to 
watch question period and do a tour. I look forward to meeting 
with the students and their teachers after question period and 
hope they enjoy their stay here in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me, on behalf 
of the member for Bengough-Milestone, to introduce to you, 
and through you to the legislature, a class of grade 5 and 6, 
numbering 24. They’re in the west gallery. They’re from 
Lyndale School in Oungre, Saskatchewan. The teachers along 
with them today . . . or one teacher, Pat Corbin, and a chaperon 
by the name of Tim Corbin. And I don’t have a bus driver, but I 
imagine they have a bus driver. I understand that I will be 
meeting them later on, about 2:30, for some pictures and drinks, 
and we’ll have a little discussion on what you seen here this 
afternoon. So please help me welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to other 
members in the Assembly, 46 students from grades 7 and 8 in 
St. Joan of Arc School in Regina. They are accompanied by 
their teachers, Christina Shuker, Jim Frolick, Merv Lang, and 
they’ve a bus driver with them named Al — and no last name 
for Al. We’ll be meeting with the students from St. Joan of Arc 
School at 2:30 for pictures and for refreshments and questions 
in Room 255 after. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome the students from St. Joan of 
Arc School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleague, the member from Rosemont, in welcoming the 
grades 7 and 8 students from St. Joan of Arc School. St. Joan of 
Arc is geographically located in the constituency of Rosemont, 
but it’s on the boundary of Regina North West, and some of you 
do live in Regina North West constituency. And I just live 
down the street from the school, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 
join with my colleague to bid you good luck during the tour, 
and I hope that you have a safe journey home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Initial Environmental Evaluation of Rafferty-Alameda 
Project 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct my 
question to the minister in charge of the Souris Basin 
Development Authority, and I would like to point out while I’m 
on my feet, Mr. Speaker, that this is Environmental Awareness 
Week, and keeping that in mind I direct my question to the 
minister in charge of this authority. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have here the draft summary of the initial 
environmental evaluation of the Rafferty project. It clearly 
confirms that serious concerns about mercury levels, about 
water quality, about downstream water, and wildlife habitat, 
and the list goes on, were not adequately addressed by the 
provincial government before the licence was issued to proceed 
with this project. And the report further indicates that a very 
considerable more study needs to be required in order to answer 
some very important questions. In light of that, Mr. Minister, I 
ask you: how can you justify your appeal of the federal court 
decision in the face of all this evidence that has now been 
presented? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Environment, I 
thought I would like to answer that question. I want to ensure 
the hon. member that in the licensing of the Rafferty-Alameda 
project that the licence did indeed deal with most of the 
deficiencies that were indicated in this report, and the hon. 
member has had access to that information. If he would like to 
review it, I think he will find that the many items that were 
required to be met under the licensing of that project would 
indeed meet most of the deficiencies that this report indicates. 
 
So I believe that Saskatchewan has indeed done a good job in 
its environmental impact assessment. There was no challenge of 
the project as far as the work that Saskatchewan’s impact 
assessment had done, but rather the challenge was made against 
what the federal government should have done. 
 
The federal government draws some conclusions. I think that 
they really didn’t look deep enough to get their answers — the 
answers are available. And I would be very pleased to meet 
with the federal people to assist them to find the answers to a 
number of the questions that they’ve put here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I will then ask you the 
question, since the minister in charge is not prepared to answer, 
will you address the question which I originally asked: how can 
you justify continuing the appeal now that all of this questions 
are being asked in this study? And in view of all that evidence, 
will you now undertake to stop this appeal which is costing the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan many thousands of dollars which 
they ought not to have to spend? 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1672 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The project that was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the minister, and I would like to ask the 
House to allow the minister to make his remarks so that we can 
all hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The project, 
when it was licensed by the province and by the federal 
government, had full legal authority to proceed, and it did 
proceed in that light. When you read the significant impacts that 
this report indicates — and I think that the hon. member should 
take some time to read the report; I hope that he has — I think if 
you read what this report is saying, it really does not come up 
with anything significant that would indicate to me that we 
ought not to appeal. So through the water corporation we have 
laid that appeal. 
 
Let me just quote to you a couple of areas that they list here and 
I think are good examples of the reason that this report did not 
have enough study behind it. First they indicate the water-fowl 
production, and they don’t give any recognition to the fact that 
we required the Souris Basin Development Authority to put in 
quite a few projects of duck marshes and things of that nature. 
 
Besides that, we’re looking at the Souris River that’s absolutely 
dry at this time, and that is the case in the Souris Valley many 
times — that it goes dry; it’s a flood river. So when we do 
indeed create a reservoir at Rafferty, there will be more 
water-fowl than there’s ever been before, but that’s not what the 
report says. And I don’t believe that the people have come out 
and studied it deep enough. 
 
Another area that they indicate is fish habitat . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
has made a good answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will then 
address my question — and it’s a new question — to the 
minister once again. Mr. Minister, there were deficiencies in 
your study. You knew what those deficiencies were; the 
Premier knew what those deficiencies were; the minister in 
charge of the Souris Basin Development Authority knew, and 
yet you went ahead with the project. 
 
Now you asked me to read to you a deficiency. I will do so. If 
you will refer to this draft summary of the initial environmental 
evaluation, Mr. Minister, on table 10, item 3, here is what it 
says, and I ask you to listen carefully: 
 

International water quality objectives against which 
impacts on transboundary water quality can be assessed do 
not exist. 
 

Now that’s pretty clear, Mr. Minister. Now knowing full well 
that your environmental impact study was severely lacking in 
this area, how can you continue to justify  

making the statements that it was a comprehensive study which 
left no stones unturned? And why don’t you finally admit that 
your decision to proceed with the project was made in the 
knowledge that these and other concerns were not adequately 
addressed, and that environmental considerations took a back 
seat to partisan political considerations of the Premier and the 
minister in charge of the basin authority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member gets a 
little excited, and I think he should not get too excited, but 
rather he should read the whole report and not just read one or 
two lines from the report. 
 
When he makes the statement that he’s making, he’s talking 
about the flow of water going from North Dakota into 
Manitoba, and unfortunately we don’t have the right to go into 
the United States and do our environmental study of their 
waterways. The water goes from Saskatchewan into Lake 
Darling and then goes through the American system and back 
into Manitoba. The control of that water quality is very 
definitely in American control, not something that we have an 
impact on from Saskatchewan. 
 
And I wanted to talk to you about the fish before, but the 
Speaker didn’t give me time. Mr. Speaker, I would like to give 
him a little background on the fish. 
 
In this study that the federal government did, it indicates a loss 
of fish habitat, and it talks about the river habitat in 
Saskatchewan, and then it talks about the reservoir habitat. 
Well, there have been no fish in the Souris River that I have 
ever seen. I haven’t seen a lot of people flocking down to the 
Souris to go fishing. Rather, they go from the Souris up north 
somewhere when they want to fish. 
 
When they speak of Lake Darling and a decrease in the fish 
habitat, this report indicates that since 1959 we have delivered 
101 per cent of the water of the Souris into Lake Darling. I 
believe that it’s high time Saskatchewan took control of its 
water resource and maintained 50 per cent of it here for our use 
and for our future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, new question. I suppose it’s going 
to have to be to the minister responsible for the water 
corporation, since the minister responsible for the project won’t 
answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, and may I open my remarks, my question, by 
saying this, that heaven help us if you are in charge of 
Saskatchewan’s water resources. Sir, in the plan outlined by the 
member from Regina North East in the draft evaluation, what 
we find is that evaluation saying that there is no water plan 
available for the Rafferty-Alameda project; that you yourself 
didn’t draw up a water plan; that you and your government 
didn’t draw it up. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, is the fact that you didn’t draw up a 
water management plan for the Rafferty-Alameda have to do 
with one of two options: (a) is that the data — and it  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1673 
 

refers to the data in this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member is taking an 
inordinate amount of time to advance his questions, and I’d like 
him to get to the question. Order. Long questions will elicit long 
answers invariably. He’s had a considerable amount of time to 
present his preamble, and he should be getting to the question. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
question is this: (a) is the fact that there is no water 
management plan due to the fact that you couldn’t come up 
with the data that met your political objections, or is it in fact 
that you didn’t want to expose to public scrutiny the fact that 
you’re going to be pumping water from the aquifer and the 
Souris Valley and stealing water from the farmers who need it 
desperately, not to be evaporated south of the border. Is that the 
reason this is . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, there is a preliminary water 
management plan in the environmental impact assessment, and 
that preliminary water management plan has been in place and 
does the job at this stage. 
 
In the environmental approval that was given, the licence that 
was given by the province of Saskatchewan for this project, it 
demanded that a complete water management plan be in place 
by January 1, 1990. That’s the end of this year basically, that 
we’re looking at for the water management plan to be finalized, 
the complete plan. 
 
That process is in place now. They’re working through it, and it 
will be ready by the end of December. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to the 
same minister. Mr. Minister, it’s obvious that this 
environmental impact statement that you have presented to the 
people of this province has been found wanting by the federal 
Government of Canada because of your narrow, partisan 
political interests. 
 
I ask you, sir, in the interests of developing a comprehensive 
water management plan for the Souris basin, will you now 
support an effort to have the International Joint Commission 
study it so that the interests of Saskatchewan, North Dakota, 
and Manitoba are all included in this water development project 
so that we can all agree that the objectives, which are laudable 
objectives for water conservation, can be met outside the 
narrow ring of partisan political debate? Will you do that now, 
sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, in the member making the 
statement that it’s partisan political politics, when you hire high 
qualified hydrogeologists to do the study and to bring forward a 
water management plan, and then for a member like that to say 
that that’s a political process, I believe that he really owes an 
apology to those very experienced people who are out there 
doing this type of  

work. 
 
I think it’s high time that Saskatchewan took a hold of the water 
that we have going through our province and utilize that water 
to the best advantage. As this report indicates, we have been 
giving, since 1958 and ’59, 101 per cent of the flow of the 
Souris River to the United States. With this project we will be 
able to control 50 per cent of that water. That’s what the 
agreement has been between the United States and Canada, and 
the indications are in place now that Manitoba’s in agreement 
with the amount of water that was agreed to let on through from 
Lake Darling into Manitoba. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister’s giving a 
long answer as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian ’88 Fertilizer Plants 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Trade and Investment, and it concerns your 
government’s dealing with the Canadian ’88 energy corporation 
proposal for fertilizer plants in Rosetown, Melfort and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Minister, in this House last Monday you said, and I quote: 
 

The proposal by energy ’88 . . . was that we would not 
participate in their project but that we would give a 
sizeable grant to that particular company. 
 

As a matter of fact, Minister, on three occasions that day you 
talked about the company approaching you for a grant. Will you 
today table any correspondence between your government and 
this company which indicates it was looking for a government 
grant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I met with these 
individuals on a number of occasions, as have others, and the 
particular company was looking for $10 million at 7 per cent 
interest. Now that translates, Mr. Speaker, into a grant, Mr. 
Speaker, because it costs the government, the Minister of 
Finance, probably around 12 per cent to borrow the money. 
And that’s 5 per cent benefit to them, which is a grant, Mr. 
Speaker, and nothing but a grant. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Please, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’ve mentioned many times before that 
I would like to ask members not to use unparliamentary 
language from their seats, as well as when they’re speaking, and 
I repeat that today. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, you’ll be familiar with the letter sent to you last 
September 19 by the Calgary law firm of Cook Snowdon, 
which outlined the points under discussion between Canadian 
“88” energy corporation, yourself, and the Deputy Premier. The 
letter was written to confirm support of the Saskatchewan 
government on  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1674 
 

their project, and it said, and I quote: 
 

The government proposes to take steps to provide the 
project with a $10 million loan carrying a fixed interest 
rate of 7 per cent per annum. 
 

Now I ask, Mr. Minister: is it that you, as a former Minister of 
Finance, don’t know the difference between a loan and a grant, 
or is it that you attempted to mislead the House last Monday 
again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, there was to be a loan — I 
said that — of $10 million. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the members allow the 
minister to respond. I’d like to once more ask the members to 
allow the minister to answer without interrupting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal was $10 
million loan at seven per cent interest. Seven per cent interest is 
well below, Mr. Speaker, the current rates, and therefore the 
government would be forced to make up the difference of 5 per 
cent, which would run to a significant amount of money each 
and every year for the five years or so of the loan. As well, the 
loan was non-recourse, Mr. Speaker, against other people. 
 
So there was a loan — I indicated that — and a 7 per cent 
interest factor on it which is equivalent to a grant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
We now see the minister backtracking and doing a flip and 
really conceding to this House that he misled the House last 
Monday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my new question pertains to a letter addressed the 
Minister of Public Participation, dated May 30, 1989, from 
Greg Noval, the president of Canadian “88” Agri-Products Ltd., 
and I quote: 
 

Further to recent media reports, there appears to be some 
confusion as to what our company and the Government of 
Saskatchewan discussed in terms of generally agreed 
provincial government financing for phase one of our 
above-mentioned project. 
 

And it goes on to say: 
 

There were no government grants or hand-outs involved. 
Furthermore, our initial formal proposal to Mr. Berntson 
and Mr. Andrew in August of ’88 involved a commitment 
to offer to Saskatchewan residents first equity in our 
project. 
 

Mr. Minister, the letter says no grants or hand-outs are 
involved, only equity shares to the people of Saskatchewan. Is it 
not true that you offered to help this company raise the 
necessary $10 million, not through government coffers but 
through offshore investors, and  

that there was a good possibility of no government money being 
involved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the House 
that this particular project wanted $10 million at 7 per cent 
interest. Now obviously the government, nor anybody else, 
cannot borrow money at 7 per cent interest, and therefore 
government was going to have to make up the difference. And 
that’s what we would see to this particular company as a grant 
or a benefit bestowed upon them by the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s exactly what we said to them various times when we 
met with them. And we met with this particular company over a 
long period of time, Mr. Speaker, requesting varieties of 
information, details, reports, etc., before we were prepared to go 
forward with the project. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. Mr. Minister, 
the only other thing that the company asked of you, according 
to the letter of September 19 from the law firm, was support in 
taking advantage of existing incentive opportunities such as the 
Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan, and assistance with 
obtaining Securities Commission approvals for a share offering 
to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
If your government is committed, as you say, to have 
Saskatchewan people investing in Saskatchewan firms, don’t 
you agree that this would have been the perfect vehicle for that; 
and if you agree, why did you double-cross these people at 
Canadian “88” energy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this particular project, they 
had discussed the possibility of a share offering, using the 
program under Finance where you would get a rebate under 
your venture capital stock savings program, and we encouraged 
them to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They had also requested support, because of the lack of water in 
Rosetown, that they would have to build a pipeline from the 
South Saskatchewan River to Rosetown. Now that was to be 
part and partaken by the Government of Saskatchewan. And 
you don’t build those, as the people of Regina and Ipsco found 
here a few years ago, for nothing, Mr. Speaker. Now that also 
cost money, and so did providing a loan at 7 per cent interest 
over a period of time cost money. 
 
Now we went along with these folks trying to make this project 
work. The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that those particular items, 
we were not at that point in time prepared to pony up to make 
the project go. 
 

Distribution of Pamphlets to Schools 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s to 
the Minister of Human Resources and Labour. Mr. Minister, I 
have a fancy, full-page, 11-page document here — glossy — 
your department sent to all grades 7, 8, and 9 students in 
Saskatchewan. Considering that we don’t have money in this 
province for a number of worthy  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1675 
 

causes, can you tell us how much it cost to send this 11-page, 
glossy, eight and a half by 11 brochure to 45,000 grades 7, 8, 
and 9 students in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the publication that the 
member opposite refers to is a publication from Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment, encouraging students to 
continue their education. And this documentation gives them 
good reason why they should continue their education and stay 
in school. 
 
Furthermore, this documentation is prepared in an interesting 
manner so that it will get their attention, keep their attention, 
and we want it clearly to sink in for all students in 
Saskatchewan that there are benefits in remaining in school and 
continuing with their education. For example, more than 
three-quarters of the people on social assistance in 
Saskatchewan do not have a high school education. 
 
The importance of an education is well worth the cost, and I 
will take notice of the cost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I must remind the minister that if he is going 
to take a notice of a question certainly it shouldn’t be preceded 
by some form of explanation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Another question. Mr. Minister, it has a 
section entitled, “Why I want to stay in school,” where one 
fellow says: 
 

If SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) didn’t offer these courses, I would still be 
working in a job I didn’t particularly enjoy. 
 

And another young man says: 
 

The good jobs usually go to people who have a university 
or college education. That’s important to remember when 
you’re deciding whether to stay in school. 
 

We all agree that those are laudable statements, Mr. Minister. 
But why didn’t you mention that under your government SIAST 
has cut 1,100 student spaces in this province and that the 
University of Saskatchewan has enrolment quotas so that many, 
many young people aren’t able to get into our schools? Why 
didn’t you tell the people of our province that, Mr. Minister, 
instead of this political propaganda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear. I took 
notice of how much the cost was, but I intend to answer the 
question of why we did it. Why we sent the  

brochure out is because education is important, and I have 
explained that to the members opposite. And then she doesn’t 
like it because it is accurate, it is true, and it’s a good piece of 
work out of my department. 
 
In addition, this government spent $50 million extra on 
education this year and built the new technical school in Prince 
Albert for $15 million. And they question our commitment to 
education. When we encourage young people to use these 
education facilities, it is unfair for them to criticize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Liquor Board 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Award to Saskatchewan Resident 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I am 
seeking leave to move a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — If the member reads the motion, the members 
can decide. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I have already sent a copy across to the 
Government House Leader and sincerely hope that all members 
of the Assembly will give leave for me to move this motion of 
congratulations to a truly distinguished resident of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to take just a few brief moments, Mr. Speaker, to 
explain to all the members the reason and nature of my seeking 
leave this afternoon. 
 
This past Sunday, June 3, Mr. Lorne Scott, a resident of 
Saskatchewan, was awarded the Roland Michener conservation 
award by the Canadian Wildlife Federation at its annual 
meeting in Halifax. 
 
The Speaker: — I think if the hon. member just gave the text 
of his motion, the House can decide. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to explain to . . . 
Mr. Speaker, can I finish my statement? 
 
The Speaker: — Would the hon. member read the motion so 
the House can decide if they wish to give it consideration. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Regina North East: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
congratulate Mr. Lorne Scott for having been awarded the 
Canadian Wildlife Federation  

  



 
June 6, 1989 

1676 
 

Roland Michener award for his distinguished career in 
service as a naturalist in Saskatchewan. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, the motion, the 
resolution that we were going to be debating was resolution no. 
6, and I think before I had a chance to rise to my feet, someone 
called stand. So I’m asking if it would be appropriate to proceed 
with that resolution. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s appropriate if leave is granted. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 6 — Allocation of Money from Western 
Diversification Fund 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the 
motion that I intend to introduce is . . . and I’ll read it, if I 
might: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada its extreme disappointment that western Canada 
has been allotted a smaller share of federal regional 
development money under the new Western 
Diversification Fund than under the previous department of 
regional and industrial expansion; and further, that this 
Assembly regrets the grants from the Western 
Diversification Fund continue to be made on the basis of 
political patronage, rather than in accordance with sound 
economic development strategies. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, clearly western Canada is being 
short-changed by the federal government, and clearly there is a 
continuance of patronage under these development funds that 
was in place under the old system. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s clear to all of Saskatchewan people that it is a complete 
failure of this government and its federal counterpart to develop 
effective regional policies or plans for diversification of this 
western economy. 
 
Federal plans to foster the growth of secondary industry in 
western Canada have always seemed to have been mounting 
half-hearted, hollow pledges. Ottawa has used economic 
development for its own political gain. This provincial 
government has used economic development for its own 
political gain. Cabinet ministers have used regional 
development funding to funnel millions into their own ridings 
— and in some cases a little closer than into their own ridings 
— and political motives have been determining the distribution 
of these funds. 
 

If we have a look at what has happened under the Western 
Diversification Fund and what’s happened under DRIE 
(department of regional and industrial expansion), it becomes 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has been short-changed 
and we haven’t been receiving our fair share of federal 
development programs. 
 
And I say to you that under the new Western Diversification 
Fund, that trend is continuing. Under the fund the West has 
received considerably less for regional programs on a per capita 
basis than our Canadian counterparts in central Canada. This 
from a government, Mr. Speaker, this from a government that 
speaks about protecting the interests of Saskatchewan. This 
from a government that campaigned federally on the unity, the 
Canadian unity, and bringing this country together. This from a 
government that is producing programs that are tending to split 
western and central Canada. 
 
Under this new program, Mr. Speaker, Ontario and Quebec are 
receiving even more per capita than they did under the old 
scheme. The old scheme, Mr. Speaker, was bad enough in that 
Saskatchewan business men and women were short-changed of 
tax dollars, federal tax dollars, that they rightfully belonged to. 
They’ve stymied industrial expansion in our province by doing 
this. 
 
And I want to say that, in terms of a commitment to western 
Canada, during the campaign we heard one story; now, after the 
re-election of the federal government, we see another. 
Saskatchewan and other western provinces are still being 
short-changed, as I believe the Maritimes are. 
 
And I’d like to know, Mr. Speaker, where the Premier of this 
province has been while all of this is going on. I see headlines: 
Saskatchewan getting a fair share of funds from Ottawa, our 
Premier Devine. Well let’s talk about this. Let’s talk about 
what’s happening with federal government moneys, and I 
would like to, if I could, just go through the facts and the 
figures in terms of the numbers of dollars that are coming from 
Ottawa to the Saskatchewan business community. 
 
In 1988, western Canada received $312 million from the 
Western Diversification Fund, and that’s only 15.4 per cent of 
the $2 billion in total that this federal government put out. It 
was just a little bit less than the 15.8 per cent that the west got 
under DREE in 1987. So in 1988, the federal government cuts 
back funding through the Western Diversification Fund, even 
less than we received in 1987. 
 
Now why might that be, Mr. Speaker? Would that be because 
this government, once elected, forgot about the people in 
western Canada, many of whom elected Progressive 
Conservative members of parliament? Could that be the case? 
Or could it be that the economic conditions in western Canada 
have become so buoyant and our economy in western Canada 
has become so bright that we don’t need the kind of 
diversification funds that we once had. Is that the reason for the 
cut-back? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that it’s nothing less than  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1677 
 

callous politics about a federal government who doesn’t care 
about western Canada and who cares little about the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Has our agricultural economy improved 
to the point where we don’t need the money for industrial 
expansion to diversify our economy, that we don’t need an 
increase in these funds? Has that happened? And I ask every 
member on that side of the House if that’s happened. I ask 
everyone in Saskatchewan if that’s happened. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I would doubt that you would 
find very few people in this province that would agree, other 
than the Premier of this province, who’s quoted under the 
headline, and I’ll quote again from the Star-Phoenix of August 
6, 1988, “Saskatchewan getting fair share of funds from Ottawa 
— Devine.” 
 
(1445) 
 
The Premier of this province, instead of standing up to protect 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, Saskatchewan business people, to 
protect us from losing a share in what is rightfully ours as part 
of this confederation — instead of standing up to protect this 
province, he condones what his federal counterpart Mulroney 
does. And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, I find that 
unacceptable, and I believe that the rest of the people in this 
province find it unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — The point I’m making here, Mr. Speaker, 
is that there was no improvement in terms of the Western 
Diversification Fund and the share that the Saskatchewan 
business community got. 
 
Ontario and Quebec continue to receive the lion’s share, the 
pig’s portion of this $2 billion. They got 67 per cent of these 
regional economic development funds, and that’s up from 60 
per cent from the year before under DREE. And yet this 
Premier, this caucus, this cabinet, continue to support, without 
uttering a word, without saying a word in support of the 
Saskatchewan business community, continue to support 
Ontario, Quebec, central Canada, over the needs and the 
aspirations of what we need here in Saskatchewan, what we 
desire in Saskatchewan, and what is rightfully ours. 
 
Let’s have a look at why these regional economic development 
funds were set up. We hear politicians in the government side in 
Ottawa talk about the need for diversifying in areas like 
Saskatchewan, diversifying our economy, getting new 
industries going, developing an economy that’s not maybe 
based on agriculture solely, or in the Maritimes maybe not 
based solely on the fishery, or maybe not based solely on 
forestry. 
 
And we hear all of these bright statements from these 
politicians, who, before elections, continually tell us that things 
will be better. And I recall a slogan in Saskatchewan: there’s so 
much more we can be. I recall the election of 1986 where . . . or 
’88 where Mr. Mulroney  

was running around telling us how great things were going to be 
and how regional expansion was part of what he wanted to 
deliver to the people of this country. 
 
But what’s the reality? The reality is, Mr. Speaker, is that what 
they say before an election and what PC governments do after 
an election are two totally separate, different things. 
 
I’d like to say on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that there’s a great deal of disappointment out there, 
not only with the Premier and with his caucus — the Premier 
who is running around and scurrying to find purchasers for our 
Crown corporations, for the assets that the people of this 
province have built up — there’s discontent with Mulroney, 
their federal counterpart, this Premier’s federal counterpart, 
because he’s doing the same thing in Ottawa. And there’s a 
feeling out there that we’re being forgotten. 
 
And there’s a feeling out there as well, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Premier of this province no longer speaks for average men and 
women, average small-business people. There’s a feeling that 
he speaks only for his large, multimillionaire friends. There’s a 
feeling that he speaks for the Guy Montpetits, the Peter 
Pocklingtons, and the Weyerhaeuser corporation, but that when 
it comes to delivering programs for Saskatchewan men and 
women, whether it be federal or whether it be provincial dollars 
that are spent, that this Premier has forgotten that there are 
small-business people out there. 
 
I said before, Mr. Speaker, that these grants are supposed to be 
targeted to regional development in areas where really there is 
some need for some financial assistance, Saskatchewan being 
no different than other regions in Canada. It’s not supposed to 
be, or we would expect it’s not supposed to be set up as a slush 
fund for friends of the PC Party. 
 
But that’s the other part of this motion, Mr. Speaker, that I’m 
going to be introducing today, and seconded by my colleague 
the member from Sutherland. That’s the other part of this 
motion, is that people are starting to understand that even if you 
happen to have a pocketful of money, if you have a good idea 
and if you have a concept that is needed, required, and will 
work, that if you aren’t a friend of this PC Party, you don’t 
count. 
 
I talked before about Saskatchewan not getting its share of this 
economic pie, the fact that we get less under the Western 
Diversification Fund than we did under the DREE program of 
1987. And in real dollars, Mr. Speaker, that can be computed to 
real jobs. That can be computed to dollars in the jeans in the 
pockets of Saskatchewan men and women, young men and 
women who are fleeing this province by the thousands. 
 
And those aren’t my numbers; those aren’t my figures. Those 
are figures that are put out by both this provincial government 
and the federal prime minister of this province. Those are their 
figures, not ours. 
 
And you don’t have to go far to find a family whose sons and 
daughters have decided to pick up in despair and leave this 
province because they don’t see a future under  



 
June 6, 1989 

1678 
 

a PC government for them — young people, young men and 
women that no longer believe that the diversification talk that 
Mulroney is talking about and that this Premier is talking about 
are in fact meant for them. 
 
They see the ongoing patronage. They see the unemployment; 
they see the lack of the future, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 
these programs have to be delivered fairly and equitably 
throughout this country to areas that deserve them and to areas 
that need them. 
 
Saskatchewan’s share, as I said, has not been what it could be. 
And we only have 16 per cent of the western Canadian 
population when you break this country down regionally — 16 
per cent of the population. But what do we get in funds? In 
terms of the money that we received in Saskatchewan, 16 per 
cent of the population, well what do we receive? We receive 
only 6 per cent of the funds — $20 million in 1988 we received, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not even bad enough that we only get $20 million — far less 
than what our share is in regards to our population. We get 
short-changed yet once again in that all people don’t have 
access to it because somehow it happens to funnel into the 
hands of those who are connected with the particular political 
party that’s governing this province for a while. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, not for long after the next 
election, because the people of this province see through you. 
They see through this government; they know what their 
motives are. They’re looking for fair and honest government, 
and they know that this PC government is not delivering the 
kind of government that they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I talked about the fact that 
the Western Diversification Fund appears to be little more than 
a political slush fund. And we’ve had examples of that brought 
to the legislature in the last few days right here in Regina and 
right here in our province. We’ve had glaring examples of what 
patronage really means. We’ve had glaring examples of the fact 
that this government cares more about their own little circles of 
friends than they do about governing fairly and governing 
honestly for all of the people of this province. 
 
And it’s not just the opposition, Mr. Speaker, who indicate that 
they feel it’s nothing less than a political slush fund. And I want 
to quote John Bulloch, the president of the Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business. Mr. Bulloch has stated that: 
 

The WDF is close to becoming nothing more than a 
political slush fund to feather the nests of provincial 
governments. 
 

And he goes on to say that: 
 

The small-business community has had to stand by while 
western Canada becomes a pawn for short-term political 
advantage. 
 

What an indictment! Mr. Speaker, what an indictment from a 
Canadian business man who has been known to  

support the Conservative Party; what an indictment from a man 
who understands the working of the Western Diversification 
Fund; what an indictment of unfairness by both this government 
and their federal counterparts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nobody wants to stand in this legislature, a place 
that we believe good, honest, and open debate should be taking 
place, nobody wants to stand in this House and accuse any 
particular minister or any particular premier or any particular 
prime minister of this province of wrongdoing, of political 
patronage. 
 
But in light of the comments of people like John Bulloch, is it 
not the responsibility of the opposition to ensure that the people 
of this province are treated fairly? Is it not the responsibility of 
opposition to bring these shortfalls of government to the 
attention of the people that they govern? Is it not the 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, of the opposition to try and change 
the direction in which a government that is on the wrong track, 
to try and change the direction in which they’re moving? 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that in 1986 when I was 
elected by the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I felt it was 
my responsibility to share their concerns with members on the 
government side. And I came here in the spirit of fairness and, I 
believed, understanding what this legislature was about, the 
tradition of the legislature, the tradition of the British 
parliamentary system, to try and make things better. 
 
And I believed, as I think all politicians on this side of the 
House believe, that the people that they represent have the right 
to be heard in the legislature and that they have the right to have 
their views shared with members of the government side. And I 
believe that they also feel it’s the responsibility of members on 
the government side of the legislature to pay heed to what 
members of the opposition are sharing with them on their 
behalf. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’ve been 
disappointed, as have the people of my riding, many ridings 
throughout this province, ridings not only on the opposition 
side, but people who are represented by members that sit on the 
government side. They’re disappointed, Mr. Speaker, because 
they feel that nobody is listening to them any more. 
 
When I look at this resolution and I look at the content and I 
talk . . . the resolution talks, the motion talks about political 
patronage. It talks about Saskatchewan not getting a fair share 
from the federal government. This Premier in this province says 
nothing. He’s not speaking for those folks, those 1 million 
people in this province. He’s not telling the Prime Minister that 
we want our fair share, we deserve our fair share, and that, by 
golly, we’re going to have our fair share. 
 
Ten out of 14 ridings in this province in this last federal election 
rejected Brian Mulroney and his kind of government — 10 out 
of 14 ridings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And why did that happen? Mr. Speaker, I 
want to tell you that I believe that happened for  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1679 
 

a combination of reasons, but one primary reason — that reason 
being that here in Saskatchewan people want an open and an 
honest government, and they want their fair share of that pie. 
They want nothing more, but they’ll accept nothing less. 
 
And when something goes awry, they want their Premier to 
stand up and tell the Prime Minister, if that’s in the forum that 
the negotiation takes place, that things have to be corrected, that 
things aren’t right, and that because we’re citizens of this 
country — not because we vote New Democrat, but because we 
in this province are citizens of this country — we deserve 
everything that your friends in Ontario and Quebec get. 
 
But is this Prime Minister listening? When I look at the 
numbers and the fact that we get 6 per cent of that $2 billion 
with 16 per cent of the population, it tells me that that Prime 
Minister in Ottawa is listening no more to the people of 
Saskatchewan than this Premier is listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan when they mounted a vicious attack on his move 
to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
(1500) 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that you’ve got two levels of 
government that are no longer listening to the people. And it’s 
time they sat back and reassessed what’s happening to this 
economy because those people are no longer listening, because 
the federal government and because the provincial government 
are no longer paying attention to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Unemployment is mounting, yet we lose our share of this 
Western Diversification Fund. Our population is dropping, yet 
we lose a share of this Western Diversification Fund. One in 
four children in this province are deemed to be living below the 
poverty line, yet we see a cut-back, a shortfall in terms of ’87 
funding to ’88 funding for regional economic development. 
 
Why doesn’t this government understand, Mr. Speaker? You 
know, members on this side of the House and, I would say, the 
majority of the people in this province, at least the polls are 
telling us that the majority of the people in this province are 
pondering that same question. They’re asking themselves why 
this Premier no longer listens to them. They’re asking 
themselves why the Prime Minister of this country seems to be 
forgetting them. They’re asking themselves why we have to put 
up with another PC government in this province, and federally, 
until the next election comes, because that’s how long they’re 
going to last, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would suggest to you, if the people were given the opportunity 
to make the decision as to whether these governments, both 
provincially and federally, stay or go, it would be a resounding 
and overwhelming defeat for a PC government here in Regina 
and a PC government in Ottawa as well. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the way this program is being 
delivered. You know, I recall in ’86, or in ’82 I guess it was, 
one of the big numbers with this government was that, or the 
PC opposition at that time, was that they were going to cut all 
this bureaucratic red tape, and that the  

good folks out there, the business community, were going to 
know where they’re going. No more red tape; easy to 
understand; figure it out for you; going to save you all that time 
in terms of going after these federal government and provincial 
government programs. We’re going to do all that for you — and 
there’s so much more we can be. 
 
Well you ask the average business person what the Western 
Diversification Fund is all about, or ask the average business 
person how to access that money, and do you want to know 
something, Mr. Speaker — they don’t know. The rules aren’t 
defined. The literature that they’ve been putting out is vague. It 
means nothing. 
 
As an example, I just would want to say . . . it refers to the 
efforts to address the long-term structural challenges facing the 
western economy, making it less vulnerable to international 
economic developments and fluctuating commodity prices, and 
yet at the same time, it talks of building on the great strength of 
the traditional resource industries. 
 
Well now, what does that mean to the Saskatchewan business 
people? What does that mean to the Saskatchewan business 
community? On one hand they talk about diversification, but 
then on the other hand they talk about relying on the resource 
industries, the non-renewable resources that we have in our 
province. 
 
Well which way is it? We don’t know. We don’t know what 
direction this federal government wants to take us in terms of 
that. It’s confusing, it’s vague, and it’s unfair. 
 
But I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that 
it’s unfair is because that’s how this government wants it. They 
don’t want the business community to understand how to access 
these funds. They don’t want the business community to 
understand how to get this money, and in what particular sector 
it may be more acceptable, what area of development. 
 
They want to confuse the people, because if you confuse them, 
that means you can pull scams like the Northern Lights game 
farm, where you’ve got a minister from the provincial 
government who phones his federal counterpart in order to 
access a half a million dollars. That’s why the rules are vague, 
and that’s why I want to say, Mr. Speaker, you have people like 
Bulloch, who are talking about this being nothing but a political 
slush fund, and that’s what this Western Diversification Fund 
has turned into, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province 
know it. 
 
I talked a little earlier about patronage and about this being a 
political slush fund, and I want to elaborate on that, Mr. 
Speaker. The Premier says Saskatchewan’s getting its fair share 
of funds from Ottawa. Well, fair share of funds for whom? Who 
gets these funds? Who accesses these funds? Is it the 
small-business community? Is it small-business men in my 
home town or in one of the towns in my riding of Duck Lake, or 
is it the small-business community and small-business men and 
women in Smeaton or in Shellbrook or in Quill Lake? Do they 
have access to these funds, Mr. Speaker? Not on your life. Not 
on your life. But the Premier says we’re getting a fair share. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1680 
 

Well let me tell you where I believe this fair share is going to 
and where the people of this province believes that this money 
is going to. And I want to quote from a newspaper article out of 
the Regina Leader-Post on Wednesday, May 17. Mr. Speaker, I 
said before that none of us want to stand in here and have to 
bring these things to the attention of the people of 
Saskatchewan, but they’ve got a right to know where their tax 
dollars go. They’ve got a right to know who benefits by the 
federal and provincial programs that are set up by PC 
politicians both here in Regina and in Ottawa, and they’ve got a 
right to know whether their government’s being fair with them. 
 
So let me quote from that, Mr. Speaker, and I quote; it says: 
 

As for the diversification grant, Taylor said he made a 
phone call to Bill McKnight (just a phone call), federal 
minister responsible for the diversification fund at the time, 
to inform him a Northern Lights official in Vancouver 
wanted a hearing. 
 

Well now I want to explain just what that’s all about, Mr. 
Speaker, because as I said, I think the people of this province 
have a right to know. This minister, the minister of 
privatization, phones the federal minister of the Western 
Diversification Fund on behalf of a constituent of his and on 
behalf of a corporation that that constituent is involved in. He 
indicates that a Vancouver business man wanted a hearing. 
Well, it just so happens, Mr. Speaker, that this Vancouver 
business man is a partner of his son’s. 
 
Well, now I can bring that around to the full circle so we 
understand exactly what’s going on. Now what are these people 
all about? They’re getting into game ranching, so minister of 
privatization gets on the telephone, phones the federal minister, 
sets up a hearing for his son’s partner — to do what? Is it 
because perhaps this man wouldn’t have had access to the 
minister? Is it because maybe he didn’t know which minister to 
get a hold of? Or did this minister phone the federal minister 
because he wanted to influence a decision, a decision to get 
some money into the hands of that corporation setting up the 
game farm — the game farm his son is involved with. Any 
thinking person would understand that that’s an improper move, 
and it smacks of patronage, and that it’s unfair. 
 
So let’s talk about the result of this phone call. What came 
about from this phone call? Clearly what happened, Mr. 
Speaker, is the federal minister understood what was 
happening. Clearly a meeting took place with directors of that 
corporation and this Vancouver business man, and by the 
minister’s own admission, a $466,000 bill, a $466,000 cheque 
came out of the federal government to benefit a family member 
of one of our MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why the people of this province are losing 
faith in this government and in their federal counterparts in 
Ottawa. That’s why this government has been dropping 
consistently in the polls over the last months. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, people are asking me when I walk down the street: 
when does this government have to call an election? When can 
we get a chance to tell this government that enough is enough, 
and that we no  

longer believe they should be governing this province? 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, just this morning I had a phone call 
from a hotelier who has been in business in this province, and I 
want to tell you he’s been in business in Saskatchewan for over 
20 years in the hotel industry — never known to be a New 
Democrat supporter; a supporter of this PC administration. But 
he understands what kind of government is being delivered. He 
understands patronage now more than ever before. 
 
This particular business man, Saskatchewan business man, 
understands what corruption and incompetence and patronage 
has meant to his business. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that this particular business man in Saskatchewan told me this 
morning that he’s waiting for a chance to vote against his MLA 
who represents him now, and he indicates to me that he’s not 
happy with the representation that he’s getting. 
 
This government will stand up and deny any conflict, even 
though a minister will indicate he’s acted on behalf of a 
corporation his son is involved with. Blind, blind, no 
understanding, Mr. Speaker. No understanding of fairness in 
government. They don’t understand that they’re dealing with 
public funds. They don’t understand that these are taxpayers’ 
dollars that they’re shelling out. 
 
It’s not like a private corporation. You’re dealing with 
government. It’s a different concept. We talk about running a 
business-like government, and that’s fair, and that’s acceptable, 
and that’s what people want. But you can’t run a government 
like a business. When you’re an elected official, be it a 
back-bencher or be it a cabinet minister or be it the Premier, 
you’ve got a responsibility because you’re dealing with public 
funds to be totally exclusive from any appearance of a conflict 
of interest, or any conflict of interest. You’ve got to be open 
and above-board and honest. 
 
And I tell you, you can’t cover up one story with another story. 
You’ve got to be open and above-board, and you’ve got to 
never put yourself in a position where people will suspect your 
motives. But this happens time after time after time, with PC 
governments both here and in Ottawa. 
 
Never in the history of this country have we seen cabinet 
minister after cabinet minister resign in disgrace. Never in the 
history of this country have we seen MPs have to resign from 
their post because they’ve misused the trust that people have 
placed in them. 
 
And I tell you that the political slush fund they’ve set up in 
terms of the Western Diversification Fund is still going to cause 
heads to roll in the political scene in this country, because you 
can’t hide from the truth for ever, Mr. Speaker. Eventually 
people will find out where you’re coming from, when you’re in 
political life, and where you’re heading to. 
 
You can’t hide the kinds of things that these two governments 
have been doing, Mr. Speaker. But I’m afraid that’s what’s been 
happening in this legislature in the last two, three weeks 
especially. Day after day after day we see cabinet ministers, 
front-benchers, the inner  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1681 
 

circle of this government, stand up and refuse to answer 
legitimate questions that are posed by members on this side of 
the House — refuse to answer questions that are posed by the 
press outside of this Chamber. And why? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government had nothing to hide, the 
answers would be forthcoming. We wouldn’t have to be 
badgering and questioning, and questioning these people with 
the same question day after day after day, if only they would be 
honest and straightforward in terms of questions that the people 
of this province have a right to know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be diverting from this motion, but 
in order to explain why I think the people have lost trust in this 
government and why this motion referring to the Western 
Diversification Fund as a slush fund is so relevant. 
 
(1515) 
 
When the auditor tables his report and indicates to the 
Provincial Auditor, the man who is the watch-dog over the 
public purse, and indicates to this province, the people of this 
province, that he can no longer do his job because information 
isn’t forthcoming from this government, why would you 
suppose that would be? Why would a government want to 
withhold answers from the opposition in question period? Why 
would they want to withhold the expenditures and the record of 
expenditures of their government — withhold 50 per cent of 
them? Why should this be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I want to tell you why. I think it’s because there is something to 
hide. There is mismanagement that abounds, and a lot of it is 
clear, but a lot of it isn’t. There is corruption, there is patronage, 
and there is a government run amok. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any thinking person, I would suggest, who would 
want to take a place in this legislature as a representative of the 
people of Saskatchewan, would want to ensure that when they 
leave office it would be a record of service to the people of this 
province, and that record would involve honesty, a high level of 
morality, and most of all, Mr. Speaker, fairness. And in terms of 
this Western Diversification Fund and the record that they’re 
leaving behind, that this government and the federal 
counterparts are leaving behind, I don’t believe they can say 
that. 
 
I don’t believe that they can say they’ve treated one business 
person in the same fashion as they’ve treated another. And it’s 
not only me that doesn’t believe that. As I’ve indicated, the 
head of the Canadian independent business federation feels 
similarly, feels that some business people are being unjustly 
treated and unfairly treated. And why should that be? If an 
elected official would want to leave government with a record 
that their children and their children’s children could be proud 
of, why would those kind of statements come to the public 
through the media? 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very disappointed that in 
fact that’s the case, and I think the people of this province are 
disappointed. No, not only disappointed. I  

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province are 
becoming angry; the people of Canada are becoming angry. 
They’re overwhelmed with the daily repetition of stories of 
misappropriation of government dollars, of ministers’ 
involvement in corporations that family members are involved 
in. They’re disappointed and they’re disgusted and they’re 
angry with a government that, because of these kinds of 
misappropriation of government dollars, are selling off Crown 
assets, assets that we’ve used to deliver programs — health 
care, dental care. 
 
They’re angry with those things, and they’re waiting for an 
opportunity to make things right. And what I mean, sir, by 
making things right is that they’re . . . I believe there’s a fervour 
out there to replace this government with a government that 
cares, and a government that’s going to deliver some decent, 
honest government. 
 
I used as an example of patronage the Northern Lights game 
farm here in Saskatchewan. And last week, Mr. Speaker, we 
were dealing with another firm, GigaText, a firm that was run 
by a French-Canadian business person whose mandate was to 
translate the laws of this province, the statutes of this province, 
into French, as the federal courts have ruled is necessary. 
 
And these people are tied in, this Mr. Guy Montpetit is tied in 
with a fellow from Winnipeg by the name of Young, who also 
had his hand in the Western Diversification Fund cookie pot, or 
its predecessor, the ERDA (economic and regional development 
agreement) — another $500,000, without the 4 to $5 million 
that we’ve been talking about that’s been frittered away in this 
province. 
 
These are the things that have people upset, Mr. Speaker. This 
is what’s creating the anger in Saskatchewan, and this is what’s 
creating a situation where this government will be very 
short-lived if it doesn’t turn its mind to governing in a fair and 
an honest fashion, Mr. Speaker, I think a sad commentary on 
this government. I think it’s unfair; the people of this province 
feel that it’s unfair. 
 
And I want to talk about this $500,000 that went to this 
associate of Mr. Montpetit’s in the GigaText affair. I want to 
talk about a quote out of one of the newspapers, the Montreal 
Gazette, that indicates there’s something amiss here. Federal 
experts indicate that the technology isn’t going to work. But on 
the same hand, there’s federal government money going into it. 
And I’ll just quote: 
 

The source said that Young programmed his computer to 
translate perfectly a document which Young himself 
selected. 
 

And I think we’re going to see a replay of that in Saskatchewan. 
 

But when expert evaluators inserted their own documents, 
the system “just coughed, sputtered and died.” 
 

And the source went on, saying that: 
 

No one came away thinking the evaluation had  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1682 
 

worked. We said, “Don’t fund this . . .” 
 

But he goes on to say: 
 

But the decision was politics, not science. They needed to 
have some ERDA programs going and they were 
compelled to spend money for (good) political reasons. 
 

Not for good economic reasons, not for good business reasons, 
Mr. Speaker — for good political reasons. What an indictment. 
What a commentary. And a commentary, Mr. Speaker, as well, 
on a government that would hook themselves and give a blank 
cheque to Montpetit to spend $4 million-plus of provincial 
taxpayers’ money — for what? 
 
There hasn’t been a single syllable or statute translated in this 
province, and they still stand up and defend their incompetence. 
They still stand up and defend the corruption and the smell that 
surrounds this GigaText operation. 
 
And the parallel I’m drawing, Mr. Speaker, is that there is no 
difference between the Mulroney government in Ottawa and 
this administration in Saskatchewan. They’re both wrong; 
they’re both corrupt; they both don’t deserve to be around this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — We have never seen a provincial 
government or a federal government that has been so closely 
tied with the smell of unfairness and with the smell of 
incompetence and with the stench of corruption. That has never 
before happened in this province. The people of this province 
are not used to that kind of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to every member on that side that’s part of it 
and that sits back without saying a word, that lets this little 
group in the front here — the Premier and the Deputy Premier 
and the Justice minister and the Finance minister — that lets 
this little group that’s controlling this province continue to 
squander taxpayers’ money . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m looking at the motion, and the 
motion deals with the Western Diversification Fund. The hon. 
member at this point is making general statements, but he’s not 
relating it to the motion. And if he’s going to continue in that 
vein, he’ll have to relate what he’s saying to the motion, which 
is about the Western Diversification Fund. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I accept your ruling, and 
certainly I’m going to try and keep as close to the topic as I can. 
And if you’ll allow me what I was trying to do — and I’m not 
contradicting your ruling — what I am trying to do is draw a 
parallel between the Western Diversification Fund, federally 
controlled, and the way this administration, that is condoning 
that expenditure, handles provincial money, because I think it is 
closely connected, and I think it’s important that the people of 
the province understand what the connections are between this 
federal and this provincial government. 
 

I indicated earlier that the Premier of this province feels that 
we’re getting our fair share. Well what I’m trying to say, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there are certain few that are getting their fair 
share — friends of this government — but that that’s not 
available to every small-business man in Saskatchewan and 
business woman in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote again from the Montreal Gazette, 
and this is dated May 31, 1989. It says: 
 

The federal government gave a Winnipeg company 
$500,000 to develop technology to translate text by 
machine, despite having a research report which said the 
technology does not work . . . 
 

Those are from government scientists. 
 

In 1987, the government awarded a $500,000 grant to 
Douglas Young, a former University of Manitoba 
professor, and his new company, Norlus Inc. 
 
The grant was provided under the federal Economic and 
Regional Development Agreement with Manitoba. ERDA 
was set up to promote the application and marketing of 
new technologies. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Has that anything to do with the Western 
Diversification Fund? Is that what it is? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well of course. Of course it is. My 
colleague asks if that has anything to do with the Western 
Diversification Fund. Well most clearly it is. 
 
And the other part, I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that would 
raise people’s ears is the fact that it was done during an election 
campaign . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, my 
colleague says they built an airport at Luseland. 
 
The same thing, half a million dollars — all during a federal 
election campaign. And who wouldn’t believe that it’s a 
political slush fund. The people of the area didn’t want it, but 
the federal operation in their wisdom decided that that was what 
was politically best for the PC Party, so the announcement was 
made. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that people are dissatisfied with 
that kind of deliverance of programs. They’re fed up with that 
kind of a government that would use its own political fortunes 
before it would use sound economic reasoning to make a 
decision in terms of expenditure of federal government money 
and taxpayers’ dollars. But not this group. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And who is this all benefitting? We 
talked about the share of money that was coming to 
Saskatchewan, the 6 per cent with 16 per cent of the population. 
We talked about that. 
 
And who does this support? This supports people like Guy 
Montpetit, living in central Canada, who come out here and 
scam a Deputy Premier who isn’t even playing in the  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1683 
 

same league. He tries to deal with Mr. Montpetit and finds that 
within six months, almost $5 million of taxpayers’ money gone, 
frittered away. 
 
But do they speak on behalf of the Saskatchewan business men 
and women? Oh no. Oh no. And Saskatchewan people know 
who their friends are. 
 
I want to say that members opposite are living in a very, very 
small world. Saskatchewan is a small community, and you 
don’t get away with the kind of government you deliver. You 
don’t get away with the kind of patronage that the Western 
Diversification Fund time after time after time displays. 
 
People are looking for decent, honest government. Regional 
economic development that makes sense for our province — 
that’s what they’re looking for, and they’re asking to be 
involved. They’re asking that this western diversification 
money be available to them as well. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is going to 
come a time when in this province there will be a government 
that will deliver these programs in a fair fashion, and not just 
for the political gain and to fill the pockets of a few of their 
close-knit friends. That’s not what this province was built on, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s not how it will continue under another 
administration. 
 
You can look at editorials from newspapers that are not 
normally known to be supporters of the opposition of this 
legislature. And what do they have to say about the Western 
Diversification Fund? They call it a slush fund. Are they happy 
that Saskatchewan is getting their share . . . or do they feel is 
getting their share? No, and I just want to quote out of the 
Star-Phoenix, March 10, ’88: 
 
(1530) 
 

Concentrating the bulk of funding in central Canada will 
not lessen the regional disparities which exist in Canada. In 
fact, such a policy will likely encourage even more. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they understand who’s supporting who. 
They understand that this Premier isn’t speaking on behalf of 
Saskatchewan business men and women, and they understand 
that their regional economic development, or as this 
government likes to howl on and on about, about economic 
diversification and how we’re building and how we’re growing. 
 
I want to spend a little bit of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking 
about how we’re building and how we’re growing in 
Saskatchewan, and I want to share some facts and some figures 
with the members on the other side of this legislature, because I 
think it’s important that they hear them. And if they haven’t 
heard them before, I’ll share them with them today. 
 
It’s important that they know what are happening to the 
business men and women in their province. It’s important for 
them to know how many of their friends and their neighbours 
are going bankrupt. It’s important to know how many of their 
neighbours’ children are leaving this  

province. It’s important to know that under their administration 
that they are blindly supporting at this present time, that they’re 
blindly supporting an administration that’s ripping the guts out 
of this province. And it’s an unfair situation, and it’s going to 
be corrected when the people of this province have a chance to 
vote and to tell these people that enough is enough. 
 
They’ve built and heaped a debt upon the people of this 
province in general revenue for $4 billion — $4 billion. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that’s a crime, it’s a shame, and it’s an 
indictment of PC incompetence. And it’s going to be corrected. 
The total provincial debt has risen to almost $14 billion. 
 
Can you imagine? Can you imagine a government so 
incompetent, so wasteful, so patronage-ridden, so corrupt that it 
would destroy the economic base of a province? Can you 
imagine a government that’s been privatizing, selling off assets, 
and at the same time increasing the provincial debt? 
 
The people of this province are starting to understand just how 
corrupt and incompetent this government is. And the move 
now, Mr. Speaker, to privatizing yet more, shows that what’s 
happening with the Western Diversification Fund is only a 
small part, a small parcel, of why we’re having the large debt in 
this province and why there are only a few that have access to 
that Western Diversification Fund money. 
 
They understand very clearly the number of bankruptcies that 
the lack of regional economic development funds have caused 
in part, the fact that in ’88, business bankruptcies are at 460. 
And you can look from 1972 up — in ’82, it takes a jump and it 
just never quits. It almost appears as there’s no room for small 
business in this province. 
 
They know that they can’t have access to the Western 
Diversification Fund — that they know. But if they haven’t got 
access to some of that federal government money, and if they 
can’t as well have access to some of the provincial government 
money through SEDCO, at least allow a decent economic 
climate so that they can function on their own without 
government involvement. But that too is being taken away from 
them. 
 
The fact that this government has allowed business after 
business to go bankrupt with no help, the fact that the western 
diversification fund money is being polarized into the hands of 
a small few friends of this Tory government doesn’t sit well 
with business people. And it shouldn’t. 
 
Not only with business people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but anyone 
with an ounce of fairness, with an ounce of morality and 
decency would understand that a government has the 
responsibility to create an environment and an atmosphere 
where business can develop on its own without government 
involvement. And they also understand that, while you do get 
involved with some businesses, you create a competition 
against others — an unfair competition. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is an indecent government that would allow that to 
happen. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1684 
 

In terms of economic growth, this program is to help develop 
regional expansion, regional development. And what’s 
happened? Because of the political polarization of these dollars, 
you find a province like Saskatchewan lagging far behind any 
other province in Canada, perhaps with the exception of 
Newfoundland. And what government would allow that to 
happen? What government wouldn’t change direction, reassess 
what it’s doing, except for this PC government in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that any member on that 
side of the House that will sit idly by and be part and parcel, no 
matter how decent a person, no matter how decent a person they 
were when they came to this legislature, I would suggest has 
either got the blinkers on, the ears closed and the mouth closed, 
or doesn’t spend enough time around here to understand just 
how corrupt this government is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1989 Saskatchewan had an economic 
growth in terms of gross domestic product, an increase of 2.4 
per cent. It’s almost inconceivable to believe. It’s almost like 
you put the brakes on in this province and said, whoa, we’re not 
going to grow any more. 
 
But it’s not the story. The real facts are a different story than 
what you hear out of the mouth of the front-benchers on the 
other side. And the reason I say the front-benchers on the other 
side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because the back-benchers don’t 
say much, with the exception of course of the member from 
Lloydminster who’s always got something to say — it’s rarely 
relevant or never researched as well. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of this 
province see through this PC government and their federal 
counterparts. They’ve had a number of years now to analyse 
and assess where they’re going and where they want to take this 
province and this country. 
 
They’re having a firsthand look at the results of free trade. And 
I’d want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that one of the 
results of free trade are the cut-backs to DREE, the cut-backs to 
Saskatchewan in terms of the Western Diversification Fund, 
because that’s part and parcel of that free trade agreement. Part 
and parcel of that free trade agreement is that you can’t fund, 
and won’t fund, regional disparities in different areas of the 
nation. 
 
It’s the free-market-place system. It’s the open-for-business 
structure. It’s the rich get richer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
poor get poorer, and that’s what that’s all about. 
 
And I sometimes smile when I see this open-for-business 
government, this free enterprise at all costs government, when 
they happen to get involved in a joint proposition. And I have to 
smile at them sometimes. They’ll invest with a large 
multinational corporation, invest taxpayers’ dollars, and then at 
the same time, just on the other side of their mouth, they’ll tell 
us that they’re going to be divesting themselves of the shares. 
 
Well that only means to me, sir, one thing. That means  

lost revenue, that means lost dollars, that means an increase in 
the provincial deficit. It’s consistent with what they’ve been 
doing. But you’d think after they’d been tarred and feathered by 
the people in Saskatchewan as they travel around the province 
and talk to people who used to support them and who no longer 
do, that they might reassess where they’re at. But oh no, not this 
group. These guys have got one agenda, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and that’s an agenda to destroy this province economically, and 
that’s exactly where it’s going. And by not fighting with their 
federal counterparts to get our fair share of that Western 
Diversification Fund, that’s exactly what they’re doing. 
 
As I said before, we hold 16 per cent of the western Canadian 
population and we get 6 per cent of the fund. Does that seem 
fair? I want to suggest to you that it’s not fair, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s not fair at all, and I would hope that the Premier 
will perhaps reassess his friendship with the prime minister of 
this province and go down there with both barrels blazing and 
tell him that we’re a little fed up and that the reason they lost 10 
out of the 14 seats in Saskatchewan is because of the neglect 
that they’ve displayed over the years that they’ve been 
government. 
 
That’s what really needs doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s 
what this Premier should be doing. He can go to the Orient and 
try and sell 25 per cent of one of our Crown corporations in five 
different countries — and I mean that’s fair and fine — but I 
think what he should be doing is looking after business here at 
home. He should be looking into the reasons that we’re losing 
12,000 people out of this province in a very short period of 
time. He should be talking with neighbours of his colleagues in 
the back benches, and he should be talking, as a matter of fact, 
with them because I don’t believe that that’s happening. 
 
And I tell you that there are stories that are funnelling back 
from that side in terms of discontent from some of the 
back-benchers — and I’m not pointing any names, and I 
wouldn’t do that — but some of them who understand that their 
electoral future is pretty dim if this government continues on 
this course. They’re understanding that this isn’t part of their 
upbringing and the kind of government that these four or five 
cowboys are delivering isn’t the kind of government that their 
parents taught them to respect and that their church leaders 
taught them to respect and that decent people in their 
community know that they should have a right to respect. 
 
They’re not getting that kind of leadership. They’re not getting 
that kind of leadership when this Premier goes to Ottawa to 
speak for Saskatchewan, because that doesn’t happen. They’re 
not getting that kind of leadership when legislation is 
introduced that clearly, clearly, clearly is opposed by eight out 
of 10 Saskatchewan people. They’re not getting that kind of a 
feeling that they can be part and parcel and comfortable with 
the front-benchers when they’re being misled in terms of the 
GigaText scam. 
 
Those are things, I would suggest, that are creating dissension 
within that caucus, and that should create dissension within any 
caucus if in fact there are a few decent people there. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1685 
 

But the motion, Mr. Speaker, deals specifically with the 
Western Diversification Fund and the fact that this government 
is not delivering it properly. I see a half a million dollars out of 
this fund into a game ranch, and I mean that’s fair and fine. And 
I see $4 million that go into a GigaText scam, and that may be 
fair and fine. 
 
But I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what could be done with, say, 
let’s pick a figure of $4 million. Let’s just use the figure from 
the Western Diversification Fund of $4 million. And let’s take a 
half a dozen ridings in your own riding . . . half a dozen towns 
in your own riding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Just to use six towns in your riding, medium size, spread that 
money in terms of grants at a reasonable interest rate. Maybe 
spread it to your hoteliers who are having a very difficult time 
to keep their head above water. Maybe you would want to look 
at a reasonable interest rate on a loan to an implement dealer in 
your community. You might want to look at a reasonable loan 
to the hardware store, or to a small . . . or say to a young couple 
that want to establish a new business in one of your 
communities. Or you might want to build, as a matter of fact, a 
fertilizer plant in Rosetown. I mean, that may be a little novel 
idea that would escape the members on that side of the House, 
but it might be something to think about. And maybe rather 
than dumping $175 million at Cargill, you’d want to pay off 
some of the debt, rather than increasing it. 
 
(1545) 
 
I mean, these are not all novel ideas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’re common sense ideas that are shared with people, 
business people, throughout this province when I talk to them 
about the direction this government’s going in. And they say to 
me, gee, you know, the high interest rate policy that’s caused by 
the diversification money that’s put into central Canada — 
that’s increasing interest rates, is really creating a hardship out 
here for me in Saskatchewan. 
 
Like, my banker is starting to put the squeeze to me. He’s 
telling me that there’s no operating capital, there’s none for me. 
Here in Saskatchewan you’re a bad business risk because of the 
environment that this government’s created, and the money 
dries up. 
 
So instead of throwing, say, $4 million at a Guy Montpetit, 
wouldn’t we be wiser to put that money into our communities 
and have young family businesses stave off bankruptcy? I 
mean, wouldn’t that be a novel idea? 
 
Wouldn’t it be an incredible idea to look at a small grocer in a 
small town that’s really finding the squeeze because of 
extended store hours in the cities now; I mean, wouldn’t it be 
novel to perhaps help him out with a little operating loan, to 
stock his store where people would want to come in and 
purchase in that small store? 
 
I mean, wouldn’t it be novel if we were using the Western 
Diversification Fund in order to do those kinds of things? And 
I’ll tell you what would be novel — it would be novel for this 
government to recognize that there are small businesses that are 
hurting in this province, that there are small businesses that 
deserve help and that require help  

but that are not getting it from this government. Now that would 
be novel. 
 
This government is losing it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of 
understanding what these small communities want. They don’t 
want any more of your glitz and your multi-megaproject hype. 
That’s not what they’re looking for. They’re looking for just a 
little help, a little stability. 
 
And I mean, it’s not a big thing. We’re not talking 
small-business people in one community that want 10 or $20 
million like your friend, Peter Pocklington. I mean, that’s not 
what they’re asking for. 
 
They’re just asking for fairness. They’re asking for this 
government to speak with their federal counterparts in terms of 
the Western Diversification Fund and talk to the people at 
SEDCO in terms of what they could be doing for small 
Saskatchewan businesses. And I mean, they might even be 
willing to overlook a half a million dollars that goes to one of 
our cabinet minister’s sons. They might be willing to overlook 
that, as long as there was a semblance of decency and honesty 
in terms of sharing the rest of that pie for themselves. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan business people are an independent 
lot. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they always 
have been as long as I’ve been involved in business in this 
province, that they’ve always prided themselves on that 
independence and their ability to work things out if they’re 
given a fair shake. That’s the spirit of the Saskatchewan 
business community. 
 
But I want to say, as well, that that spirit is becoming bent, and 
it’s becoming broken, because they see at every turn this 
government unwilling to help where they can, and willing to 
destroy when they can. They see utility rates increasing at an 
alarming rate, taxes increasing because of revenue-sharing 
changes to the municipal governments, increased local taxes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening attentively 
to the member opposite, and we are here debating resolution no. 
6 that speaks on Western Diversification Fund and economic 
development. Now I am prepared to speak . . . I am prepared, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to speak on their motion, resolution no. 
13, as it relates to small business. That’s what I believe that the 
member opposite has been doing for the last five or 10 minutes. 
 
Now if they want to combine the two resolutions and allow me 
the privilege of speaking for one or two hours on what this 
government has done for small business, I am prepared to do 
that. But I believe until then, you should advise the member that 
he should speak on what the resolution is. Otherwise, I think 
that in fairness to other members of this Assembly that want to 
speak on a relative topic, we don’t get that opportunity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — First of all, let me say I regret that the 
member from Regina South was brought to life by a gibe  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1686 
 

that we hadn’t heard from him for some time. It should be 
noted, although this is not germane to the point of order, that 
the member could not have heard most of what the member 
from Prince Albert had to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resolution is fairly broad in its terms. The 
resolution urges that this Assembly communicate to the 
Parliament of Canada the fact that western Canada, and 
Saskatchewan in particular, is not getting its share of the 
Western Development Fund and that that money which is being 
spent is being spent in a fashion based on patronage rather than 
sound economic development. That is a fairly broad topic. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, his comments were within that broad topic. He was 
talking about the use that the funds were put to and the misuse 
that the funds were put to, and that’s all part of the topic. He 
was, as well, discussing the political patronage which has been 
involved in the discussion of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I believe the member is 
entering into debate, and we’re just discussing a point of order. 
 
Well I’ve listened both to the member from Regina South and 
the member from Regina Centre, and I believe the member 
from Regina South has an appropriate point to make with 
regard to relevance and the . . . 
 
Are the members . . . Order. Order, order. I would ask the 
members just to allow me to make my comments. 
 
I’ve been listening to the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake. The Speaker earlier had asked the member to make his 
points relevant to the motion before us. And I’ve listened to 
both points of order, and I would ask that the member continue 
to . . . 
 
Member from Moose Jaw North, I believe the members are 
required to be quiet while the Speaker is on his feet, and I 
would just ask that privilege. 
 
I would ask the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, as he 
continues his remarks, to make his remarks fairly relevant to the 
motion that he has moved in this House this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can 
understand the member from Regina South’s sensitivity in 
terms of anybody talking about the business community and 
their feelings toward his government, because I think it’s 
becoming much clearer to him as he travels the province and 
talks with business people in terms of their acceptance of his 
government’s administration. I can understand that sensitivity, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
As I was saying before I was interrupted by the member from 
Regina South, I’m trying to explain, and I will continue on this 
vein if I might. I’ll be a little more specific as it relates to the 
motion, sir. 
 
And we were talking about the Western Diversification Fund 
and how it’s being allocated throughout the Saskatchewan 
business community and how it is perhaps  

misdirected in terms of not being available to small businesses, 
to mom and dad businesses. And if that is relevant to the 
motion, which I feel it is, I would like to share a few of the 
thoughts that people have asked me to share with the members 
on this side of the House and on that side of the House as well. 
 
And as I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it a little 
disappointing that the allocation of these dollars is not directed 
towards the small business sector, as I believe it should. And 
the provincial government is clearly a party to the direction of 
that money. And it never stood up. As I said before, the Premier 
indicates that we’ve got our share. The Premier indicates that 
things are going well, but that’s not what the business 
community out there tell me. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government reassess 
its position in terms of supporting the patronage that the 
Western Diversification Fund has been exhibiting; that they 
assess what putting those dollars into the hands of small 
business in Saskatchewan could do for this economy. 
 
I mean, even the minister from Regina South would understand 
that the biggest job creation tool that we have in Saskatchewan 
is not the big megaprojects that he so proudly boasts about, it’s 
the mom and dad businesses, the small businesses with 20 or 
fewer employees, or 30 employees. Those are the people that 
generate jobs in this province. And I want to say, because the 
Western Diversification Fund has forgotten about them, we 
have an out-migration of young people from this province like 
has never happened before. 
 
Now if the minister wants to stand up and argue against his 
government’s own figures in terms of out-migration from this 
province, in terms of unemployment in this province, in terms 
of the number of people on social assistance, well that’s his 
business. And I’d welcome hearing those arguments because I 
tell you frankly, I believe it’s impossible to defend the 
undefendable, and those figures that his government has put 
out, in my mind and in minds of the small-business community 
of Saskatchewan, are clearly undefendable. 
 
And as I said, the business community isn’t asking for much. 
They’re not asking for megadollars from the Western 
Diversification Fund or from SEDCO. They’re asking for a 
small piece of that pie, but they’re being denied that because 
we’ve got a callous, incompetent, patronage-ridden 
government, both in Ottawa and Regina. That’s why this is 
happening, and that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion is 
before the House. 
 
If he really believed; if that minister really believed in the lines 
he uses when he addresses this legislature when referring to 
small business; if he really believed that there was a place for 
Saskatchewan business . . . for the Saskatchewan business 
community in the scheme of things in this province, if he really 
believed that small-business operators were worthy of 
existence, then he would be changing the direction of this 
government in terms of its allocation of funds, and he would be 
lobbying his federal counterpart to change their allocation of 
funds in terms of the Western Diversification Fund. That’s what  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1687 
 

he’d be doing. 
 
The business community in this province doesn’t want rhetoric 
or hype any longer. They want performance. They want 
performance out of western diversification money. They want 
performance out of SEDCO money. They want decency from 
their elected officials. They want honest, open answers in this 
House as to how those dollars are spent, and they want access to 
them. 
 
And you failed, Mr. Minister, to speak on behalf of the business 
community in Saskatchewan on every count — on every count. 
The Premier has failed to act, the Deputy Premier has failed to 
act, the Finance Minister has failed to act, and the Justice 
Minister has failed to act. 
 
And I understand that you’re not of the inner cabinet, Mr. 
Minister, and that you don’t have maybe direct access to how 
these funds are looped out. I understand that maybe you don’t 
have any more involvement than one of the lowliest 
back-benchers on the other side do, and that may be the case; 
and you may be a little bitter about that and you may be a little 
upset about it. But some advice for you, sir, would be to sit 
down with those people and tell them what your small-business 
colleagues are actually saying about them; what they’re actually 
saying about the western diversification slush fund that goes to 
friends of the PC Party and is not available or accessible by 
Saskatchewan small business. 
 
You’ve got a responsibility. Sir, your responsibility is to speak 
for your small-business colleagues, and you aren’t doing that. 
You’ve had opportunity in this legislature hundreds and dozens 
of times. You’ve been part of government since 1982, and I 
want to tell you, you have changed nothing. The patronage 
hasn’t stopped, continues on; apparently you condone it. The 
western diversification funds that are allocated are not 
accessible to small business, and you know that — only friends 
of your political party. And that’s why, Mr. Minister, and that’s 
why, Mr. Speaker, this motion is before this Assembly. 
 
I said before that it’s not something that one wants to do, to 
stand in this legislature and roar at a government and chastise a 
government for incompetence, for corruption. No one wants to 
have to do that. And I guess maybe it’s only a special instance 
when one does, and that’s when you’ve got a PC government 
led by four little soldiers sitting in the middle of the front 
benches, like this one does, who cares little for the people of 
this province, who cares little for the future of the children of 
our province, that it’s time someone did. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I want to suggest to you that members on this side of the 
House are going to continue as long as these guys are hell-bent 
toward destruction and driving this province into destruction as 
they are. 
 
I talked before about western diversification money being put 
into the hands of a corporation that a son of a minister is 
involved with, and that isn’t acceptable. And I think that all 
members on that side of the House understand that. I think even 
the back-benchers, who may not be as closely  

involved with the happenings of that, understand that. 
 
And I think that they would wish they could go back to the 
small towns in their ridings and say, by golly, you know, I think 
the federal government and the provincial government have sat 
down and worked out a deal where there’s going to be some 
funding available for you; I mean even you, who haven’t 
carried a PC membership card or who aren’t related to a 
member of the government side; even you, lowly Saskatchewan 
business person who’s maybe been operating in this province 
for 20 or 30 years and who’s employed people consistently, 
even you might have access to these funds. Wouldn’t that be a 
novel idea? 
 
And wouldn’t that be a positive move if members on that side 
of the House would take that approach to the Western 
Diversification Fund, and would take that approach when 
they’re in caucus talking to the inner cabinet? What a novel 
approach. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think that they may find 
that there would be some respect for them when they got back 
to their ridings, because that business community is waiting for 
someone to speak on their behalf. They’re waiting for members 
of this legislature to stand up and tell the inner cabinet that 
those funds have to be allocated in a different fashion, that they 
have to be shared more equitably, and that all taxpayers of this 
province have a right to access to them. I mean, what a novel 
idea — fairness and decency . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My 
colleague from Regina North says, in light of this government’s 
actions it would be unique, and I can’t help but agree with him. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this motion is not one that 
should be before the legislature because we’ve got other 
pressing matters to deal with. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re right. You’re right 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And the member from Kinistino says I’m 
right, and I know I’m right. And we’ve been waiting for 
legislation to deal with agriculture and unemployment and 
health care, and you haven’t delivered one piece before this 
House that you’re willing to debate. 
 
We’ve been willing to talk about the Western Diversification 
Fund and what it might want to do. We’ve been willing to talk 
about interest rates. We’ve been willing to talk about 
unemployment. We’ve been willing to talk about all of these 
things. 
 
But what kind of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Where’s the 
legislation that you’re holding back? You bring in the 
legislation, and we’ve given you commitments in writing that 
we’ll debate it tomorrow. As a matter of fact, I would suggest to 
you, Mr. Finance Minister, we’d be willing to go tonight if you 
had the guts to bring any legislation before this House. 
 
We’ve been here for 50-some days, or however many days it is. 
You people haven’t brought in one substantive piece . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1688 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I was taken a 
little off topic by the Finance minister, but it’s so easy to do. He 
so rarely speaks in this legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Only from his seat. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And only from his seat when he does. So 
it was actually a rare treat to hear his voice again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister talked earlier about getting 
on with the business of this House, and I want to say, in terms 
of this motion, there are other things that I would rather be 
doing, rather than to be speaking about the Western 
Diversification Fund and the government’s lack of moving on 
making that fund function. 
 
We’d rather be speaking about unemployment in this province, 
or we’d rather be speaking about programs for small business, 
or we’d rather be speaking about how to stop the bleeding of 
young people out of this province. Those are all things we want 
to speak about. We spent 50 days or so in this House, and the 
people of Saskatchewan are waiting for this government to 
govern — not one piece of legislation dealing with any of those 
topics. 
 
Private members’ day, the opposition day, we have an 
opportunity to debate what we feel is relevant. And clearly the 
plight of small business is relevant because there are a number 
of them going bankruptcies, and this motion deals with that. But 
there are other issues. There are farmers going bankrupt; 
legislation that we’re waiting to have debated in this House; 
record unemployment in this province. 
 
But what do they bring before us? The bell-ringing motion day 
after day after day. 
 
The people of this province know what they’re about. The 
people understand what this government’s motives are. They 
understand that they’re afraid to let this legislature work. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. I believe the hon. 
member will agree that he’s wandering off the topic. He’s 
wandering off the topic, and I ask him to come back to the 
motion in a more direct manner. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
enthusiasm may have taken me off topic a little. I will apologize 
for that if that were the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland has 
indicated that he would like to second this motion, and would as 
well like to say a few words on the topic. And I plan on entering 
my closing remarks to the legislature so that that may happen. 
 
But in closing I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I share the 
disappointment of the business community in Saskatchewan, 
the disappointment that they don’t have access to federal 
government funding through the Western Diversification Fund; 
that it has become nothing but a slush fund for the PC 
supporters, and that’s been evidenced in this legislature in the 
last couple of weeks.  

The minister of SEDCO understands that clearly. 
 
The people of this province are disappointed and understand 
that that money has been used during election campaigns to buy 
votes, not only in Saskatchewan but in other jurisdictions; as an 
example, Manitoba, through the Norlus scam. They understand 
that millions and millions of dollars of diversification fund 
money has been pumped into Quebec and southern Ontario to 
create an artificial economy that has created an inflationary 
jump, that has caused interest rates to be raised out here and yet 
compound the problems in Saskatchewan. They’re disappointed 
in all of that. They know it’s unnecessary and they feel it’s 
unacceptable. 
 
But they also know, Mr. Speaker, what the root cause of those 
happenings are. They understand that it’s a PC government, 
both federally and provincially, that cares more about its own 
little group of Tory supporters, that cares more about its own 
little political agenda and its own political future than it does 
about the rest of the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada. It 
disappoints them. 
 
They also know that that’s why we’ve got a massive debt in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And in Ottawa, as well, my colleague 
from Quill Lakes says. These are all things that they understand 
clearly. They also understand that a federal minister and a 
federal prime minister will stand up and say one thing one day 
and turn around and say the opposite the next day. 
 
They’re disappointed, and they understand that this Premier will 
do the same thing here in our province. They understand that 
cabinet ministers will stand up in question period in this forum 
day after day after day and ignore facts that are placed before 
them and refuse to answer. 
 
All of this is tied into what’s happening with the Western 
Diversification Fund, Mr. Speaker. All of this is part and parcel 
of why this Tory government in Saskatchewan will have a 
quick death come next election. I would suggest to you a severe 
and a massive hemorrhage of Tory blood will flow throughout 
the streets of this province. And if there are two or three that 
come back to this legislature after the next election, I would 
suggest to you that the people of this province will be in shock. 
Thank you very much. 
 
I move: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of 
Canada its extreme disappointment that western Canada 
has been allotted a smaller share of federal regional 
development money under the new Western 
Diversification Fund than under the previous department of 
regional and industrial expansion; and further, that this 
Assembly regrets that grants from the Western 
Diversification Fund continue to be made on the basis of 
political patronage rather than in  

  



 
June 6, 1989 

1689 
 

accordance with sound economic development strategies. 
 

This motion is seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is actually 
quite an important motion that we’re discussing this afternoon 
inasmuch as it deals with an issue that many western people feel 
the federal government in Ottawa is really not fully aware of, 
and that issue is the nature of western economic development. 
 
And this motion, as you’ve just indicated, consists of two 
principal parts: one, indicating that there is extreme 
disappointment in western Canada that a smaller share of 
federal western regional development money has been given to 
the West than to the rest of the country under the Western 
Diversification Fund; and secondly, expresses regrets that 
grants from this Western Diversification Fund continue to be 
made on a patronage basis. 
 
And it’s for this reason then, Mr. Speaker, that many people 
here in Saskatchewan feel that these concerns need to be 
brought to the attention of the federal government. They need to 
hear from this Legislative Assembly the concerns of 
Saskatchewan business people that they simply don’t have 
access, fair reasonable access, to federal funding through the 
Western Diversification Fund, and neither do they have an 
equal opportunity because of some of the patronage associated 
with this fund. 
 
Now the people of Saskatchewan, for the most part, know that 
the Western Diversification Fund was announced with much 
fanfare and promise in the months preceding the most recent 
federal election last year. People had a lot of hope, a lot of 
optimism that this might be the fund that would make a 
difference for western Canada, that this might be the fund 
which would actually see Saskatchewan firms beginning to 
compete with companies in Ontario and Quebec for federal 
contracts and for other business contracts as a real means of 
diversifying the western economy. 
 
Federal plans were to foster secondary industry throughout the 
western provinces. And what we’ve seen in the last year and a 
half is that these federal plans have basically not materialized. 
And I intend to document that in the next minutes, with some 
degree of specificity. 
 
Really what it amounts to is a political plan and not an 
economic development plan. We’ve seen federal cabinet 
ministers like Bill McKnight, the minister responsible for the 
western diversification plan, putting hundreds of millions of 
dollars into his own constituency. 
 
We’ve seen $1.7 million worth of western diversification 
money, for example, going into airports in western 
Saskatchewan, in Mr. McKnight’s constituency. And that’s just 
unacceptable. People smell patronage, people smell corruption 
when they see western diversification funds being used in that 
kind of fashion at the same time that Saskatchewan business 
people, small-business  

people in particular, simply can’t have access to those same 
funds. 
 
And I want to demonstrate this afternoon how those grants to 
the airports violate the expressed criteria of the Western 
Diversification Fund itself. 
 
(1615) 
 
Another example of the disappointment that this fund, or this 
initiative, has fostered across the province of Saskatchewan, is 
the well-known scandal associated with the Northern Lights 
game farm. People are really disheartened and saddened when 
they learn that half a million dollars can be granted to the son of 
the minister of the privatization here in this province simply by 
virtue of a phone call to the federal minister’s office responsible 
for this program. And that is patently unacceptable, as is some 
of the unparliamentary language that we’ve just heard. 
 
When a half a million dollars can be sprung at the snap of a 
phone call from a provincial minister here to the federal 
minister in Ottawa, something is rotten in Canada and 
Saskatchewan. And people know that that rot has infected the 
Western Diversification Fund. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit this afternoon about some of the 
spending, the global spending as well, of this Western 
Diversification Fund. The West, as a whole, and Saskatchewan 
in particular, have never received their fair share in 
disbursements from this federal program. The very program that 
was to equalize regional disparities and to contribute to western 
growth and diversification, both on the global level of the four 
western provinces and on the level of this particular province, 
has not received proportionate funding. 
 
Under this fund, the West has continued to receive substantially 
less for regional programs on a per capita basis, and Ontario 
and Quebec, as we might suspect, have received proportionately 
more than their fair share, more in fact than they did under the 
old department of regional and industrial expansion programs. 
In terms then of total government funding, Saskatchewan and 
the four western provinces as a whole are still to this day, in 
spite of this fund, being short-changed by the federal 
government in Ottawa. 
 
In 1988, for example, western Canada received $312 million 
from the Western Diversification Fund — $312 million. That 
was 15.4 per cent of the total disbursements of this $2 billion 
total. This was less than the 15.5 per cent the West had received 
under the old DREE program a year earlier — not much less, 
but the point is, it was still less under a program whose 
expressed intention was to diversify and open up new 
opportunities for small-business people in western Canada. And 
that’s precisely why western Canadians are disappointed with 
this program. 
 
The point is that no improvement has been made in the share of 
development grants coming into the West, or coming into this 
province, and people can’t understand why. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1690 
 

And then when they see the money going for patronage 
purposes, they totally fail to understand what is going on with 
the program that is supposed to be serving their interest. Ontario 
and Quebec, for example, received 67 per cent of the regional 
development funds under this new initiative, up from 60 per 
cent under the old DREE funding a year earlier — 7 per cent 
more for the East; less for the West. And these are the very 
grants that are supposed to lessen regional disparity. 
 
And this has meant then that Saskatchewan’s own share — and 
I want to talk very particularly now, not just about the West in 
general, but about Saskatchewan’s share — that Saskatchewan, 
with 16 per cent of the western Canadian population, has 
received only 6 per cent of the total funding coming to the West 
under this program. With 16 per cent of the population, 
Saskatchewan gets 6 per cent of the money. 
 
And I think you’d have to admit yourself, Mr. Speaker, that that 
isn’t exactly the picture of fairness or proportionality that we 
might hope for or expect under a diversification program. What 
it is actually doing, those figures reveal, is perpetuating the 
inequalities, the inequities of previous programs that we’ve 
experienced from the federal government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What a disgrace. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And as my colleague says, it’s a disgrace. It 
really is. 
 
To this date, according to the western diversification office in 
Saskatoon, their own figures, Saskatchewan in fact — and this 
is not just a disgrace, but this is actually scandalous — 
Saskatchewan has received the lowest amount of funding of any 
western province, the lowest amount of any western province, 
from the Western Diversification Fund. 
 
And people ask themselves, how can this be? How can this 
possibly be when the Premier of the province who prides 
himself on being such a close associate of Brian Mulroney, goes 
to Ottawa regularly and can’t defend Saskatchewan interests 
with a program whose expressed intention is to meet those 
interests in a new and a fair way. 
 
People ask, how can this be? What’s going on? From the 
Premier who’s an apologist for the Prime Minister, and he can’t 
even get a fair shake for his own people here in Saskatchewan 
from this program. 
 
British Columbia receives $77 million; Alberta receives $71 
million; Manitoba receives $44 million; and Saskatchewan 
receives $39 million. Still next year country, still the lowest 
amount of funding from the diversification program. 
 
And what is troubling as well, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that no 
annual reports have yet been tabled in the House of Commons 
in Ottawa from this Western Diversification Fund. There’s been 
no accounting to this point for the expenditures made under this 
fund, although the fund will have been in existence for two 
years now — two years in existence, but no accounting for the 
funds. 
 

And we see echoes of that here in Saskatchewan when Public 
Accounts are tabled late and auditors have trouble getting access 
to information to table their own reports. 
 
The early projections when the Western Diversification Fund 
was announced indicated that each of the western provinces 
would be receiving approximately $60 million per year. Those 
were the early projections. Now we know that Saskatchewan 
doesn’t get its fair share when it gets $39 million — far short of 
its own appropriation. 
 
It’s interesting to know in this regard, to put this into some kind 
of context, that in the four-year period ’83 to ’87, the federal 
government, while spending $100 million on biotechnology, 
spent $60 million of that for the biotech institute in Montreal — 
$60 million for the biotech institute in Montreal, when 
Saskatchewan can’t get its $60 million allotment from the 
Western Diversification Fund. It can’t even get $25 million 
from the Western Diversification Fund for the plant biotech 
institute here in Saskatoon, and that’s a disappointment as well. 
 
When this kind of funding, a $25 million funding request for a 
centre of excellence in biotechnology is dangled as a political 
carrot before the federal election in ’88, and people to this day 
still can’t see any tangible proof of that money coming to this 
province for a biotech institute, that’s a disappointment. 
 
Well not only that, not only is the funding inequitable, but the 
actual performance of the Western Diversification Fund is cause 
for concern, great cause for public concern. Because what the 
Western Diversification Fund has really done is taken a sort of 
shotgun approach to western diversification that has 
characterized many of the federal plans in the past — a shotgun 
approach in that political considerations are allowed to override 
economic considerations in the making of the grants. 
 
Grants are made for political purposes rather than in accordance 
with sound economic principles with an economic development 
strategy which will help to build the infrastructure of this 
province and the other western provinces. 
 
Indeed this is so much the case that John Bulloch, the president 
of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, has stated: 
 

The Western Diversification Fund is close to becoming 
nothing more than a political slush fund to feather the nests 
of provincial governments. 
 

And he goes on to express the dissatisfaction of the 
small-business community that has had to stand by while 
western Canada becomes a pawn in the political ambitions of 
the federal Progressive Conservative government. 
 
And I can speak from personal experience, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of my own constituency, going door to door, running into 
a fellow who was into the business of steel fabrication and 
wanted information on the Western Diversification Fund and 
how he might qualify. I shared some of that information with 
him, gave him the contacts such that he could forward his 
proposal for consideration,  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1691 
 

and nothing has come of it — nothing has come of it. 
 
Because what it really amounts to is that the high rollers in the 
provincial economy are given preferential access to this 
Western Diversification Fund. Or those firms who have 
political connections are able to access western diversification 
funds, but other smaller firms are not able to implement their 
own plans for diversification and make their contribution to the 
provincial economy. Hopes were high, but this fellow didn’t get 
anything from the Western Diversification Fund. 
 
I have a printer in my constituency who was also quite excited 
about the prospects of securing some funding under the Western 
Diversification Fund when it was announced, and I supplied 
him with information too on the particulars of the program and 
how he might make contacts and access the program with his 
application. And again nothing came of it. He was told that he 
didn’t qualify, that they weren’t in the business of assisting 
existing businesses to implement their existing business plans, 
but that the criteria had to add to the larger diversification and 
innovation in the province. 
 
And this in itself has caused a lot of disgruntlement with 
Saskatchewan small-business people when they go to access the 
fund and find that they can’t crack into the fund, in fact that 
they aren’t even considered when they bring their application to 
bear. 
 
Indeed I think that it’s fair to say that the primary criticism of 
the Western Diversification Fund is not a political criticism; the 
primary criticism has come from the business community itself 
— those people who have tried to access the fund and found 
that they simply can’t do it. 
 
Business people feel that they haven’t been given a fair shake, 
or they’re convinced that when they bring their applications 
forward, that the guide-lines for funding are prejudicial and 
unfair, poorly considered, and not really shared with them in 
any full fashion. And so in fact there is a grudge almost, that 
they end up wasting their time filling out applications for 
western diversification program and finding that they don’t 
even qualify in the first place. 
 
(1630) 
 
And this feeling is entrenched when they open the newspaper, 
as they did this fall before the federal election. And I have in 
front of me here a clipping from the September 26, 1988 
Star-Phoenix, that is titled, “Helping Saskatchewan industry”: 
 

The western economic diversification is listening to your 
ideas for new products, new technology, new export 
markets, import replacements, industry-wide productivity 
improvements . . . 
 

And it goes on to give three little pictures of individuals who 
have benefitted from this program and how they have benefitted 
from western diversification funding. And so the carrot is there; 
all the encouragement is there; the come-on, the hucksterism is 
there in the public relations effort. 
 
But when people go to access the program and find that  

they can’t access it because they don’t meet the criteria, then the 
disappointment sets in, then the bitterness sets in, then people 
begin to wonder and ask questions as to what the program is 
really all about and what sort of credibility it has. 
 
And I think, for example, very specifically, of a small business 
in the Sutherland constituency that approached me this spring 
regarding the possibility of funding from the Western 
Diversification Fund. This business is called Baba’s Home 
Style Perogies. And the people that . . . this is a family-run 
operation, small business, newly established in the Sutherland 
constituency on Central Avenue. 
 
And the people came to me wanting to know if there might be a 
possibility of provincial funding or assistance to help them 
diversify from the making of perogies into the making of 
cabbage rolls. And the long and the short of the story is that 
there was no provincial money available for them. 
 
In fact, when I couldn’t secure anything myself for them, I 
contacted the offices of the minister responsible for small 
business and asked that she might talk with them. And in 
checking with them today, they still have not had contact from 
the minister. And this is at least two months if not three or four 
months ago that this overture was made to the minister’s office 
to contact these people. 
 
But the point is there was nothing provincially. We knew that. 
We tried it; it didn’t materialize. So they wondered about the 
possibility of western diversification funding. Well that simply 
didn’t exist either. It simply didn’t exist because it wasn’t a new 
technology or one of the contours of the program again. It 
wasn’t a new product, it wasn’t a new technology, it wasn’t a 
new export market, it wasn’t an import replacement, it wasn’t 
an industry-wide productivity improvement, so they didn’t 
qualify. 
 
But meanwhile the Saskatoon Fresh Pack Potato people, who 
also make perogies and are diversified into cabbage rolls and 
other foods, received $188,000 from the department of regional 
industrial expansion. 
 
I say this to illustrate the way in which the door is closed to 
small family-run operations under this program. Much ballyhoo 
about how it benefits the province and how it’ll diversify the 
economy, but it doesn’t serve the needs of Saskatchewan 
small-business people. 
 
And I want to go on now to talk about some of the other 
projects that have been funded or have not been funded, in 
particular, by this western diversification program. 
 
And as we look at the funding that’s taken place to date, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s simply impossible to do so without consideration 
of the political contours of this fund. And in fact that’s why the 
motion before us this afternoon talks about the grants from the 
Western Diversification Fund continuing to be made on the 
basis of political patronage rather than in accordance with 
sound economic development strategies. 
 
For that reason, it’s no accident, Mr. Speaker, that again this 
past fall as we were approaching the federal election,  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1692 
 

on Monday, September 19, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, on the 
third page, the top of the third page, has an article entitled: 
McKnight focuses on province in pre-election spending spree. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Trying to buy votes. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And that’s shorthand, as my colleague from 
Regina Victoria says, for McKnight trying to buy votes for the 
federal PC Party. 
 
And I’ll just take the opportunity to read the introductory two 
sentences to this article: 
 

With the federal election in the offing, Ottawa is spending 
money in Saskatchewan like a man on a mission, and more 
often than not the man fulfilling the mission is Bill 
McKnight, minister responsible for western diversification. 
 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker, to talk about some of the 
highlights of this madman McKnight’s spending spree. A 
Lloydminster upgrader at $401 million — western 
diversification money. But that’s for private enterprise. And put 
that beside, Mr. Speaker, put that beside Baba’s who wanted 
money to make cabbage rolls in my Sutherland constituency — 
a glaring inequity. And no wonder people resent this program 
and feel bitter about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An upgrader, incidentally, in the federal minister responsible’s 
own constituency. It just happens to be a coincidence, but 
people know that it’s more than a coincidence; it’s political 
patronage. And that is precisely what this motion today is 
talking about when we talk about the Western Diversification 
Fund, and therein is the need for this Assembly to communicate 
to the Parliament of Canada itself its disappointment in this 
fund and its patronage dimensions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Another expenditure from this Western 
Diversification Fund made by the man on a mission, the 
madman McKnight on a mission, before the federal election last 
year, was the announcement of 25 million for the national 
agriculture biotechnology initiative. That’s money that we still 
haven’t seen, incidentally. It’s money that’s been talked about 
for two or three years with much ado, and we’ve seen nothing. 
But it was talked about. That didn’t stop Mr. McKnight from 
talking about it in September, just before the federal election 
was going to be called. 
 
And the western diversification office also had $5 million to 
give to the Potash & Phosphate Institute of Canada in 
Saskatoon. And here we see another dimension of this Western 
Diversification Fund that rubs people the wrong way. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is the fact that money from the Western 
Diversification Fund tends to go, not just to the big players like 
the Lloydminster upgrader or a biotechnology institute, if and 
when that money will ever be spent, the money tends also to go 
to industry-wide organizations or associations. 
 
And that is precisely so that the minister responsible, Mr.  

McKnight, and the program itself won’t be criticized for 
funding various projects or businesses in one community and 
not another. Because when push comes to shove, if you stop to 
think about it, it’s only logical to draw the conclusion that there 
is only so much new diversification and so many new initiatives 
that any government can take. There are only so many 
businesses in the world. You can only be so innovative. You 
can only be so diversified. 
 
And so faced with that fact, when you begin to pick and choose 
between individual companies, small-business people, you run 
the risk, in giving the grant to one, of alienating the others. 
 
So what does the western diversification program tend to do? It 
tends to give money, big money, to industry-wide associations 
or organizations. And I have a number of examples of these 
kinds of associations. 
 
One of them, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, is the Potash & 
Phosphate Institute of Canada, headquartered in Saskatoon. And 
it’s very interesting that initiatives in this regard for the potash 
and phosphate industries were first announced here in 
Saskatchewan, by my reckoning at least, in the Speech from the 
Throne, which you probably might recall, on December 3, 
1986. This was just after the provincial election of 1986. 
 
And I quote from that Speech from the Throne of December 3, 
1986: 
 

Aware of the importance of the information and 
management skills in today’s information-based economy, 
my Government intends to harness the competitive 
excellence and international reputation that are the 
hallmark of the Saskatchewan grains, biotechnology, 
potash and uranium industries to pursue the establishment 
of research institutes associated with these industries in 
Saskatchewan. This action will strengthen Saskatchewan’s 
position in these significant world industries where policy, 
management, and information decisions too frequently lie 
offshore. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how often the management of 
potash and the Saskatchewan potash industry has laid offshore 
as the Speech from the Throne would have us believe. We do 
know that the Premier of this province would have it that way; 
would take the management and the ownership, in fact, of the 
potash corporation offshore to Asia, to India, to Hong Kong, to 
China and Japan, and other places. And he’s tried in fact to 
peddle the potash corporation there. But this is an initiative 
announced in the Speech from the Throne, December 3, ’86, 
respecting the establishment of a potash institute. And for the 
longest time, Mr. Speaker, it was well over a year, well over a 
year after this announcement was made, we didn’t see the 
establishment of a potash institute in Saskatchewan. 
 
And do you know, when it was established, what form it took? 
It was an industry-run association, an industry-run association, 
not government established, as is indicated by the Speech from 
the Throne, but industry initiated. And we haven’t really heard 
very much about this institute since then. 
 
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1693 
 

But we do know one thing about the recently established potash 
and phosphate institute that was established down the road, 
from the Speech from the Throne. We do know one thing, that 
it already gets now $725,000 from the Canadian International 
Development Agency — that’s three-quarters of a million 
dollars from CIDA; that the institute companies themselves 
contribute about $3.75 million annually to this institute; and 
that in return, in return for this $3.75 million contribution, they 
get back $1.75 million in tax breaks from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So yes, there was a plan in the Speech from the Throne to give 
tax breaks to the industry-run potash and phosphate association. 
So that’s the picture there. 
 
And then what happens with the Western Diversification Fund? 
How does that enter in? The Western Diversification Fund and 
Mr. McKnight waltz in and give $5 million to the Potash & 
Phosphate Institute of Canada. Now isn’t that cozy? And how 
do you suppose the folks at Baba’s, with their perogies and their 
cabbage roll ambitions, view this sort of initiative? Five million 
dollars to them that’s got, and nothing for their family-run 
operation. Not very kindly, Mr. Speaker, not very kindly at all. 
 
(1645) 
 
I will say, parenthetically, that funding for research institutes is 
very important, and that’s been a fundamental flaw in much of 
the federal and provincial government’s policy with respect to 
science and technology. But one has to wonder whether the use 
of the Western Diversification Fund in making this kind of 
overture or initiative or gifting to the potash and phosphate 
institute is quite the kind of expectation that Saskatchewan 
people had about the fund when it was initially announced, or 
last fall when it was propagandized in Saskatoon papers. 
 
Now it isn’t just the potash and phosphate institute that has 
received funding from the diversification fund. The fund has 
funded quite a number, quite a number of other associations or 
organizations in contrast to individual family-run, 
small-business operations. 
 
And I think, for example, of the $79 million which was given 
from the Western Diversification Fund for the South Moresby 
National Park reserve in British Columbia. That’s an initiative 
that I fully support, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very important to 
have the South Moresby islands preserved for future 
generations, but I have to question whether the Western 
Diversification Fund is in fact the vehicle to fund that kind of 
initiative. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would go back to the advertisement in 
the Star-Phoenix propagandizing this, that talks about the 
Western Diversification Fund as being for new products, new 
technology, new export markets, import replacement, or 
industry-wide productivity improvements. And I would ask 
myself what $79 million for the South Moresby has to do with 
western diversification. It seems more a vehicle to buy the 
federal government out of political problems that it’s having 
with respect to the South Moresby issue in B.C. 
 

It’s about as far west as you can get. Maybe that’s the criteria 
that caused it to qualify for its $79 million worth of funding. Or 
maybe there again could it be, Mr. Speaker, could it possibly be 
that that money was given to bail out the Vander Zalm 
government in B.C.? People wonder. People have to wonder 
about the appropriateness of that kind of expenditure for 
western diversification when it violates the self-proclaimed 
criteria of the program. 
 
The salmon enhancement program in British Columbia got $53 
million. This was basically another industry-wide 
organizational enhancement program rather than a program for 
any one particular business. And while that’s important work to 
be done, to enhance the salmon fishery, people have to wonder 
how it is that expenditures from the Western Diversification 
Fund are made in that regard. They question it, and rightly so. 
 
The province of Alberta got 7.75 million for an engineering 
research facility under the western diversification initiatives. 
And get this, Mr. Speaker, this is quite something in terms of 
western diversification: the western provinces, over the next 
three years, will receive $45 million — $45 million for the 
western provinces in the next three years from the Western 
Diversification Fund — for what? Soil conservation. Soil 
conservation programs. 
 
Now I don’t know that that really is such a new product or a 
new technology or a new export market or an import 
replacement or an industry-wide productivity improvement. 
Perhaps that’s the criteria under which it qualified. Again, I say 
soil conservation is very important, and there haven’t been 
enough measures in that regard. We’ve lost more than half of 
our topsoil here in Saskatchewan since the province was opened 
to cultivation. So it clearly is the case that soil conservation is 
by all means appropriate and necessary, but whether it should 
be funded from a western economic diversification fund, people 
have to wonder. And they do wonder about this fund and about 
its funding criteria and about the fairness of access to the fund. 
And that again is what this motion is talking about in terms of 
our overtures or initiatives here in Saskatchewan to the federal 
government in conveying our concerns. 
 
All of these industry-wide or association kinds of funding are 
worthwhile, Mr. Speaker. I don’t question their value for one 
moment. What I do question is the appropriateness, in some 
cases, of the Western Diversification Fund funding these 
initiatives. I wonder, and the people of Saskatchewan wonder, 
when they see these kinds of expenditures, whether they really 
are moving Saskatchewan and the other western provinces 
away from their dependence on familiar, staple, basic western 
industries. 
 
And I could go back to the soil conservation initiative or the 
salmon fishery initiative. Those are key industries for the 
western provinces, but it’s nothing new, and one has to wonder, 
then, how is it that they qualify for funding under a program 
whose intention is to diversify the economy? And people then 
wonder whether they have been misled by the federal and 
provincial governments with the ballyhoo that surrounded the 
propagandizing of  
  



 
June 6, 1989 

1694 
 

these programs. Hundreds of small-business people . . . I think 
the figure is in the neighbourhood of 85,000 small-business 
people have applied for funding under the Western 
Diversification Fund — 85,000 small-business people. And 
what do they see from the fund? Precious little, precious little in 
terms of jobs created for their firms. 
 
And as a result they’re frustrated by the lack of action regarding 
their applications. They’re frustrated by what they perceive to 
be the unfairness of the western diversification program, the 
duplicity in the program, and as I said before, the patronage 
element in the program, when the minister of privatization’s son 
can secure half a million dollars on the basis of a simple phone 
call from the minister to the federal minister. 
 
And so many Saskatchewan small-business applications sit 
hanging or rejected while the high-flyers of the economy get 
bankrolled, while industry-wide associations get bankrolled, 
lest we offend any one particular company or small business in 
making a grant to them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I should also call your attention to some of 
the other programs that Mr. McKnight funded out of this 
Western Diversification Fund just prior to the federal election 
last autumn. Would you believe that Mr. McKnight had $56 
million for French-language training and the translation of 
statutes. Hah! The translation of statutes — $56 million. Yes, 
isn’t that interesting that that kind of money is available out of 
the Western Diversification Fund. 
 
Well we’ve heard a lot about GigaText lately and how $4 
million of provincial money was squandered, and then the 
Western Diversification Fund has $56 million for 
French-language training and the translations of statutes. And to 
this day we don’t have statutes translated here in Saskatchewan, 
either by the Western Diversification Fund or GigaText. 
 
And people say, this is absurd; this is ridiculous. And it’s more 
than that. People begin to draw the conclusion that some of the 
funding under this program, Mr. Speaker, is out and out 
scandalous. And that’s why this resolution talks about the fact 
that: 
 

. . . grants from the Western Diversification Fund continue 
to be made on the basis of political patronage, rather than 
in accordance with sound economic development 
strategies. 
 

Well another expenditure by Mr. McKnight, as he was blazing 
trails across Saskatchewan attempting to secure his re-election 
and the re-election of his comrades, was 4.7 million for the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. And again I say, Mr. 
Speaker, I applaud the work of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, but one has to wonder about the 
appropriateness of a $4.7 million expenditure to the college 
from the western economic diversification fund. 
 
Does that meet the self-professed criteria of a new product, a 
new technology, a new export market, an import replacement, 
or an industry-wide productivity improvement? We don’t know 
for sure, but people sure  

want to wonder. They sure want to know the facts about some 
of these expenditures. 
 
And here is the corker, Mr. Speaker. This is perhaps one of the 
most gross expenditures made by Mr. McKnight as he went on 
his pre-election spending spree across Saskatchewan last 
September before the federal election. Financial assistance for 
small rural airports totalling $1.7 million — $1.7 million to 
assist small rural airports within a four-month period — as 
much, Mr. Speaker, in fact, as was spent in the entire previous 
fiscal year under the same program for airports in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And would you believe, Mr. Speaker — this is quite interesting 
— that four out of the five airport improvements — $1.7 
million expended — four out of the five projects were in 
Conservative ridings, with three of them in Mr. McKnight’s 
own riding. 
 
Now again I say, this is why Saskatchewan people wonder 
whether there isn’t an element of political patronage built into 
this Western Diversification Fund; not incidental to it, but built 
right into it, when three of the five projects are in the minister’s 
own constituency. And they spell scandal. 
 
It’s similar to the Prime Minister building a penitentiary in his 
own constituency, federally. And people don’t like it. They’re 
used to Conservatives doing that kind of thing, but when they 
see it repeated again and again, blatantly, they have trouble with 
that kind of expenditure. 
 
Now I have many, many more things to say, Mr. Speaker, about 
this fund, and we could talk about the new defence initiatives 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I think that at this point I’d like to just say that 
I support the motion, and I’m sure that all other members will 
join. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


