


















































June 12, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 12, 1989 
 
 

1813 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well thank you, colleagues, and thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s nice to come back refreshed after supper. We have 
a little bit of a problem in the Trew household in that the 
washing machine is now leaking, and my family is busy 
cleaning up the water. If I end my speech quickly, I have to go 
and help clean up the basement. So that’s what I call incentive 
for . . . well, incentive for me to get into the meat of my text 
rather than the introductory comments, as I did earlier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing, of course, with the 
proposal to change the rules, the bell-ringing rule here in our 
legislature. The proposal will eliminate our ability to ring the 
bells when the government gets way off track, if the 
government ever does again, and I think that’s fairly important. 
If the government does not go so far off track as they did in 
regards to the SaskPower sell-off, then any opposition has no 
reason to ring the bells. If the government governs in the 
manner it is supposed to and governs according to the way it 
was elected, the opposition has no reason to ring the bells. 
 
Indeed we went through it earlier where the reason we rang the 
bells was because the government got so far off base with its 
privatization of SaskPower. That’s the only reason we rang the 
bells. Had it been any other legislation that the government 
would introduce, we would not have rang the bells, certainly 
not for 17 days. They’ve broken their word, and that is 
something that, although I’m still in my first term as an MLA, I 
do recognize, Mr. Speaker, that our word is our bond. It has to 
be, because as a politician we really have nothing if we haven’t 
got our personal integrity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And we’re trying to point out to the government 
that the personal integrity is disappearing because of promising 
during the . . . up to and during the 1982, and up to and during 
the 1986 election, and then subsequent to that, we’ve had 
promises that SaskPower would not be privatized. The reason I 
keep referring to SaskPower, of course, is that’s what 
precipitated the bell-ringing. And the 17-day bell-ringing 
session that we were engaged in — that we all were, whether 
we wanted to be or not — that 17-day bell-ringing session was 
precipitated by the government’s actions regarding SaskPower 
— no other reason. 
 
We didn’t go out because of proposed changes to the labour 
legislation, although it’s certainly no secret we  

have very many concerns about the proposed changes to the 
labour legislation. But we have not walked out over that. We 
did not walk out over any of the Bills that have been introduced, 
and as I pointed out, there’s 42 Bills have been introduced in 
this legislature. 
 
Only one of them precipitated a walk-out, and that only because 
the government had gone totally against its word. That’s why 
we were out. That’s why the issue continues. That’s why we’re 
simply saying to the government, go on to other business; try 
us; just watch estimates proceed; watch things go ahead. Just 
move to anything else. 
 
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg thinks that it’s 
astounding that I would even propose such a thing. Well, I 
remind you that for 84 years just such a proposal was the norm. 
It is only in the last month, little better than a month, that this 
bell-ringing issue has been the number one priority. 
 
I campaigned in the by-election down there. Though we got the 
highest NDP vote we ever had got previously — I guess that’s 
sort of a statistic that is for losers, because clearly you won that 
by-election. You have the right . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Certainly you’re entitled to take your glee now 
but I remind the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that not 
one word was spoken to him or to the NDP candidate nor, I 
suspect, to any of us who were working in that by-election, 
about changing the rules of the legislature, not even changing 
the rules in general, never mind specifically changing the 
bell-ringing rule. 
 
So you may laugh about it now, but I remind you a general 
election is coming sooner than many of you on that side would 
like to think. And when that general election comes around, the 
people of the province will speak and they will say the 
government has gone too far; they will say that unilaterally 
changing the rules of this Legislative Assembly is not 
acceptable. Not especially when you consider that for 84 
previous years in Saskatchewan the rules were set by an 
all-party committee, who met, who would negotiate the best 
terms for their own respective causes, but would negotiate the 
best possible terms, and then the rule changes were introduced. 
 
It certainly was not in the NDP government’s interest through 
the 1970s to introduce a televised question period that would 
enhance the proceedings as far as the opposition is concerned; 
certainly wasn’t in the then government of the day’s interest to 
do that, but an all-party committee was struck. They agreed that 
the interests of the people of the province would be better 
served through that change to the rules, and what we are 
proposing is very similar. 
 
Set up an all-party committee, in this case “all-party” being 
Conservatives and New Democrats. Set up such a committee; 
let’s talk, let’s find out where there is common ground. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1814 
 
 

We thought we had the beginnings of such an agreement very 
early on in this bell-ringing issue. Indeed, my colleagues and I 
had agreed that that was the way to go, that was one of the 
proposals that was being discussed. We had no sooner agreed to 
it then that proposal was yanked out from under us by the 
government — yanked that proposal out and said, we are going 
to put this rule change through, period. Was no talk of, let’s 
make it an all-party effort. 
 
It was, this rule change is going to come down your throats 
whether you like it or whether you don’t. It doesn’t matter; it’s 
immaterial. We have got 38, they said, and you’ve only got 26. 
And the school-yard bully power prevails. That’s the mentality 
of members opposite. 
 
That’s why members on this side are proud to stand up in this 
legislature and debate the issue of rule changes. We are 
providing every opportunity for the government to realize that 
the bullying, the school-yard bully tactics, are not acceptable. 
They’re certainly not acceptable here; I never did find them 
acceptable in school. But if they have any place — school-yard 
bully tactics — it’s certainly not in the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see, Mr. Speaker, the privatization of SaskEnergy, which 
precipitated this particular debate, is going to result in an 
increase in taxes for city taxpayers throughout this province. 
Cities currently collect 5 per cent of the revenue on the sale of 
natural gas in those areas. And . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who pays for it? 
 
Mr. Trew: — One of the questions being asked by the, again, 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is, who pays for it. And of 
course we pay for it when we use our natural gas. When I pay 
my SaskPower bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member is off the 
topic. He’s bringing specific issues into the argument which do 
not relate to the rule under discussion. I ask him to get back to 
the topic. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was just 
trying to help out the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in 
what was a very pressing matter for him. And I see the member 
for Saltcoats also would like some help. Why don’t you join 
this debate? It would be a first; it would be a first for you — a 
very first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a Star-Phoenix, June 3 article — I can’t 
display it, so I won’t. It is by Dave Traynor of the Star-Phoenix, 
and the title is “Business in the House remains stalled.” You 
can’t get anything much more germane to this topic than that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Germane, eh? 
 
Mr. Trew: — It’s a nice word, germane. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Appropriate, to the point. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Germane is to the point. And the article says, Mr. 
Speaker, the fourth paragraph, and I quote: 
 

The only reason the government insists on bc 
 

changing the rules is so it can bring back the SaskEnergy 
privatization legislation and ram it through the House, 
NDP members argue. 
 

That’s the end of the quote, and that’s exactly what the debate is 
all about. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It really doesn’t matter if it was in the 
Star-Phoenix or wherever it was, the point is that that argument 
has been advanced many, many times by yourself, sir. And I 
have asked you two or three times not to go back to that topic, 
and I’m going to ask you once more. 
 
But rule 25(2), I should like to bring it to your attention, very 
specifically relates to tedious repetition. And I know that you 
don’t have to keep repeating. You could have other topics to 
discuss, and I’d like you to do that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that 
ruling. The article on a different quote says, and I quote again: 
 

But Deputy Government House Leader Grant Hodgins 
says he can’t do that, facing the very real threat of the 
opposition walking out or stalling. 
 

And of course that’s what the debate is largely about. And 
that’s why we’re here. We’re saying to the government, bring 
forward any other agenda item. We’ll talk; we’ll debate it. 
Instead, we’ve been on this changing of the rules for over a 
month, and it just makes absolutely no sense to carry on this 
particular discussion. 
 
In the, again, Star-Phoenix, there’s an article about House time 
dwindling for regular business, and I know you will appreciate 
this, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a topic that I don’t believe I have 
touched on in this particular speech. Mr. Vern Greenshields 
says that: 
 

MLAs will only get an expense allowance for 70 days at 
the legislature. This year, about 50 of those days are 
already burned up without doing any government business. 
 

Further down, the article says: 
 

With the government apparently intransigent about getting 
the bell-ringing rules passed and the public caring little 
about it, the time seems to have arrived for the NDP to 
pick up its spoils, declare a victory, and restrict its fun to 
question period. 
 

(1915) 
 
But there’s a very real reason why we can’t do that, sir. This is 
not an attempt on our part simply to have fun. Standing and 
debating this rule change is not an attempt on our part to simply 
have fun. Indeed, as the article points out, after day 70 there is 
no more per diem for a sitting. 
 
But I can assure you that members on this side of the legislature 
are prepared to sit here long, long past day 70, if need be, to get 
about the business of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s why 
we’re calling for the estimates  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1815 
 
 

to come forward. That’s why we’re calling for the Bills to come 
forward instead of this insane motion to change the rules after 
them having worked so well in this legislature for 84 years. 
 
We in Saskatchewan should be proud of our traditions, proud of 
our history, proud of the way we have made things work for so, 
so long. And often we have made things work in our own 
unique way. We have recognized for a long time that 
Saskatchewan is not New York. We don’t have a cosmopolitan 
make-up; we don’t have 20 million people within a 50-mile 
radius. We’ve got 1 million or something less than 1 million 
people scattered across a very, very huge province. For that 
reason, many of the economic theories that may work in the 
highly populated centres such as New York simply don’t work 
here. 
 
We have introduced in Saskatchewan telephones to every 
household that wants it, and that includes the on-the-farm 
households. That is introduced because we’ve been proud to go 
our own way. The Department of Telephones was not 
introduced by the CCF nor the NDP. It was introduced before 
that, but in the proudest of Saskatchewan traditions, to do a job. 
So we should be building on our strengths, not simply looking 
at what happens everywhere else, always for the latest Messiah. 
 
Certainly looking to Maggie Thatcher’s Great Britain is not the 
answer. The proof seems to be coming home to roost 
increasingly. We get reports daily about their legislature, their 
House of Commons, being unworkable. Any time I see a news 
blip from their House of Commons I just thank my lucky stars 
that I don’t live in Great Britain, although I guess if I did live in 
Great Britain I would not even want to get elected to that body 
because it appears to me to be totally unworkable. 
 
This legislature is very workable and has a long tradition of 
working, and that’s why I hope that in some small way I can 
contribute on behalf of my constituents. I hope I can contribute 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And I have friends, as 
I’m sure most of us in this legislature have friends right across 
the province, so that’s part of what we’re here saying: let’s keep 
the best of what we’ve got. 
 
And we see the potash debate being drawn into this. We see that 
if we lose the rules, the Conservatives can use their majority to 
pass the Bill over the opposition of the New Democrats, and 
they’ll pass the potash privatization Bill or whatever else they 
want. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Allow the member to continue 
without interruptions. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed, it is nice to 
have the floor, and that’s one of the great traditions of this 
Legislative Assembly, is that those of us who wish to speak on 
an issue get our turn. Indeed, when my colleague, the member 
for Saskatoon Sutherland had completed his remarks, there was 
ample opportunity for the member from Saltcoats, or any of the 
other members on the other side who have not spoken, to get to 
their feet and join in the debate. 
 
I welcome any and all government members. There’s a  

goodly number of them, more who have not spoken than who 
have. I welcome for them the opportunity to rise and enter this 
debate in a much more formal manner than speaking from their 
seats. As my colleague, the member from Regina North West 
says, or indeed it would be nice if some of them would enter in 
any debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I believe the hon. 
member should not belabour the point. He should get back to 
the topic under discussion. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I still will welcome 
them when they join the debate. 
 
And since this debate started — this debate changing the 
bell-ringing — we’ve seen the GigaText affair break loose, and 
we’ve spent a considerable amount of time witnessing yet more 
money squandered. We have witnessed the legislature working 
probably at its worst, probably at its worst, because what the 
government would dearly love is to muzzle the opposition to 
the point that we were totally ineffective. 
 
I am proud to say the members on this side of the legislature, 
we in the opposition, take our task very seriously. In our British 
parliamentary system you require a government and an 
opposition — the notable exception, of course, being New 
Brunswick where the people of that province failed to elect any 
opposition, but despite that, the Premier named some of his own 
party to act as official opposition. 
 
In other words, the Premier in New Brunswick even recognized 
that you had to have an opposition. You don’t have to like what 
they say, but you have to have somebody digging around and 
trying to find out some of the things that the government is 
doing wrong, and hopefully making some suggestions for 
improvements, hopefully coming forward with their own plans 
for how we can improve our province in this case, and in the 
case of New Brunswick. 
 
We have a situation where government members opposite me 
tonight don’t want to hear any of the problems. They think 
somehow if you just close your ears, close your eyes, and close 
your mouths, you hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil. They 
translate that into there is no evil or there is . . . Evil may be a 
bad choice of words and I may — in fact, I will — apologize to 
anyone that that may have offended because I wasn’t trying to 
cast particular aspersions on members of the government as 
being evil people. That was not my intent, whatever. 
 
My intent was that when any government does something 
wrong, somebody has to be there to point out the problems. 
Somebody has to be there to steer or help guide that 
government back to reality; help guide that government back to 
a common sense approach of governing our province. 
 
And that’s what we’re really trying to do when we urge that we 
move off of Bill 33 and on to things like, well, the Great Sand 
Hills to be protected from drilling. It’s a very important issue to 
the people in that area. And not just to that area because, Mr. 
Speaker, my grandmother has her ashes scattered in the Great 
Sand Hills, and it was in fact  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1816 
 
 

my grandmother’s favourite part of this province. People who 
have never been to the Great Sand Hills won’t . . . can’t even 
begin to appreciate the beauty of them. 
 
But they are a unique portion of our province. We should be 
talking about restricting the drilling or passing legislation or 
making sure that whatever drilling activities in the Great Sand 
Hills area totally protects the environment, and I mean totally 
because it is a very fragile environment. But instead we’re 
dealing with a proposal to change the rules in the legislature, a 
proposal that will take away any opposition for all time. It will 
take away the right of any opposition to ring the bells when the 
government goes astray. I mean, if ever we’ve seen a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that has gone astray, we’re 
witnessing it here today. We see a government that talks about 
us making this province ungovernable. That’s their terminology 
— we’re making this province ungovernable. 
 
This government has made this province ungoverned, 
ungoverned. And why? Because of their insistence to deal with 
the obscure; their insistence to deal with a bell-ringing motion. 
If you were to canvass every MLA ever elected here and asked 
them, before they were elected did they know what the rule was 
regarding bell-ringing, I suspect a goodly number of us would 
respond, no I did not know what that rule was. But if you were 
to canvass every living MLA that’s ever sat in this legislature 
and ask them if the bell-ringing should still be here, then I 
suspect they would say, yes it should be here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should be dealing with the happenings in the 
province. I have here facts on farming. It’s a very good article 
put out by the federal government. And they point out on page 3 
that farm capital required in Saskatchewan is the second highest 
in Canada, yet the value of agricultural products sold in our 
province is the second lowest in Canada. The only province 
with a lower return to farmers is British Columbia. So we 
should be dealing with things like that instead of dealing with 
the bell-ringing motion. 
 
It seems to me that when you have such a wealth of good 
information that is available, to discuss the issues important to 
many of the constituents — certainly I would think to many of 
the constituents of members opposite, largely elected from rural 
Saskatchewan — seems to me they would want to talk about 
farming facts. 
 
They would want to discuss, for instance, why is it that in 
Saskatchewan our machinery costs are the highest in Canada. 
Saskatchewan has the highest machinery costs of any 
agricultural . . . of farmers anywhere in Canada. And our 
interest on indebtedness is the highest. The wages to farm 
labour is the lowest in Canada. It seems to me that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Regina Victoria 
says, well won’t the changing of the rules improve that? And I 
guess that’s why we’re spending so much time dealing with the 
change of the rule that will prohibit the opposition from ringing 
the bells. It must be why the government, the member of the 
farmers, is making the bell-ringing motion such a high priority, 
indeed number one priority, certainly a higher priority than 
bringing down the cost of machinery or the interest cost or 
improving the return through products. Mind you,  

I guess that if I were part of the government that had just 
removed oats from the control of the Canadian Wheat Board, I 
would be reluctant to talk about agriculture as well. 
 
So we’ve got a time when we’re talking about a rule change 
instead of talking about what is the real size of the deficit here 
in Saskatchewan. How can we tackle that? And it’s a problem 
that many of our respective constituents are concerned with. 
 
The Speaker: — I must once more call the member’s attention 
to relevancy. I have risen a number of times tonight, and I must 
bring his attention to that rule even though he seems to be 
having some difficulty with it. But it’s my duty to remind you 
again, sir, that you are straying from the topic. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are all of these issues 
that my constituents and people that I run into, and talk to, all 
across the province, are asking me: well why is it that you don’t 
speak out on this, that, or the other issue — whatever their 
favourite issue of the moment is. And I’d dearly love the 
opportunity to do that, but as you can appreciate, when we get 
up on such a restrictive thing as the motion changing the bells, 
it very much restricts the scope of our ability to discuss what’s 
going on. 
 
But it seems a tragedy, and almost a travesty of justice that we 
would, because of the government bringing this rule motion day 
after day after day, that we would be hung up on that for in 
excess of a month when we could be dealing with all of these 
other very important issues. I’ve heard a couple of the 
government speakers. There has been a couple, or maybe even a 
few more than a couple, members speak on this debate, and 
they’ve talked about the hypocrisy of the NDP on this. They’ve 
talked about the hypocrisy. 
 
But I’d like to suggest to you that what it really is, is not a case 
of hypocrisy, but a case of “hip-pocket-risy.” In other words, 
whose hip-pocket are you in? Are you in the hip-pocket of the 
voters, the people of the province, as I think we are? Or are you 
in the hip-pocket of the oil companies and the Weyerhaeusers 
and the Cargills and the Peter Pocklingtons of this world? 
 
That’s really what this rule change is all about: whose pocket 
are you in? Are you promoting rules to bring on privatization, 
or are you promoting rules that will help the people of this 
province keep our province as a proud one? And if privatization 
is such a good idea, why didn’t the government talk about it 
before now? In fact, why did they deny they had any plans until 
now for privatizing? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we very much feel that this bell-ringing is tied 
to the privatization. And that’s why the recurring theme on my 
part, coming back to privatization all the time because it’s 
clearly part and parcel. It’s been demonstrated in recent weeks, 
ever since the government introduced its SaskPower 
privatization scheme and that scheme which is very poorly 
received by members of the public. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1817 
 
 

Dealing with that very matter, Mr. Speaker, I see in the May 26 
Star-Phoenix, the headline from Randy Burton says, 
“Legislative impotence frustrates Devine,” and there’s a quote 
from the Premier saying people are phoning to say get a hold of 
this thing. Well we have offered numerous times for the 
Premier to be able to get a hold of this thing. We have offered 
that. Simply move on; give us a try. What have you got to lose? 
 
We spent nearly a month exclusively dealing with this number 
one issue, this bell-ringing issue. There’s an obvious impasse. It 
is quite obvious that there is a great deal of reluctance to shift 
from the respective positions. We think we’re on hallowed 
ground; the government thinks it has to have this rule change. 
We have an impasse. 
 
But all the government has to do is bring forward its agenda, 
bring forward any of the other items on the order paper and try 
us. If we walk out again, then I think that the public would look 
much more favourably upon this rule change. 
 
As soon as the opposition frivolously uses the bell-ringing, I 
believe we would lose the support of the people of the province. 
And I would think we would deserve to lose the support of the 
people of the province if we used the bell-ringing frivolously. 
And that’s why we’re simply not going to be using bell-ringing 
frivolously. 
 
Indeed, I’ll submit to you, it would have been much easier for 
us to have not entered this debate, to have allowed this 
bell-ringing motion to come to a vote. And then if we were the 
party that was going to frivolously ring the bells, all we would 
have at that point in time had to do is walk out and not come 
back to answer the call on this very issue — this motion 
changing the bell-ringing. 
 
But we’re not a party of frivolous bell-ringing. We’ve rang the 
bells twice in over seven years, two times in over seven years. 
When I say we’ve rang the bells, I’m of course talking for 
periods in excess of an hour or, you know, a short period of 
time that’s required to gather whatever members may be 
reasonably close to the legislature for a vote. 
 
So we’ve not used the bell-ringing frivolously, and we have no 
intention of doing so, because to use it frivolously would risk 
losing the support we have gained. And it’s fairly hard earned, 
as members on all sides of this legislature can appreciate. It’s 
difficult to get people to feel closer to you than to the other 
people, the other party. So we’re anxious to keep that trust. 
 
I’m not going to read the article from Swift Current, the 
editorial that the headline is, “Devine government shows its 
contempt.” But I want to highlight a little bit about what it is. 
 

The provincial government seems to think lately that it can 
do anything it wants — drink our liquor from an old fruit 
jar, slander our names all over the place, even step on our 
blue suede shoes. 
 

And the article goes on and talks about some of the sins of this 
government. It enters into the Provincial Auditor  

affair. One of the things this article says is: 
 

Few Justice ministers in Saskatchewan have acted so 
unjustly. Lutz did ask for negotiations with the government 
that his department’s ’89 budget include 112,000 for his 
own pension, but he’s entitled to that money by law. 
 

And it’s symptomatic . . . I realize that the Provincial Auditor is 
not a part of the bell-ringing debate but I submit to you, Mr. 
Speaker, he is, because we have a Justice minister that has stood 
in this Legislative Assembly during question period and 
slandered the name, the good name, of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
It is much like, I think . . . I take it much like someone who has 
a migraine headache, and they’ve had this pounding, throbbing 
headache that just won’t give up, and they’ve had this throbbing 
headache for a month. After this throbbing headache that 
they’ve had for a month, somebody offers them three minutes 
of relief, and at that stage this migraine sufferer is ready to sell 
his or her soul just for three minutes of relief from the migraine. 
 
That’s what I think the member for Kindersley did. I think he 
sold his soul for three minutes — it wasn’t three minutes; it 
turned out to be 25 minutes, the duration of question period — 
right after that, he was out of the frying pan and directly into the 
fire, where he stayed for the next week. 
 
Indeed, we called for his resignation. We didn’t win that battle. 
As you can appreciate, oppositions don’t win every battle. 
 
But we certainly made a point. The Provincial Auditor has had 
his good name upheld. Newspapers throughout the province 
have come to his aid, and we’ve moved on, of course, to the 
bell-ringing motion. 
 
But all of those things lead into why we’re here, why we’re so 
dug in, and why we’re here tonight. It’s just because, without 
the bell-ringing, the right to ring the bells, we and every other 
opposition for evermore loses that very important tactical tool. 
Not that we necessarily ever would use it, but it’s nice to have 
that ability to use the bell-ringing rule if it is needed — nice to 
have the ability to carry on. 
 
And we see that privatization bypasses the public for the select 
few, the wealthy few. We see that the rule changes bypass the 
people of Saskatchewan. For whose benefit? For whose benefit 
do they bypass the people of Saskatchewan? For the select few. 
 
When you can ram what you want down the throats of any 
opposition, be they New Democrats or in another time they may 
be Conservatives, or more likely Liberals, because I don’t think 
after the next election that there’s going to be . . . I don’t think 
there’s going to be enough Conservatives re-elected to form the 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — So the privatization is nothing but an economic 
sell-out that people of the province rejected in  
 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1818 
 
 

1971. They have seen the then Liberal government of the day 
privatizing, just doing whatever they could to see that the big 
corporations got what they wanted. Everything they possibly 
could, Ross Thatcher and his Liberals did for the big 
corporations, the multinationals, and the American 
corporations. 
 
In 1971 along came Al Blakeney and the New Democrats with 
their new deal for people. And those were exciting times, Mr. 
Speaker. They were exciting times because there we had a party 
that put out a blueprint for the future. We had a party that talked 
about nationalizing potash, the potash industry. Talked about it, 
not after an election, but before they were ever elected, while 
we were part of the opposition — talked with their blueprint for 
the future. Talked about such important things as increasing the 
minimum wage, talked about putting people to work. Didn’t 
talk about changing the rules in the legislature, that I am aware 
of, but certainly had talked, not so much of changing the rules 
in the legislature, but had talked in terms of setting up a fair, or 
fairer, electoral boundaries commission. 
 
And of course after he was elected, that is what the ex-premier, 
the Hon. Al Blakeney, did — set up a fair electoral boundaries 
commission because he believed it was so fundamentally 
important. When in Regina Elphinstone, or whatever . . . I’m 
not sure if it was called that in 1971 or if it was Regina Centre, 
or whatever the name of it is. The seat that elected him in 1971 
was more than four times as big as two other seats in the same 
city that sidled up to his constituency — more than four times 
as big. And the ex-premier — of course I’m talking about Al 
Blakeney — felt that was fundamentally unfair. That’s why he 
introduced the changes in the electoral boundaries. 
 
And that’s coming back to why we’re here debating this 
proposed rule change. We have promised that the SaskEnergy 
fight won’t be dropped. We’ve had such curve balls thrown our 
way as . . . The latest thing is apparently school boards are not 
getting the full amounts of money that they are entitled to, and 
as they have been receiving in other years. And that is being 
withheld because the government insists day after day after day 
to bring forward this rule change that the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly be amended by adding . . . and there 
is a lengthy paragraph, or four, that I choose not to read into the 
record. But because we’re hung up on the rule change, school 
boards are doing without money. 
 
We say, bring on the estimates, bring the Education estimates, 
let’s get it out of the way. We don’t want to hold up money 
from school boards. I move adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion respecting 
rule no. 33, and the use of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures, and I would ask for leave to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Rule No. 33 Referred to the Special Committee on Rules 
and Procedures 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
. . . I will be moving this motion, Mr. Speaker, and I will read it 
first: 
 

That, by leave of the Assembly, that notwithstanding the 
usual practices of the Assembly, the adjourned debate on 
the motion of the member for Kindersley to amend rule 33 
shall remain on the order paper, and further the subject 
matter of that motion is hereby referred to the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a long, and I suppose frustrating 
process, and I am pleased that with the movement of this 
motion that agreement has been reached between the respective 
House leaders, that this rule no. 33 will be referred to the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as in many events that take place there are 
negotiations, and I am pleased as well to announce, Mr. 
Speaker, that this committee will report back to the legislature 
by the fall session. I am also pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, 
that the government has been successful in obtaining an 
agreement that bell-ringing shall not take place in the interim. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to announce that a normal 
functioning of this legislature, I believe, will take place over the 
next while, and from the government perspective we certainly 
have attained what our wish was, and that was to end any threat 
of bell-ringing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do move, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, that notwithstanding the 
usual practices of the Assembly, the adjourned debate on 
the motion of the member for Kindersley to amend rule 33 
shall remain on the order paper, and further, the subject 
matter of that motion is hereby referred to the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 
to comment on the agreement that has been reached this 
evening between the Government House Leader and our 
caucus. 
 
I want to say, before I take my place, a couple of things about 
how we came to the point where we’re at in terms of 
bell-ringing, the motion that we dealt with for the past . . . better 
part of a month, and then tonight the agreement that has been 
concluded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to know the way this issue 
started, with a Bill that was brought before the Assembly, a Bill 
that would have, in part, privatized  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1819 
 
 

SaskPower. And for that reason the opposition rang the bells for 
17 days. 
 
On returning to this Assembly, a motion was put by the 
government that in order to avoid the bell-ringing, we believed, 
on SaskPower in the future, that a motion was rammed at this 
opposition and the people of the province that would have taken 
that tool away, had SaskPower Bills been reintroduced. And we 
said from day one that we believed that this was not a proper 
way to change the rules of the Assembly; that it went against 
the history of the legislature; that never before had rules been 
changed in that manner. 
 
I guess I’m very pleased that the two weeks that we’ve debated 
this motion, that members on this side of the House and some 
on the government side have debated it, have now been proven 
worthwhile; that we have achieved our goal that we set on day 
one — that this should be solved in a committee of the 
Assembly. 
 
And to that end, I give the members of the opposition full credit 
and the members of the government side credit tonight for 
picking up on this option and recommendation that we had put 
to them on day one, that it go to a committee to report back to 
the Assembly. 
 
And so I say to you that it’s an important event, and that the 
opposition, I think, can take full credit for the fact that when we 
started the session we believed fully that SaskPower should not 
be privatized in this session. And on that point the people of the 
province and the opposition, I think, have made their point, that 
that will not be privatized during this session. 
 
On the issue of the bell-ringing, we said that we should 
maintain that right during this session, and to that end the 
people of the province have once again won this evening. And 
so I congratulate the members of the opposition and the 
members of the government who I believe will be voting for 
this motion. 
 
I want to say, the disappointment for myself and for members 
of the opposition is that it took the better part of a month — the 
better part of a month the government has held up the working 
of the Assembly, and that we could have had this agreement, I 
feel, many, many days ago. In fact, it was a suggestion of the 
Leader of the Opposition when he rose in his place the day after 
the motion was introduced, that we refer it to a committee. I 
think it could have been accepted at that time. I’m disappointed 
in that sense. But I want to say that the result tonight proves that 
the debate that we’ve been involved in for the past two weeks 
has been well worth while, and I’ll be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 7:53 p.m. to 8:01 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 40 
 
Muller Wolfe 
McLeod Gleim 

 
 

Berntson Neudorf 
Lane Gardner 
Smith Kopelchuk 
Muirhead Britton 
Maxwell Prebble 
Schmidt Rolfes 
Hodgins Shillington 
Gerich Lingenfelter 
Hepworth Tchorzewski 
Klein Brockelbank 
Martin Solomon 
Sauder Atkinson 
Johnson Anguish 
McLaren Goulet 
Hopfner Trew 
Petersen Smart 
Martens Van Mulligen 
Baker Koenker 

 
Nays — 00 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In order for 
our estimates for Energy and Mines tonight, I have with me in 
the House, deputy minister, to the right of me, Mr. John Reid; 
immediately behind him, Mr. Ray Clayton, his deputy minister 
of finance and administration within the department. To Mr. 
Clayton’s left I have Pat Youzwa, the assistant deputy minister 
of resource policy and economics; and immediately to my left I 
have Dale Fletcher, who is the director of the economic and 
fiscal analysis department; and behind him Mr. Les Beck, who 
is the executive director of geology and mines. There are also 
several other officials that will be coming forward as we need 
them, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I had a 
speech to give tonight, and it may as well come right now, Mr. 
Chairman, because it was on the rules. And I wanted to share 
with members in this Assembly, including the Minister of 
Energy and Mines, some choice quotes from books that I won’t 
be quoting directly, but they were basically on the decline of 
democracy, which is one here, also one on tyranny, one on 
totalitarian rule, and a couple on William the Conqueror. But I 
think I’ll pass on sharing some of the choicer quotes out of that 
selection of readings that I spent a number of hours with on the 
weekend. 
 
And I want to perhaps just start out, Minister, by saying that we 
have today almost finished day number 55 in this Assembly. 
Last year at this time, which was a session of about 69 days, but 
last year, day 55, we had about 104 Bills introduced and 84 of 
them had been passed during  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1820 
 
 

the course of that session of 69 days, which is about three 
weeks longer than what we’ve sat so far. 
 
On a comparative basis, we have, to this year, reviewed first 
reading and second reading, 44 Bills, which is about 42 per cent 
of the number of Bills which were passed at this time last 
session. We have also, day 55, we have achieved basically a 42 
per cent completion ratio of the number of Bills that have been 
introduced and even a far lesser number that have been passed. 
We have exactly three Bills passed in this session after 55 days, 
Mr. Chairman, where at this point last year we had about 37 
Bills. 
 
And it seems to me that the opposition have been prepared to 
co-operate with respect to estimates, have been prepared to 
co-operate with respect to reviewing some of the legislation that 
the government has promised, and that has not been 
forthcoming until this evening, so I’d like to get into the 
estimates at this point right now. 
 
But, Minister, I have a number of just administrative questions, 
if I may. I’d like to know the name and the title and the salary 
of all of the minister’s personal staff and I’d like to know if 
there’s been any change in those salaries in the past year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there has been one change 
in my office staff, and that is Mr. Tim Jeffery is no longer with 
me. And no, there has not been any change in the salary levels 
of the people that work in that office. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, my question to the minister 
was: I’d like the name of the persons that are employed in her 
personal staff, the titles thereto, and the salaries which they earn 
individually. And I wanted to know finally, if there were any 
changes in the salaries of her personal staff this year over last, 
and what those changes were. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I will send one over to the member, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, if the minister could also let 
us know when the last change took place — the exact date, if 
possible. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, but I cannot supply that tonight; I 
will have to get that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — That’s fine. We’ve given the minister 55 
sitting days plus 17 days of bell-ringing, which is about the 
length of last year’s entire session. We have not reviewed more 
than two departments in estimates out of the 28 or 30 that we 
have to review this session, and we’re starting out a bit late. 
And the minister still does not have that information available. 
 
The minister is aware that these types of questions are asked on 
a regular basis so the people of Saskatchewan and the 
opposition can monitor the changes in staff and the salaries paid 
to the political assistants of the minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could address your officials to 
answer the following question. For 1988 and ’89, or the fiscal 
year ’88-89 . . . I’m sorry, ’87-88 . . . No,  

’88-89 is right, the number of out-of-province trips taken by the 
minister. So the last fiscal year, the number of out-of-province 
trips taken by the minister. And I’d like you to identify in each 
case, the following four items: (a) destination; (b) the persons 
accompanying the minister at government expense; (c) the cost 
of the trip; and (d) the purpose of the trip. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I will send to the member all the details 
that he has requested. I can only give him tonight, Mr. 
Chairman, the out-of-province trips taken by myself, in total, 
are numbered seven. To the other details that you want, those 
will be forthcoming with any other information that you may be 
requesting — we will put into a package. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If you could 
perhaps put the following in the package as well if you don’t 
have it at your fingertips this evening: for the current fiscal 
year, ’89-90, the total amount budgeted for out-of-province 
minister’s trips. As well, for l988-89, the total amount spent by 
the agencies that you are responsible for on advertising. As 
well, for the years ’89 and ’90, the total amount budgeted for 
advertising. 
 
Fifthly, for 1988-89, the total amount spent by the agencies you 
are responsible for on polling and market research; and for ’89 
and ’90, the total amount budgeted for these purposes. 
 
And finally, did your department use any charter aircraft during 
1988-89? And if so, at what cost? And finally, a corollary 
question: what amount has been budgeted for charter aircraft in 
the current fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can give the member 
verbally some of those. He may want to have a follow-up in 
writing. 
 
On advertising expenses for the year ’88-89, it was $38,680. 
The budget for that particular year was $70,550, and it is the 
same for 1989-1990. 
 
Polling expenses, Mr. Chairman. There were no expenses 
incurred for polling in ’88-89, and nor have we budgeted any 
dollars for this upcoming fiscal year. 
 
On the aircraft charters, the budget for ’88-89 was 96,500, and 
we spent 71,264. The budget for 1989-90 is $148,710. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Minister. With regard to the 
advertising: was the advertising done by one agency, and if so, 
who was the agency, and what was the purpose of the 
advertising, and was the agency appointed or was it tendered? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there were a variety of 
agencies used: Marketing Den, Dome Media Buying Services 
advertising; and advertising in the Gazette was done through the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. If there were 
any other questions in dealing with the advertising, perhaps I 
could ask the hon. member to repeat them. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1821 
 
 

Mr. Solomon: — The questions were related to: what was the 
purpose of the advertising, and were the agencies appointed by 
the department or the minister, or were the expenditures called 
for tendering? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There is a purpose; let’s deal with that 
first. I go over such things as the Regina Oil Show, the natural 
gas industry advertising for positions within the department — 
there are several of those. We had some ads running in terms of 
the gold industry. We did some advertising on the prospectors 
and the development seminar. We had . . . This also includes 
the cost of our annual report. We had the fossil fuel technology 
report, the annual report, the Co-op upgrader, the open house 
that they have out of the geology department, and as I said 
earlier, most of them had to do with the advertising of positions. 
 
In terms of how these were chosen, these were appointed 
agencies. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — That’s not surprising, Minister. Since the 
election of your government in 1982, each department and 
Crown corporation that a Conservative minister has been 
responsible for, have not tendered one advertising contract to 
our knowledge. They have appointed each of the agencies, and 
in most cases they have been Dome Advertising, Dome Media 
Buying Services, and Roberts & Poole. 
 
With regard to your expenditure on, I believe it was charter 
aircraft, and I may have missed the figure, but was that a figure 
that you provided which doubled from last year? One hundred 
and forty-eight thousand dollars is the figure that I have written 
down. Is that for the total cost of aircraft charter? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The increase in the dollars that I indicated 
in the budget are due to the new mineral industry diversification 
program, which has simply increased the number of geology 
field parties and that has increased the aircraft rentals. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And this was a figure that you couldn’t 
budget for? It was a figure that was just sprung upon you as a 
result of the creation of this new program? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, I’m sorry, the figures I gave you . . . 
The 148,000 is what we budgeted for ’89-90, for this year, 
which is an increase over the budgeted amount of last year. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Minister. I want to turn now to 
the oil revenues and prices and production over the last number 
of years. We have in Saskatchewan an interesting development 
with respect to oil royalties, and I want to just perhaps raise a 
few questions with the minister. But when I look through the 
average, annual well-head price of U.S. crude oil, at U.S. 
dollars per U.S. barrel, I have numbers that start in 1971 where 
the price was $3.39 a barrel, and they run in about the same 
range till ’74 and it goes to $6.74 a barrel; 7.56 in 1975; $8.14 
in ’76; stays in the 8 to $9 range until 1979 and ’80; and we see 
the prices fluctuate from 31.77 U.S. to about $25 a barrel from 
1981-82 to 1985-86, most of ’85. 

Yet when you compare the revenue of the provincial 
government with respect to these oil royalties, you see not a 
variance that are really directly related to the price as I’ve 
described. I’m aware, and so are many people in this province, 
that you have played with the oil royalty situation a bit — the 
tax holidays that have been provided to oil companies that 
operate in this province. And I want to just ask you a question 
with regard to these revenues. 
 
We have in 1981, revenue of this province as a result of the oil 
royalties, of $533 million, on the production of 9.4 million 
cubic metres. We have in 1982 about $700 million in royalties 
paid on production of 8.1 million cubic metres of oil. 
 
In 1983, it goes from $700 million to . . . It drops to $685 
million, even though production increases from 8.1 to 9.4 
million cubic metres, about a 14 per cent increase, yet there’s a 
decrease in revenues. 
 
In ’84-85-86, we see a steady increase in the production: from 
9.5 million cubic metres to 10.8 million cubic metres in 1984; 
11.6 million cubic metres in ’85; 11.8 in 1986. Yet we’ve seen 
the royalties drop to, 1986, to $213 million. 
 
Production increased again in ’87 to 12.1 million cubic metres, 
and the revenue went up a bit to $347 million. Yet when you 
start looking at ’88, you estimated in your budgetary estimates 
revenues of $311 million. I’m told that the actual revenues 
realized were about $180 million and that was due to the lower 
price in oil, and we can understand that. Yet the price of oil in 
its estimated range for 1988 seems to me to be a bit off. 
 
If you are budgeting $174 million for oil royalties this year, I’d 
like to know on what price you’re basing oil and whether it’s 
U.S. and location. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — For this year’s budget, we have budgeted 
$16.08 U.S. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And that’s $16.08 U.S. for what grade of oil? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s for what they call WTI, West 
Texas intermediate. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What is the figures that you have available to 
you right now, from your officials, with respect to the average 
price for the first five months of the year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the average will work out 
for the five-month period to approximately $19.30 or 19.32. 
January, the month of January, it was ranging in the upper $17 
mark, 17.80; March had 19.45 and 20.94; and in May, we have 
seen it doing just a little over the $20 mark. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — On the basis of that price continuing or at 
least maintaining that level, what do you estimate your revenues 
to be in oil? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have done our 
estimates based on that $16.08 information that I  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1822 
 
 

gave the member, and we have not done any other estimates 
based on any different price; nor are we likely, for at least 
another quarter, depending on what happens with the price of 
oil. 
 
I think while it has been averaging higher than what we 
estimated this year, there are still a lot of factors out there that 
would indicate that it perhaps is unpredictable, and the industry 
still remains in somewhat of a volatile situation, given the price 
of oil and the surplus factor out there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can you explain to me why, in your own 
words, why the oil royalty revenues have dropped from $700 
million in ’82 and ’83 and ’84 to $347 million in 1987, 180 in 
1988, and will come to 174 million this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, if I go back to . . . Well 
let’s start with 1983. There was a substantial jump in the price 
of oil from ’82 to ’83. It was just a little over $4 a barrel that 
year. It came in at 29.59; 1984, we dealt with oil at $32.02 a 
barrel, and this was the average price over the year; 1985, 
which the member has spoken of several times tonight, was the 
high year, and the price of oil was well over the $30 mark. In 
fact, the average oil price that year came in at $33.04. 
 
Now, in 1986, Mr. Speaker, we saw it fall in half. It dropped 
down to 15.73; in 1987, it was $19.80; and then in 1988, we 
were dealing with $13.35 per barrel of price of oil; 1989, the 
estimated figure is 13.52. 
 
Now these figures that we deal with are Canadian prices, and 
they’re based on the well-head price, which is somewhat 
different than the WTI. Perhaps that’s a good starting point for 
the explanation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is the minister planning on finishing her 
starting point, or does she expect me to guess? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the drop in 
prices is self-explanatory. In 1985 you go from $33 per barrel 
. . . I’m sorry, 1985; in 1989, down to 13.52, and that should 
explain a very large drop in the revenues coming in from it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Does the minister have a price for 1979 and 
1980? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — My 1980 figures . . . I do not have the 
’79. I have ’72, ’75, and 1980 was $14.68. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So in 1980 we had revenues of $483 million 
on the basis of $14 oil, and in 1988, nine years later, on the 
basis of $13 oil with a 30 per cent increase in production, our 
revenues are less than half. Could you explain that to me, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there were two factors, if 
you go back to 1980 and ’81, that again you continue to ignore. 
And the reason I say again is because you went through the 
same request for information last year, and I again went through 
the giving of the same  

information. So let’s do it another time. 
 
You keep ignoring the fact that there were incentive 
expenditure payments of $60 million that you . . . $60 million, 
that was the incentive payments prior to 1982 that were being 
paid out. You also have not calculated, if you are in fact are 
doing any calculations, that there was an export tax of $164 
million. So your $420 figure that you’re using does not show a 
clear picture. 
 
There’s two other factors that you have to take into account. 
There are two other factors that you must take into account 
when you are looking at the difference on the revenues coming 
in. One is the fact that there is a decline in productivity, and it’s 
a natural decline that takes place within the oil industry. Our 
wells have gone on the average from 20 barrels a day down to 
15 barrels a day. And therefore, the cost of drilling has gone up 
if the productivity has gone down. 
 
The other factor that you have to take into account is the 
increase in the ratio of new oil. New oil has a lower royalty than 
what old oil has. And that is not a change in the system; that’s 
been there for some time. And there’s been a . . . The increase, 
for example, in Saskatchewan in the ratio of new oil has gone 
from 33 per cent to 81 per cent. So that’s a very large factor that 
has to be taken into consideration when you are looking at the 
value of the production and the revenues coming into the 
province. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What we’ve seen here, Madam Minister, as a 
result of the policies of your government and your department, 
we have seen royalties drop significantly even though 
production has increased by 30 per cent and the prices remained 
about the same. You are saying that there’s an export tax. I 
think the export tax is not something that comes from the 
provincial government. It would likely come from somebody 
else, unless you have some detailed information on that. 
 
And the other aspect I want to raise with you is that you have in 
your own annual report outlined very clearly that even in 1987 
there were 987 wells drilled that were completed for 
production, yet 811 of those wells . . . I should say 811 of the 
987 wells drilled were completed for production. Of the 811 oil 
wells that came on stream, you go through the number that 
received tax royalty holidays. And when you look at the 
numbers out of the 811 that came on stream in that particular 
reported year — ’87-88 — 779 received some form of tax 
holiday, which is 96 per cent of all the new wells that came on 
stream. 
 
Now don’t you think, Minister, that when you start encouraging 
wells to be drilled and they’re not paying any taxes on those 
wells, that there’s going to be some impact on the productivity 
of existing wells that are owned by the same companies? And 
don’t you think that they’re going to be extracting that oil at a 
higher rate than they would under the older wells that are 
paying the higher royalty rates? What do you have to say about 
that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I hear the member from Saskatoon 
University. Perhaps he’d like to get into this discussion too. I 
would welcome him to give the member from Regina North a 
little bit of help. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1823 
 
 

He says this is nothing but a give-away. You know, that’s the 
same charges that were there last year and again this year and 
again the year before. 
 
Let’s talk about productivity. You know, you say the 
productivity has gone, I believe, you said down, and that it was 
a give-away. And in fact if there are more wells being drilled, 
that does not necessarily mean that you are giving away 
productivity out of those wells because you have a royalty 
incentive in place. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Okay. I’m sorry, I misunderstood you 
then. 
 
You know, I guess what you have to ask yourself is: can you 
compete with other producing provinces? And in reality the one 
that you have to compete with in Canada is our neighbour to the 
west, the province of Alberta. 
 
Now you and I both know that they have royalties that are much 
lower than what they are in Saskatchewan. Not only do they 
have a lower royalty, but they have oil that is easier to find and 
probably oil that is a little cheaper to bring up, because of the 
grade of oil. They have many more barrels of the lighter oil than 
what Saskatchewan has, and the industry has a fairly well built 
up infrastructure within that province. And all of that adds to 
the attractiveness of making a decision, whether you are going 
to explore in this province or perhaps go to Alberta. 
 
So you look at those factors as we did, when we looked at 
putting the royalty program into place several years ago, and I 
think it was concluded at that time by both sides of this House, 
including your past leader of the opposition, Mr. Blakeney, who 
has readily admitted, along with the member from Regina 
Elphinstone today, who was the member from Shaunavon, that 
in fact you will most likely require incentives for exploration of 
the oil industry. He had concluded that also, so it becomes a 
question of what kind of incentives. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Free oil. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well you say free oil. 
 
I look at what your party’s past policy was on incentives and 
you gave an incentive for the drilling of holes. It didn’t matter. 
There was no stipulation that I had to find oil if I was going to 
drill that hole in the ground. There was absolutely no strings 
attached to it, so I could drill in the ground, dry hole, and I 
would get the money from government. And you paid for the 
drilling of dry holes. 
 
Now I don’t know how that can possibly . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Listen now, I don’t know how that can possibly 
add to the future revenue to come into the province. There’s 
nothing coming up, nothing at all, and it was not future 
orientated, and it was not based on any kind of a success 
program. 
 
This one, if you find oil — if you do — then your taxation will 
not kick in for a period of time, but you know that that is going 
to be there for two, three, four years down the  

road. If it’s a deep well, an exploratory well, then you would 
qualify for the five years. 
 
Now I, quite frankly, think that that is a fair incentive, given the 
competition that we’re into and the fact that today our royalty 
rates remain one of the highest in North America. If you are 
going to be competing for exploration, it is very obvious that 
you are going to have to have some incentive for that 
exploration to take place. 
 
And we said, well I suppose we could look at lowering the 
royalty rates, making it equal with Alberta. That does not 
guarantee that it’s going to come in, and I believe that the 
incentive of the royalty holiday does not guarantee that the 
exploration is going to come into your province. But at least it 
is success orientated. If you drill, it’s there, and the money will 
come back twofold. And I think when the price of oil is up, the 
history of this program . . . And if you go back to 1985, 1984 
when, in fact, the prices were up there, you would find that the 
drilling did take place. 
 
I think you have to take a look at the input costs that go into the 
oil industry at the field level, the exploration units. You know, 
it costs about — and let’s use for all intents and purposes 
tonight — a quarter of a million dollars to drill an oil well. Now 
you come up with too many dry holes, and the exploration isn’t 
going to be there. You might come up with one dry hole and 
two oil wells; somebody still has to pay for the quarter of a 
million on the dry, and that’s a risk that the oil companies 
should take. 
 
And that’s fair, that they have part of that risk there. But if some 
place else, like Alberta, can reduce the degree of their risk, then 
those people will go there, as opposed to Saskatchewan. 
 
I think the incentive program on the royalty holiday for wells 
has proven successful. It’s clean; it’s not paying for dry holes in 
the ground like the previous program was. 
 
And I think that it has been concluded by both parties in this 
House a couple of years ago, that you in fact will need 
incentives, so it becomes a question of which incentive works 
the best. And if you take a look at all the figures that are 
available to you, you will probably conclude that it is a clean 
program and it is effective for Saskatchewan and it is not a 
give-away. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, in my view and the 
view of my party, what you have done as a result of this 
give-away program of yours, an incentive program, as you call 
it, that even some of the oil people that I’ve spoken to who have 
taken advantage of it laugh under their breath at the kind of 
program you’ve offered them . . . They think this is better than 
Christmas when they come to Saskatchewan in dealing with 
your department in respect to oil royalty-free periods. 
 
When you look at the numbers, Madam Minister, the statistics 
prove very clearly that under the NDP from 1971 to ’74, the 
average production was about 13 million cubic metres. And you 
have not achieved that as of this year. We went down in the 
late’70s and early ’80s a bit, down to average about between 9 
and 10 million cubic metres, but that tended to be more, I think, 
a direct factor  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1824 
 
 

of the environment of the day, prices being around 3 and 4 and 
$8 a barrel. 
 
What we’ve seen as well, Madam Minister, is a revenue side 
that previous budgets have shown to be true, that has been more 
substantial in this province. When you’re looking at a revenue 
of $483 million or $533 million in 1980 and ’81 when oil was 
around 14 to $15 a barrel, and it’s two to three times greater 
than it is now, even if we were paying out $60 million in 
incentive programs at that time, we’re still netting 470 million, 
which is more than twice . . . two and a half times what you’ve 
netted in the last fiscal year. So I don’t see where this is 
pertinent to the argument when you start talking about the track 
record. 
 
(2045) 
 
The track record very clearly showed that the revenues, the oil 
royalties the oil companies paid, may have been the highest in 
North America, but it seems there’s only about two or three 
rates in North America right now, and that is: free, that we’re 
getting now from you; low; and what they were under the New 
Democratic Party and Allan Blakeney. And in those times, the 
revenues went towards the people of this province to help 
administer the province and to help balance the budgets and 
provide programs of a high calibre to all the people of this 
province. 
 
Given those kind of formulas and those kind of statistics, it’s 
my view that we have lost, in revenue forgone as a result of 
your 1982 oil royalty holiday and subsequent ones, almost $2.5 
billion in revenue to the people of this province. That’s 2.5 
billion . . . actually $2.469 billion, and I can’t understand why 
your department continues to pay more attention to the 
husbanding of our resource than to providing a fair royalty to 
the people of this province. And I’d like to know whether you 
plan on reviewing that, and at what point in time in the future. 
 
Also you make reference to drilling wells. The Canadian 
exploration development incentive program is in the process of 
being cancelled, or at least downgraded, and I wondered what 
representations you’ve made on behalf of the smaller oil 
companies to the federal government on this. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Your opening comments tell me that we 
are probably wasting a lot of time in expressing each of our 
opinions, unfortunately, Mr. Chairman. What you have said, 
you’ve basically either chosen to ignore or you don’t 
understand what I’ve said about the factors that have to be taken 
into account when you are doing the calculations of the 
revenues in the value of oil. 
 
For example, Mr. Member, I talked about the productivity, how 
that had gone down. I talked about new oil; that plays a role. 
You’ve been critic long enough to know that the enhanced oil 
recovery process plays a role in the calculations of the revenues 
that are coming in, the impact on that. And the export tax, the 
federal export tax that I talked about — you’re right, it wasn’t a 
provincial tax, the export tax; it was federal. But that was 
dollars coming back to you; it was not based on what you were 
getting for oil . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is within 
your revenues when you were in government . . .  

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you say it wasn’t and I say 
you’re wrong. 
 
For example, in 1981 you collected $164 million of federal 
export tax that took you to the total of $472 million, and yet you 
stand here tonight and you tell me that you collected, on your 
royalties, 472 million. That’s not true, you didn’t . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well let’s be clear on the points that we’re 
talking about. 
 
I think one of the things, when you look at the success of this 
program, you have to look at what happened from ’72 to 1984, 
and that was that the oil production went down. Nineteen 
seventy-two this oil was producing 86 million barrels and by 
1983 — I’m sorry, ’82-83 — we were down to 53 million 
barrels. Now if you had continued at that rate, a reduction of the 
production, that tells you what you would not have for revenues 
nor would you have jobs and a lot of other factors in the 
producing communities. 
 
If you take a look at 1983-84, we started to move upward. And 
today we are at approximately, for the year ’88-89, it is 
estimated 75 million barrels which is still somewhat under that 
’72-73 production level. But you can simply . . . You cannot 
keep producing oil and generating revenues that are going to 
keep going down every year on the production. I mean, you 
weren’t even replacing what was being used back in about 1980 
and the mid-70s. 
 
In response to your last question about the smaller companies, 
I’ve had an opportunity, in fact, to meet with SEPAC (Small 
Explorers and Producers Association of Canada). We’ve had 
several discussions. And there has been a concern from SEPAC 
on the CEDIP (Canadian Exploration and Development 
Incentives Program) program and I think they are no different 
than some of the junior companies. They are struggling these 
days. They are struggling for investment dollars. They’re not 
easy to find for several reasons, one being that the oil patch is 
fairly unstable. They are having a difficult time raising capital 
because of interest rates, and I think they see other investments 
perhaps as being more attractive in terms of the returns that they 
are going to get back. I will be meeting with Mr. Jake Epp, the 
federal Minister of Energy and Mines, on the 14th, and we will 
be discussing the situation as it impacts on Saskatchewan. And, 
of course, anybody within the industry in this province knows 
that the smaller companies indeed are the life-blood of the oil 
industry, so that will take up a major part of our meeting. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I think there’s a lot of discrepancies, 
and there may be the odd minor discrepancy in some of the 
statistics that I quote. But I can tell you, Minister, the numbers 
you quote, there are some major discrepancies. In fact, the 
production years that you referred to were not declining 
production. In 19 . . . I can share these numbers with you if you 
like, but 1975 we were at 9.3 million cubic metres; it went 
down to 8.8 the next year; up to 9.7 the next year; down to 9.6; 
and down and up again. And it was up and down but pretty 
steady within 5 or 10 per cent in the course of those six or seven 
years. 
 
But the other point is that the oil that was in the ground was not 
evaporating in those days of lower prices for oil  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1825 
 
 

products. The budget was balanced in this province. We didn’t 
have a $4 billion operating deficit. We didn’t have an $8 billion 
Crown corporation capital debt. You now have a $12 billion net 
debt in this province on operating and capital. When we were in 
power, there was a surplus. 
 
And I want to know how you explain that away, and how you 
continue to defend the larger royalty holidays to the larger 
corporations. Yet you have indicated that you’re meeting the 
minister with regard to the smaller exploration and development 
companies. And I would hope that that would certainly be high 
on your priority. 
 
I know Mr. Newhouse from Tappit Resources was in the news 
this morning and said that the exploratory wells would be fewer 
and fewer in this province and that the cancellation of the 
Canadian exploration and development incentive program will 
hurt the smaller oil companies and the natural gas companies a 
great deal. He feels that the reason for the cutting of the 
program is a bogus reason. The federal government has said the 
money is going to balance the budget, yet the federal 
government has sunk billions of dollars into the large 
megaprojects. 
 
And I want to get to that in a moment, Minister, but before I do, 
I’d like to talk to you about Saskoil. We have here in 
Saskatchewan a privatized Crown corporation, Saskoil, one of 
the first in the province to be privatized. And the corporation 
was privatized in 1985, at least in a legislative way, and in ’86 
was taken to market. 
 
And I’d like the minister to explain to this House and to the 
people of this province the scenario that finds us in the place 
we’re in today. 
 
Can you take us from 1986 when the corporation was first 
privatized? And what I’d like from you is not when it was 
privatized, but what money was given to this province and this 
treasury, where that money went, and in exchange for what 
equity. Could you give us that little scenario, please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, just before I leave the 
issue of the small oil companies in Saskatchewan, the member 
seems to be quite concerned with them and about the health of 
their particular industry. He should also know that they are in 
favour of the royalty holiday program, and, in fact, it has given 
the smaller companies in Saskatchewan a fairly good footing in 
terms of having their foot into the door of the oil industry. 
 
The questions that pertain to Saskoil, that is not part of the 
Energy and Mines estimates; I don’t have those figures. I would 
have to write to the corporation on behalf of the government’s 
interest in that, and I can certainly endeavour to do that, as the 
member could. 
 
I believe the member did, in fact, take some time and go to the 
annual meeting. And if there’s any discussion on Saskoil 
tonight, it is certainly going to have to be without specific 
figures that I don’t have with me, Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I mean, that’s the problem we’ve got with 
your government, Minister. Whenever there’s a question of 
accountability of taxpayers’ dollars, you don’t  

have the answers. Whenever there’s a question about what 
happened to a piece of taxpayers’ property, you don’t know 
what happened; you forget; you don’t have the statistics here. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, I might remind you that in 1986 the 
Government of Saskatchewan was an equity holder. They had 
the majority shares in the company of Saskoil. We have come 
from a majority situation, and we’re in a minority situation 
now. 
 
I want you to tell this Assembly, in an accountable way, what 
happened from the time the government owned the majority of 
Saskoil; what was given in exchange for that equity; and where 
we stand now; and where the money has gone. Can you tell us 
that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well Mr. Chairman, I would have to go 
back probably through Hansard when they were doing the 
Saskoil Bill in about, I believe, 1985, and I think the member 
could do that too, to get some specifics on dollars, equity, 
assets, liability — that type of thing. Mr. Chairman, I’ve 
already stated I do not have that information with me. Any 
information that I have, I have out of the annual report. 
 
And I think the member, in terms of asking the question, you 
know: what have we got in exchange for all this? For example, 
if I look at the recent acquisitions and the activity of the 
corporation of Sask Oil and Gas, I think that the success of the 
corporation is one that should be applauded, not with what the 
member has to say and what he has said in the past about it. 
 
If you look at, I believe, it’s now over a billion dollars that 
company is worth in what? two, three short years it’s gone from 
about $260 million in assets to over one billion. I think that tells 
you something about the success of that corporation. 
 
(2100) 
 
Also in terms of its success has been the diversification into the 
gas industry. As I recall prior to the corporation going out for 
public shares, it was strictly oil and no diversification, and now 
they have gas properties; they are producing gas. Their recent 
acquisition, I believe, had something to do with a gas marketing 
arm to give them the ability to secure some markets. 
 
So I really do think in these economic times, particularly within 
the oil and gas industry, Sask Oil and Gas Corporation has in 
fact did some very smart moves of cementing that company’s 
future, and all in Saskatchewan and for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, what you’ve given us so far 
is a bunch of poppycock. You have not addressed the questions 
that I’ve asked. You don’t know what’s going on with the 
equity of the people of this province in a corporation like 
Saskoil. You talk about a billion dollars in assets; you don’t 
have a gosh darn clue as to what’s going on. 
 
And I want to just maybe share some of the statistics that I 
have, and I’d like you to perhaps pay some attention. And  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1826 
 
 

if your officials don’t know the answer to this question, I’m 
prepared to wait for as long as it takes for you to get the answer 
to this House and tell the people of this province precisely what 
has happened with the equity, the government’s equity, the 
taxpayers’ equity in this corporation, and what has been given 
in exchange for that equity. 
 
And if you don’t know the answer to that, Madam Minister, 
you’re misleading this House. You have absolutely no idea as to 
what’s going on. At least that’s what you’re portraying here, 
and I think that’s wrong. I think you’re hiding something. I 
think you’re covering up on what has happened with regard to 
Saskoil. 
 
And I want you to just perhaps sit back for one second and 
write down some numbers. Sask Oil and Gas Corporation was 
privatized in 1986; $75 million was paid as a dividend to the 
Government of Saskatchewan for 40 per cent of the company, 
for 40 per cent equity. That’s what your chairman told the 
annual meeting the other day, and that has been confirmed by 
other information. So 40 per cent of the company was sold for 
$75 million in dividends. 
 
The only problem we have with that, Madam Minister, is that 
we have not received, as a province, one nickel in dividend 
since that $75 million pay-out. We have not received one 
penny, at least to the information that you have provided and 
your officials have provided, in exchange for the loss of equity 
from 60 per cent of the company, down to where we are now, 
25 per cent of a company. 
 
I’m wondering if you could perhaps talk to your officials, and if 
you can’t, I’m prepared to wait till you get the information, and 
explain the transition of the government’s equity from 60 per 
cent down to 25 per cent. Where’s the dough that was in 
exchange for that equity, and where did it go? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — You know, with all due respect to the 
member, this is the Department of Energy and Mines estimates, 
and I would refer him to the Estimates book, ’89-90, Mr. 
Chairman. There’s nothing in here on Saskoil, and yet he 
demands of the Department of Energy and Mines, Sask Oil and 
Gas. And will all due respect to the member, the last thing that I 
don’t need in this House is a lecture from this one, from this 
one in particular. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I’m quite willing to write a letter or phone 
Sask Oil and Gas on behalf of that member from Regina and 
ask for the information that he would like. I will do that for him. 
I will try and do it in the morning . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well he says I should know that offhand. Why should I? I 
ask you: offhand, why should I? 
 
Have you asked any questions about the 20 per cent-plus 
equities that the province has in Ipsco? Do Ipsco estimates 
come in this House? Who are you trying to kid? I don’t believe 
it. I mean, you’re smarter than that, so don’t play dumb in here 
with those kinds of positions. It’s not credible.  
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, you can stand  

there and call individual members names; that’s usually the 
procedure of a very incompetent person to dig themselves out 
of a hole, and I think that’s the procedure you’re using. But I 
want to remind you, Minister, that on the order in council, 
which appoints the members of the board of directors on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan, is your signature. Now maybe 
you’ve resigned your position as Minister of Energy and Mines 
in the last half-hour; I haven’t heard. But if your signature was 
on that order in council and the minister’s signature is on the 
order in council before you, there should be some 
accountability for that equity in the province’s, at that point, 
controlled Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. 
 
But, I want to refer . . . I mean, here we have Sask Oil and Gas 
Corporation, 1986 Annual Report, and they’ve got pictures of 
some of the executives. One picture is in front of J.R. Ewing; 
another four or five executives have a picture taken in front of 
John Wayne when he appeared in the movie Hell Cats, the life 
of Red Adair; and we have another picture of four or five 
executives in front of Jed Clampett, from the Beverly Hillbillies. 
And I was wondering why they did these little pictures in the 
annual report, and it seems to me that they got it right on the 
third one, that we have a government that is running the 
province like Jed Clampett and the Beverly hillbillies. 
 
And all we have from you is a response by saying, don’t ask me 
the questions; I only signed the order in council that appointed 
the directors to the board. Don’t ask me any questions. I’m 
surprised they didn’t have the picture of Jed Clampett 
superimposed over the minister’s picture, because I think that 
would have been the reflection of the accountability we have in 
this House this evening, Madam Minister. 
 
Now I want to get back to the Saskoil. We have a corporation 
that invested in a corporation, the people of Saskatchewan has. 
The government of Saskatchewan is the body that is holding it 
in trust. We have had this government, your government, 
Madam Minister, say in this House that you don’t know what’s 
going on with that corporation. We’ve seen Sask Oil and Gas 
Corporation go from a 60 per cent public control and ownership 
in an equity position by the government to where you’ve been 
quoted as saying we’re down to 25 per cent. 
 
And I’m wondering if you could perhaps come up with some 
answer as to how we got there. What did we exchange for 35 
per cent control of this corporation? And I want to know where 
that value is right now, whether it’s in a treasury, whether it’s at 
Crown Management Board, or whether there was no value 
given in lieu of control of the corporation. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can’t answer the question in terms of 
the pictures. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pat, get that smile off your face. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well it is rather funny if you think about 
it, you know — Jed Clampett, 1986. 
 
I have no idea, I have no idea, Mr. Chairman, how the pictures 
in the report came about. But I would say this to the member: I 
want him to go back and I want him to read  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1827 
 
 

the 1978 report, and I want to see what picture is portrayed in 
there of the chairman of the board. 
 
I’ll tell you what it was, Mr. Chairman, the emphasis wasn’t 
Saskatchewan, the emphasis was Alberta, and it’s right there, 
clear as a bell — 1978, Mr. Chairman. So the member can read 
1986, tell him to read all of them, and he might get a clearer 
picture of it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, these estimates once again are Energy and 
Mines, and the member has another forum in terms of asking 
questions of what ministerial responsibilities are, and that has to 
do within question period. 
 
As a citizen of this province, a member of the government, he 
also has another one, and that’s at the floor of the annual 
meeting of Sask Oil and Gas. Those are all open, that they are 
not part of the estimates that we are doing tonight with the 
Department of Energy and Mines. This department does not 
deal with the corporation of Sask Oil and Gas. Mr. Chairman, I 
can’t state it any clearer than that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister . . . Mr. Chairman, the 
minister is saying that she is not responsible, nor is the 
government responsible, for any equity that they hold in the 
Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. 
 
The orders in council that have been signed to date have been 
signed either by the minister here this evening — the Minister 
of Energy and Mines — or a combination of the Premier and 
the minister, or the Acting Minister of Energy and Mines, and 
yet she is saying that this government has no responsibility with 
respect to Saskoil. 
 
Well since 1986, Madam Minister, when we owned — you and 
on behalf of the people of this province — owned 60 per cent of 
this corporation, we have come from a 60 per cent equity 
position, control of the corporation in essence, six directors of a 
10-member board appointed by you and the Premier by 
Executive Council; signed orders in council, signed by your 
hand, and you are saying that we do not have any responsibility 
to answer questions with respect to Saskoil. 
 
Well since 1986, this corporation, Madam Minister, has issued 
new stock on a regular basis. And they’ve issued new stock in 
one circumstance to set up a holding company to sell off its 
assets and to lease back the assets; $80 million, I believe, it was 
worth. 
 
They sold off another bulk of shares most recently on the 
Toronto Stock Exchange through three capital corporations. It 
was a bought deal; there were 10 million shares sold for $97 
million, approximately. These shares . . . it was a bought deal in 
the sense that the shares were already sold to individuals and 
pension funds and corporations, but they were handled by three 
capital corporations on the Toronto Stock Exchange. 
 
And, Madam Minister, what we have seen is we have seen the 
equity of this corporation go from 60 per cent controlled by the 
government and the people of this province, down to 25 per 
cent through the various issuance of new treasury stock for not 
one penny in return for the loss of that equity. 

And I’d like the minister to stand in this House tonight and say 
to us that she is prepared to again give away a Crown 
corporation, 35 per cent of a Crown corporation and the 
majority of that Crown corporation — and her government 
would be prepared to do so — for nothing. Are you prepared to 
do that again? You’ve done it for Saskoil. 
 
And I’m wondering, if that’s going to be your policy, what’s 
going to be the next sell-off? Is it going to be SaskEnergy? Is it 
going to be the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan you’re 
going to give away in the same circumstance? How do you 
explain this give-away of Saskoil? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the picture gets a 
little clearer, you know — why Sask Oil and Gas? Now we’re 
into Sask potash, SaskEnergy. I ask again: why doesn’t the 
member want to talk about Ipsco — 20 per cent, the 
Saskatchewan government has in Ipsco, but I don’t see the 
member raising one point on that particular item. 
 
I did not, for the member’s benefit, state that he did not have a 
responsibility to ask questions. If he chooses to ask questions, 
that’s his privilege — that’s his privilege. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you should answer them. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, and the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, from the seat of his pants, wants to get in on the 
debate too, as usual — as usual, Mr. Chairman. That’s okay. 
 
But I say again, this is the Department of Energy and Mines 
estimates. There is nothing in here that indicates Sask Oil and 
Gas. And if the member wants to get into questions on Sask Oil 
and Gas, I’ve given him options as to where that information 
will come from. If he wants to get into it in question period 
tomorrow, I would be delighted. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
can stand up in question period and ask you a question and you 
can talk about everything but the answer. That’s the same tactic 
you’re using this evening. Rather than stand up in this House 
and just respond in a frank and courteous manner, you choose 
to do something very weird. You stand up and say: well don’t 
ask me questions here, ask me questions in some other forum. 
 
The questions I asked at the annual meeting, Madam Minister, 
pertained to the shareholders of the corporation, both privately 
and the public. And I can tell you right now that I may have 
some political differences with your chairman and your 
president, but certainly they were far more forthcoming than 
you are this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And I can tell you that the questions I want to 
ask you, Madam Minister — there’s a series of them, so you’ve 
got to start answering some of them. I mean, I can stand here all 
night and I can ask you the questions until you answer them; I 
can ask you the  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1828 
 
 

questions and wait until you get the answers. It’s your choice. 
But I want you today, this evening, to stand up in this House 
and respond to the questions with regard to Saskoil. 
 
How do you explain the give-away, the total give-away of 35 
per cent equity control of a corporation in return for nothing? 
The records that I have show that you have not, and this 
provincial government, this incompetent, Tory government, 
have not received one bloody dime for 35 per cent equity 
control of a Crown corporation that’s been privatized. Now get 
with it, Madam Minister. Are we going to have some response 
from you? Are you going to go through the scenario of what 
you’ve done to this corporation, what you have done to an asset 
owned and controlled by the people of this province, or are you 
not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I had indicated 
before, I would be quite willing to get the information for the 
member out of Sask Oil and Gas Corporation, and deal with it 
in that manner. I don’t have the information. I’m on the 
estimates of Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. That does not 
include one dime of Sask Oil and Gas. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, it seems to me and the 
colleagues in the opposition that the reason you don’t want to 
answer the question is the same reason that we’re in the worst 
fiscal position in the history of our province. We have a $4 
billion operating deficit this government has created in the last 
seven years. We have the fastest-growing operating deficit in all 
of North America. We have $8 billion in Crown corporation 
capital debt. We’ve got over $12 billion of accumulated 
operating capital debt in this province — no accountability. 
 
The auditor, Willard Lutz, in this House, tabled his report, and 
said on 46 separate occasions in the last fiscal year, 1988, you 
broke the law, you weren’t accountable, you didn’t provide 
information that you had to provide. And now we see in 
estimates the Minister of Energy saying: well, I’m not going to 
answer any questions on Sask Oil because we used to own 60 
per cent of it; now we only own 25 per cent; I don’t know what 
happened to 35 per cent, and if I did I wouldn’t tell anybody. 
 
Well could the Minister answer one question perhaps: did you 
sign any orders in council pertaining to the appointment of 
directors of the board of Sask Oil and Gas in the last 18 months, 
and how many have you signed? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the government, in fact, 
on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, does appoint people 
to the Saskoil board, and yes, that does go through an order in 
council or through cabinet. I believe there were two names. I 
would have to get them for the member, and I will endeavour to 
do that, along with any other financial information that he may 
want. I do know that he has made a very special effort to go to 
the annual meeting and ask his questions, and I’m pleased that 
in fact the chairman of the board and the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the corporation did in fact answer the questions. That 
is their responsibility, and that’s one of the purposes of this 
company being public. There in fact is a forum there for any 
resident, a shareholder, to go to that  

meeting and get the information that they want. I think that’s a 
plus. 
 
Now obviously the member and I are going to disagree on that 
point also, but that’s as I see it. You can stand in here and you 
can accuse me of doing a lot of things. That’s fair ball. That’s 
the way that you wish to do it, well you go right ahead. I will 
give you all information that is available to me as it relates to 
my estimates on the Department of Energy and Mines. And if 
there’s anything forthcoming on oil and gas, Sask Oil and Gas, 
then I have already stated to you several times that I would 
endeavour to undertake that to get it for you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, you are a minister 
responsible for the appointments of directors to the board of 
Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. By that very relationship, you 
are also, according to the pecking order and the responsibilities 
of a cabinet, responsible for the Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. 
I’d like to ask you the question related to the board. Who have 
you appointed to the board in the last couple years, and can you 
tell this House why you appointed these people? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not denying that I 
have any responsibility for Sask Oil and Gas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We agree on one thing tonight, Mr. 
Chairman, the opposition and I. I am not denying that. What I 
am saying to the opposition is that in fact that is not within the 
estimates of Energy and Mines, and that’s what is before this 
House tonight. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, in 1986 Saskoil 
issued a number of shares. The Government of Saskatchewan 
gave up 40 per cent of the company in equity for $75 million in 
dividends, which was basically theirs anyway in the first place. 
I mean, you had built up $53 million in retained earnings at the 
beginning of 1985, and you made profits of 40.6 billion in ’88. 
 
Now since 1986, Saskoil’s issued new treasury stock. The 
incredible aspect of this move, in my view, is that all the new 
stock, the new treasury stock, and the major shareholder, has 
been sold. But the major shareholder, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, has not purchased, nor have they asked to 
purchase their rightful share, that is, 60 per cent of all the new 
shares. At least that’s the answer we’re getting from you 
tonight. That’s the answer I’m expecting to get from you, 
because you don’t want to answer any questions. 
 
We’ve gone from a 60 per cent equity position, and I can go to 
the board meeting, the annual meeting, the annual general 
meeting and ask the president and ask the chairman of the board 
about these questions. But the fact of the matter is, Minister, 
that they don’t particularly care if the government loses the 
equity. Their faces shine and they smile when they see less 
government control and more control to them as the chairman 
of the board and the president of the corporation. Because you 
know better than I can tell you that when you run a company, 
the less involvement you have from your shareholders, and in 
particular the major shareholder, the different things are  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1829 
 
 

going to be with respect to running the corporation. And that’s 
the kind of position they’re in. 
 
So I can go to the annual general meeting, as I’ve done, and I 
can ask the questions, as I’ve done, and I can get the answers, 
and they provided them. But the fact of the matter is you’re 
accountable for the equity of the people of Saskatchewan in that 
corporation. You have not, to this time in the evening, at 9:40 in 
the evening, responded in terms of how you’ve accounted for 
their assets. 
 
And I want to know from you, Madam Minister, how you 
explain the reduction in equity from 60 per cent down to 25 per 
cent to the people that you’re accountable to, the taxpayers of 
this province, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, and 
the opposition. How do you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest to the 
member that if indeed the policy of arm’s length of government 
control on Sask Oil and Gas is one indicator of a successful 
corporation, then that one is indeed successful. It’s been arm’s 
length from government — talks about government control. I’m 
not sure what he defines as government control or, in fact, what 
his expectations are. 
 
And I would also suggest to the member that simply because 
someone owns 60 per cent of that corporation, that they don’t, 
in fact, control it, as he talks about control. 
 
I think the primary concern in terms of the regulatory function, 
Mr. Chairman, of the Department of Energy and Mines, when it 
comes to control of the oil and gas operation, has got to be 
within the ability of the department to, in fact, monitor how 
much of the commodity is out there; how much they’re bringing 
up; the price of it; and to be able to set a fair royalty structure 
for the province to determine its fair share that they’re getting 
out of the oil and gas industry. That’s one form of control. 
 
If indeed I look at Sask Oil and Gas since it has been put out for 
public share offering, I look at the increase on those assets — 
going from 200 and, I believe, it’s 65 million dollars, to over $1 
billion today. And I would say to the member that perhaps the 
best thing that happened to that corporation that it became 
arm’s length from government. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Didn’t answer the question, Madam Minister. 
You haven’t been accountable to date on the estimates. 
 
I’m having second thoughts about the excitement at getting into 
estimates. At least we had an opportunity during the debates 
preceding 55 days of getting some kind of answers out of the 
government, albeit they were a bit short on information. 
 
But here we have, we’ve gone now for about half an hour on 
Saskoil. You have denied the fact that you’re responsible for 
Sask Oil and Gas. You have refused to give us an explanation, 
an accountability on why the corporation has gone from a 60 
per cent equity government ownership to a 25 per cent, and why 
we have  

not received one penny in exchange for that equity. 
 
We have seen in every corporate leveraged buy-out on the 
markets in the last 20 years the selling off of controlling share 
of a company at a premium. Every corporation that you can 
look at on the market that’s been bought out on a bidding 
process, a going-concern corporation, has been purchased at a 
premium, and that is, the controlling equity has been purchased 
at a premium. 
 
You have said tonight that 60 per cent does not constitute 
control of Sask Oil and Gas. How does that square, Madam 
Minister, with your Premier and your minister responsible for 
the potash corporation saying that we’re going to have 55 per 
cent control of the potash corporation once it’s privatized? Are 
you saying that we’re not going to have control over that 
corporation either, the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, three points. Again, and 
the member will recognize I simply stated I did not deny a 
responsibility for the government’s percentage of the 
ownership. That’s point one. 
 
Point two, I have stated time and time again tonight to him, the 
information that he requires is not with the Department of 
Energy and Mines, the estimates that are before this House 
tonight. Now why is that so difficult to understand? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because it’s not true. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The information is simply . . . Well, it is 
true. To the member from Saskatoon South, it is true, and he 
knows it as a critic in the past of Energy and Mines. He knows 
that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, point three. When I talked about the control, 
there are various ways of controlling. Within this department 
what we try and control is the monitoring of the activity that’s 
taking place — how much oil is coming up; how much gas is 
coming up; the price of it; how much they owe the government; 
how much they get to keep for themselves; the land sales. That 
is what I meant when I referred to control in terms of the 
mandate of the Department of Energy and Mines which are the 
estimates that are before this House tonight. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, the only conclusion 
the people of Saskatchewan can get from your explanations, or 
lack of explanations, is that this seems to be a vehicle in which 
ministers can fill their pockets with some kind of change. 
 
Now I’m going to continue on with some other questions on 
this corporation because I think it’s pertinent to the debate this 
evening. And the questions I want to review are the . . . Your 
government’s position in the past about Crown corporations has 
been that they’re inefficient. And I want to talk about the debt 
and mismanagement of Saskoil in the last little while. 
 
When Saskoil was run by the province the debt/equity ratio was 
.09 to 1, which is about 9 per cent. They . . . 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1830 
 
 

The Chairman: — Order. Order. The question before the 
committee is Energy and Mines estimates, and I’d ask the 
member to relate his questions to the blue book and Energy and 
Mines estimates. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — In the blues, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of 
Energy and Mines is responsible for certain and sundry oil and 
gas initiatives in the province, and one of the responsibilities, in 
my view, and in the view of the opposition, is with respect to 
Saskoil. You are the minister responsible. 
 
You won’t answer any questions in question period. You won’t 
answer any questions in Crown corporations because you don’t 
come to Crown corporations any longer. 
 
And what I’d like to do is just raise with you a couple of 
comparisons, Mr. Chairman, and tie them into the blue book. 
And the comparisons I want to raise is the fact that Saskoil used 
to be a very profitable corporation. There were a significant 
number of millions of dollars retained earnings in that 
corporation. Saskoil paid significant revenues to the provincial 
treasury as dividends. Yet the corporation was sold off in 1986 
for $75 million. 
 
The minister has said tonight, Mr. Chairman, that Saskoil has an 
asset base of around a billion dollars now, but what has come 
with that is that their debt/equity ratio has gone from 9 per cent 
to 47 per cent since it was privatized. So it has increased over 
500 per cent. 
 
(2130) 
 
As well, Mr. Chairman, Saskoil’s original objective for return 
on average capital employed, set in 1981, was to maintain a 14 
per cent . . . an average year rolling acreage . . . or average, I 
should say. This statistic measures the efficiency of 
management. And now we’re looking at, in 1988, in the 
privatization, that it’s at .5 per cent — not 14 per cent — but .5 
per cent. In ’87 it was 7.8 per cent, and in ’86 it was .2 per cent. 
So the efficiency of the company has decreased substantially. 
 
And I also want to talk to you for a moment, Madam Minister, 
about the net tangible asset ratio. The company is gone. The net 
tangible asset, by the way, is the shareholder’s equity versus the 
long-term debt. It’s the shareholder’s equity versus the 
long-term debt. And what happened is that the corporation has 
gone, in a few short years, from a net tangible asset ratio of 
$2,300 per 1,000 of long-term debt to almost $22,000 for every 
1,000 of long-term debt . . . I’m sorry, it’s the reverse; it’s fallen 
from 21,000 of equity for 1,000 debt to 2,300. So it’s fallen to 
about one-tenth of its initial net tangible asset ratio. 
 
We’ve seen as well that the company is not an integrated 
company. It’s moving towards that way, but it’s doing the 
opposite of what many oil companies in the province and many 
oil companies in western Canada are doing. It is taking on, 
Madam Minister, more debt in times of volatile oil prices. It’s 
taking on, Madam Minister, more debt when interest rates are 
volatile as well — a very unstable situation. 

Every other oil company that you talk to is reducing its debt and 
consolidating its position with respect to operating costs. And 
this company is doing the opposite. And so you may say that 
the company is going to become a one billion dollar 
corporation. But what’s happened, not only have we lost the 
equity in the corporation for practically zero, if not zero, we 
have lost jobs in the corporation in this province. Originally the 
corporation was set up to create jobs in Saskatchewan. We have 
lost the equity. We’ve lost the control even through the 
stock-market with respect to the shareholders that are out there 
right now. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. The debate and 
the point you’re making are very interesting, but they don’t 
relate to Energy and Mines estimates. If the member wants to 
debate this, he should put a motion before the House to debate 
it. But it doesn’t relate to the Energy and Mines estimates that’s 
before the committee tonight. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — A point of information. Could you advise the 
House what rule you’re quoting from, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The Chair decides relevance. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Further point of information. If you can’t get 
it in Crown corporations, the information, and you can’t get the 
information in public accounts, where can you get it, Mr. 
Chairman? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There’s no debate with the Chair. 
It’s not up to . . . Order. It’s not up to the Chair to tell a member 
where they can get the information. But the questions are not 
relevant to the estimates before Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t argue with you, Mr. Chairman, 
that it’s not up to the Chair to tell members where to get their 
information, but I do raise with you, Mr. Chairman, the fact that 
— I’m not making this personal; I’m talking about the position 
of the Chair — that the role of the Chair is to be able to 
interpret the rules. 
 
How can you interpret the rules if you are not prepared to tell 
the committee what you base your ruling on, Mr. Chairman? 
Surely one of the purposes that you . . . one of your roles is to 
be able to justify the ruling that you make. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Page 171, rule 494: 
 

The whole management of a department may be discussed 
in a general way when the committee is considering the 
first item of the Estimates of that department, which reads 
as . . . (which is item 1). 
 

Order, order. Saskoil is not in the blue book, in the Estimates. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The point I was 
getting to, I hadn’t got to the point where I was going to be 
raising my question, but the point I was going to get to was with 
regard to revenues to the department through  
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1831 
 
 

Saskoil, and that’s part of it. The other part of it is that Saskoil 
is very much a part of the Department of Energy when it comes 
to revenues. And if you look in the Estimates book, if my 
colleague here would just pass me my Estimates book, you’ll 
note that in this book there are items with respect to mineral 
revenues, item no. 2. 
 
The Chairman: — Certainly, certainly your question is in 
order on mineral revenues; your question is in order on 
appointments to the board, but the debate and some of the 
questions you asked were not relevant, so . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
The Chairman: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could you give us a list of those 
questions that would be appropriate on Saskoil as they relate to 
Sask Energy and Mines because I’m having a great deal of 
difficulty. On some you allowed the member to ask a great 
number of questions on Saskoil, and then all of a sudden you 
change your mind and disallow them. Could you give us a list 
of what you have decided are in order and not in order, because 
it seems to me you’re making very arbitrary decisions. 
 
The member’s been asking questions on Saskoil for the past 
hour and not getting many results. Now the appearance is that 
you’re protecting the minister from answering the questions. 
I’m saying, how could you allow it for an hour, a broad range of 
questions, including the appointment of the board of directors 
of Saskoil, which the minister said that she would take notice of 
and get back to us . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That she didn’t know. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . that she didn’t know the answer but 
would get back to us. How are we supposed to know? Where is 
the accountability? We can’t get answers in the Crown 
Corporations Committee on the issue; we can’t get it in Public 
Accounts. This is millions of dollars of taxpayers’ moneys 
we’re talking . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member’s point of order is 
becoming debate. I have allowed a far ranging of debate and 
questions and the member was getting off of the question that 
was before the committee. And certainly on mineral revenues 
and revenues to the department, is relevant, but other questions 
are not. I can’t make a list. The members ask questions and the 
chair will then rule on the questions. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you. Can you, Madam Minister, please 
tell us who the board members are, recently appointed at the 
May 11 meeting, and what their qualifications are? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps some clarification 
in terms of what this department manages. It does not manage 
the corporation of Sask Oil and Gas.  
 
As a member of the Executive Council, members of the 
Executive . . . Would you like the floor to get into the debate? 
Well can you wait your turn then. Can you wait your turn? 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. All . . . Order. Order. All 
members will get an opportunity to ask questions from their feet 
without interruption of the minister when she’s trying to 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the Leader of the Opposition says 
he doesn’t like some lectures. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two-bit lectures. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: Yes, two-bit lectures, and he’s a good judge 
of what a worthy cause is, isn’t he? You bet, you bet, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Chairman, this . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. All members . . . I will say 
again, all members get an opportunity to ask questions in 
Committee of Finance, and I would ask them that they rise, be 
recognized, and ask their questions when their microphone is 
on. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. This department 
does not manage Sask Oil and Gas. As a member of Executive 
Council I have been appointed to be responsible for the 
Saskatchewan government’s interest on its percentage of shares 
of the Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. Mr. Chairman, I don’t 
deny that responsibility, and I have from the beginning of the 
member’s questions stated if he would like that information, 
give me the questions that he has and I will endeavour to get it 
from the corporation. 
 
But in all fairness, I have told him time and time again tonight, 
the management is not within this department. We don’t have 
the information here for him. That will have to come from the 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Because they are not responsible for the 
management of Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. That’s not very 
difficult to understand. Now in terms of who was appointed, I 
believe the government appointed Mr. Ron Barber and Mrs. 
Joan Cook. And if you would like the background on those 
people, then I will endeavour to get it for the member from 
Regina North West. 
 
But if he would just lay out a list of the financial information 
and any other information he wants on that company, I would 
be pleased to take it and in turn find him the information. But 
he is not going to find the information with the Department of 
Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could the minister please tell us whether 
there are two members of the board appointed by the 
government, or is there three. You’ve given us two names: Ron 
Barber from Weyburn and a person by the name of Joan Cook. 
Is there a third person? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that we’ve 
moved from three to two, but in order to be certain, I would 
want to check that out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you 
may be right, but the reason I say that is because a third name 
does not come to mind this evening. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1832 
 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, I was at the annual 
meeting, and there were three people appointed and elected, 
appointed through order in council by somebody named or 
titled the Minister of Energy and Mines for the province of 
Saskatchewan. My question to you is: who is the Minister of 
Energy and Mines in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Before the member from Regina North 
West gets too excited about everything, I would suggest that he 
give me an opportunity tomorrow to check out the board 
structure. He will in all likelihood find that George Hill is 
represented there because of SaskPower and the shares in 
Saskoil, not as in the official government appointment, as he 
thinks. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, did you sign the order in 
council which appointed the two or three directors from the 
government to the board? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Those are recommended, Mr. Chairman, 
by myself. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And under what authority did you sign the 
order in council? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, this is the authority of 
Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — In what capacity did you sign the order in 
council that appointed these directors to the board of Sask Oil 
and Gas Corporation? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I do them as minister appointed for 
responsibility of the government’s percentage of ownership of 
Sask Oil and Gas. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, why 
you appointed these individuals to the board. Did you appoint 
them to the board because you felt they had the right alphabet 
on their name? Did you appoint them because perhaps they 
knew something about oil and gas? Or did you appoint them 
because they had some dealings in automobiles? Or did you 
appoint them because they’re representing the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan on that board? Pick any of the above or 
anything else. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, these people are serving 
their second term on that board. Both Mr. Barber and Mrs. 
Cook are familiar with the oil and gas industry. Both have 
worked in it, have had investments in it in the past, and I 
believe Mrs. Cook is still actively involved in the Estevan area. 
 
I think they serve this board well. I think that they perhaps bring 
a layman’s view to Sask Oil and Gas, and that they represent 
the people of Saskatchewan in a very good manner, because not 
all the oil and gas industry is well-known outside of the 
producing areas, and I think these people have a feel and a 
vision for Saskatchewan, and that’s why they’re there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You appoint them. You say that they 
represent the government on the board. Whose interest  

do they represent and protect? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve said that they 
in turn are representing the people of Saskatchewan for the 
percentage of share ownership by the government. The 
government, as these people are always telling us, with control 
of Crown corporations in fact belong to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They are appointed by the government, Mr. 
Chairman, that’s very clear. But I also said that I think they 
bring a reasonable view to that board of lay people outside of 
the oil and gas industry. They come from small producing 
areas, and I believe that that’s important when it comes time for 
some decisions to be taken by the board of Sask Oil and Gas. 
They, in fact, do represent the lay person quite well on that 
board. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So they represent, through the appointment 
by the minister, the minister, the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and the people of Saskatchewan; that’s what you’re saying. 
Now their interests is our interests - 
_ axiom of equality — a very simple mathematical term we all 
learned in high school. 
 
And I want to ask you, Madam Minister, therefore, what 
happens, if you can — since you’re responsible for appointing 
these people, and they’re responsible to us, through you — 
what happens with the 35 per cent equity of Saskoil? What did 
we get in return for the 35 per cent equity, the drop from 60 per 
cent to 25 per cent? And where is that value for loss of 
controlling interest in equity in Sask Oil and Gas Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Once again I will state that any specific 
information the member wants, I will be delighted to get it for 
him, but I can’t give it to him tonight. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’m wondering when the minister might be 
able to obtain that information? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The member, all his questions, if he 
would like to put them on a piece of paper for me tonight . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well okay then, I’ll wait for 
Hansard to come out in the morning, or tomorrow afternoon, I 
guess, if it’s the night sitting, and we’ll get him the information 
that he wants, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, we’ve been in this 
Assembly 55 sitting days. We gave you another 17 days while 
we rang the bells to get your act together. That’s 72 days. Last 
year our session was only 69 days length in total. You’ve had 
more days already. You’ve got one, two, three, four, five, six, 
seven, eight officials with you tonight. Surely one of them 
should have some idea about an answer on the questions that 
I’ve asked tonight pertaining to Saskoil. 
 
Now I’d be happy if you would just take your time and filter 
through the crowd, ask each of them individually. I’ll wait. I’ve 
got lots of patience. My family blessed me with lots of patience; 
you may not know that, but that’s a fact. And I’m prepared to 
wait for as long as it takes for you to get an answer from one of 
these one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight officials in this 
House. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1833 
 
 

Madam Minister, can you ask them, please, and get for us, what 
happened with 35 per cent equity of the corporation that we 
held and now no longer hold. What did we get in return for that 
equity? And what did we get in return for that controlling 35 
per cent of Sask Oil and Gas Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, he can count. We’ve been 
in here 55 days. We’ve had one question — one question — 
from this member during question period, Mr. Chairman. I 
believe I have yet to receive a letter from this member with any 
kind of a question in it. And in fact, when there has been a 
question to be delivered by letter, it has probably come from the 
Leader of the Opposition as opposed to the critic of Energy and 
Mines, which tells us something about the confidence level that 
the Leader of the Opposition has in the member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I came here prepared to do the estimates of 
Energy and Mines. I’ve already stated these officials work for 
Energy and Mines, not Sask Oil and Gas. And on the specific 
questions of Sask Oil and Gas, I will get the information for the 
member, but I can’t deliver it here with the Department of 
Energy and Mines. I’m prepared to do Energy and Mines; why 
isn’t he? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, we’ve established that you 
are indeed the Minister of Energy and Mines — that took about 
an hour to get to. We have established that you, as Minister of 
Energy and Mines in the province of Saskatchewan, appoint 
certain directors to the board of Saskoil. We’ve established as 
well that those people have some accountability to you. 
 
It’s widely known in this province, in this country, that the 
legislature must hold governments accountable for their 
financial actions and their other transactions. 
 
We’re asking you this evening, Madam Minister, whether you 
want to participate in this accountability process through 
estimates. You won’t do it through Crown corporations. You 
won’t do it through the process of question period. And we’re 
asking . . . and you won’t do it through the process of the 
auditors because you now have private auditors for Saskoil. 
 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, if you could make note of the 
questions that I’ve asked tonight and try and get the information 
for tomorrow; I’d be happy to wait till tomorrow to get that. 
And I want to know — and I can ask you more questions if you 
like — but would you be prepared to do those things for us this 
evening? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already stated 
that I would get him any answers that I could as it related to 
Sask Oil and Gas. Now if he’s not prepared to give me those 
questions in writing here tonight, I’m going to have to wait until 
Hansard comes out tomorrow afternoon. I’ve already stated that 
I would do that for the member, and if he had any others, to jot 
them down and we would in fact do that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would think that . . . you know, for the member 
to say that they can’t get any answers in question period is 
absolutely ludicrous considering that he has had . . . screwed up 
his courage to ask one question in 55 days.  

Like really, you really have to wonder. He’s had 25 minutes 
every day for 55 days to ask a question, and what do we get? — 
we got one. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, and Mr. Chairman, I’ll ask 
you one more time, and if you want to read Hansard tomorrow, 
please read Hansard, and if you can’t get around to it, have one 
of your one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight officials do 
the reading. 
 
What I’d like from you, Madam Minister, is this: number one, 
I’d like you to provide to this Assembly the scenario from when 
we went from 100 per cent control and ownership of Saskoil to 
where we are now, including the following: what dates the 
transactions took place of diluting of equity; what was received 
for exchange for dilution of that equity; where the money went. 
 
And in particular, I’d like to have some detail from the point 
where the corporation was 60 per cent controlled through the 
number of shares by the government, and to the point where we 
are now where we hold 25 per cent equity in shares in the 
company. 
 
I’d like to know what we received as a premium for the loss of 
that control of the corporation; what we received and what we 
also had with respect to riders or agreements — shareholders 
agreements — that pertain to our option to buy the same 
percentage that we owned of treasury stock that was issued for 
other purposes. 
 
While you’re doing that, Madam Minister, I’d like to know how 
you explain the company issuing 10 million new shares to three 
corporate bankers to be sold in the stock exchange for $97 
million, and why that $97 million put us in a position from 35, 
or thereabouts, down to 25 per cent, yet we received not one 
nickel of that transaction. Yet the $97 million was used to 
purchase a corporation called ICG Resources Ltd in Alberta for 
$111 million cash. That means Saskoil topped it up by $14 
million. They took the $97 million from the revenues of the 
issuing of the new treasury stock; they added $14 million to 
that; they gave it to ICG, Inter-City Gas Corporation, for the 
purchase of ICG Resources Limited. ICG gas corporation has 
head office, I believe, in Toronto, or Winnipeg, or both. 
 
I want to know, Madam Minister, while you’re going through 
this process, I want to know how your government explains 
spending $111 million cash of taxpayers’ money on purchasing 
ICG Resources in Alberta, an Alberta corporation, to protect 
Alberta jobs, as well as taking on another $150 million in debt, 
in view of the volatile interest rates and volatile oil prices that 
are out there. Could you get that information for us in the next 
day or two? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I will once again endeavour 
to get the information for the member. 
 
Just in response to the last part of his question here, I think if he 
goes back and he, in fact, reads Hansard from the one question 
that he asked several weeks ago, he will find, in fact, that part 
of the response is in my answer at that point in time. But I will 
be getting the information for him. 
  



 
June 12, 1989 

 

1834 
 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Will the hon. member please be 
quiet? The minister from Regina Centre, the member from 
Regina Centre, please be quiet. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 
 


