




















































April 20, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 20, 1989 
 
 

919 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, a group of 26 grade 8 students from Glen Elm 
School in my constituency of Regina Victoria. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Larry Moleski, and by Trevor 
McLary and Louise Petschulat. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with them after the question 
period for pictures and for drinks and a lot of tough questions. 
And I would ask that members join with me at this time to make 
them welcome in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Payment of Crow Benefits 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the Deputy Premier. And, sir, you have been 
recently quoted in he press as advancing the idea or a Tory 
policy that the Crow benefit, the subsidy paid be not paid to the 
railways, not paid to the producers, that it be paid to the 
provincial government. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, prior to making this 
policy statement, did you contact any of the farm groups, and 
could you indicate what their reactions were. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I was at an irrigation 
conference in Saskatoon and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Here it is, my boy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . and it’s right there. He’s got it, I 
think, in the Star-Phoenix. I’m not sure who read it to him, Mr. 
Speaker. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the 
discussion was related to the Star-Phoenix story of that morning 
that was dealing with the breakthrough in GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) where they were talking about 
freezing subsidies and then measuring subsidies and then 
backing away from subsidies, Mr. Speaker. This is something 
that we’ve talked about for a long time, getting the grain war 
out of the road so that we can all have some opportunity to 
build on our strength in our various jurisdictions. 
 
And during the course of that discussion, Mr. Speaker, it 
occurred to me that if GATT was successful, the Crow benefit 
would be gone. If the Crow benefit is gone, Mr. Speaker, the 
argument then will not be who gets the payment; it will be, 
what payment? There ain’t none, you know. 
 
So I thought — and this was right here where this was  

hatched — I thought that perhaps what we should do if we 
believed, Mr. Speaker, if we believed that GATT was going to 
be successful in dealing with agricultural subsidies, perhaps 
what we should be doing is going for infrastructure funding, not 
necessarily to get . . . the provincial governments, not 
necessarily to municipal governments, maybe directly by the 
federal government, but to infrastructure funding so we can 
build on our strength — pipelines, industrial parks, roads, all of 
those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the Premier, to the Deputy 
Premier. I want to direct this to the thumper. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, it’s quoted in here that you state, “It is only a matter of 
time before the Crow benefit it targeted as a subsidy and 
removed entirely.” I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, do you agree 
and are you supportive of that position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the GATT is General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. They have this office in 
Geneva. From time to time they get together and they talk about 
trade barriers, Mr. Speaker. One of the trade barriers that has 
caused a great deal of frustration all over the world in 
agricultural commodities, Mr. Speaker, is agricultural subsidies. 
GATT has been talking about getting rid of these ag subsidies 
so that we can all build on our strengths and market into the 
world in the most efficient way possible, because we’re now 
building on our strength, and building in the most efficient way 
possible. 
 
Now what I want that member to understand is that if all 
members of GATT decide that what we have to do is get rid of 
our subsidies, the Crow benefit, in all likelihood, will be 
considered to be a subsidy. And if it is gone, it is gone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a further supplement to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, would you agree that eliminating 
the current $720 million that is being paid under the Crow 
benefit, that it will undoubtedly increase the transportation costs 
to the individual farmers and that it will affect the overall 
transportation system in this country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, you don’t care about the farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the member from his 
chair says, oh, you don’t care about the farmers. Mr. Speaker, I 
am one. I am one. And me and my neighbours, me and my 
neighbours, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate very much the kinds of 
things that this government has done for the farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. And I won’t . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

920 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I won’t take the time of the House 
today to go through that very lengthy list, Mr. Speaker; just to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that not only do we care but we understand. 
And that’s far different than members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Report on Education for the Deaf 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Education. 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that your task force studying the 
options for education of deaf children in Saskatchewan did not 
reach a consensus, and in fact prepared two reports, not just the 
one you released? And will you today give this House your 
assurances that the second report will be made available to the 
public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, yes and yes. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the minister. This minister 
did not send out . . . New question. My light’s not on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. New question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, you only sent out one report to all of the 
stakeholders in deaf education; you did not sent out both 
reports. Will you undertake your commitment to contact and 
write all of the groups involved in the task force hearings on 
deaf education to ensure that they have access to both reports? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that may well 
have already been done. The report has been available through 
my office. If it’s not widely enough distributed, I’ll take your 
suggestion under consideration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. This minister did not 
distribute both reports; he only distributed one report. Now, Mr. 
Minister, would you tell this House why you only distributed 
one task force report, when there were two opinions on this 
issue, that you led the people of this province to believe that this 
task force was united on the directions in deaf education? And 
can you tell us, Mr. Minister, why haven’t you made a 
commitment to release both reports and send it to all of the 
stakeholders in education so that all people, all groups know 
what in fact the recommendations of that task force report was? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
already said that the report could be as widely distributed as 
anyone wishes, and anyone who does wish a copy can get it 
from my office. 
 
But I would make this observation, Mr. Speaker, that when I sat 
in on the meeting with the task force, the paper  

that was provided to me by two of the members of the 
committee was never presented to me as a minority report or 
characterized in that light, Mr. Speaker. And I suspect that’s . . . 
and in fact the chairman of the board, the chairman of the task 
force spoke to both documents. 
 
So quite frankly, I never really viewed it as a minority report. It 
was presented to me with the understanding that in about three 
of the recommendations, there was disagreement, Mr. Speaker, 
three out of about 17 or 18 or 19 recommendations. So what 
that tells me is there’s probably fairly good support for the vast 
majority of the recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. This minister did not answer 
the previous question. Can you tell this House why you only 
sent out one opinion on the task force report? There were two 
opinions. Why did you only send out one and mislead the 
people of our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I just went through that, Mr. Speaker. 
And if I was to back up and take a look at this issue, the reality 
of what the member is speaking about is that when it comes to 
the education of deaf children, it’s a highly emotional, charged 
issue. And there are strongly held views on either side, Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates specifically to a couple of areas. Number 
one, the school for the deaf itself, and should we continue to 
have an institutionalized setting; and secondly, Mr. Speaker, the 
type of sign language that would be used by students and 
teachers. Those two areas particularly did not enjoy a 
unanimous view. I recognize that it’s a highly emotional 
charged issue, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to proceed 
knowing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expansion of Saskoil 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the Minister of Mines and Energy and it involves Saskoil’s 
buying spree. Madam Minister, in March of this year, Saskoil 
sold 10 million shares worth $97 million from the province’s 
holdings to wealthy investors in Ontario and kicked in some 
additional money to purchase ICG Resources of Alberta for 
$111 million. Aside from the $150 million in debt, in new debt, 
can you tell us what the people of Saskatchewan got out of this 
deal for giving up half of their equity or half of their ownership 
in Saskoil? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. member, 
the critic for Energy and Mines, that in fact what we have for 
the people of Saskatchewan is a company that has increased its 
resources from about 20th position in Canada on oil to about 
number eight in Canada. They have increased their gas reserves; 
they have in fact diversified. 
 
All of that, Mr. Speaker, has come in with the company  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

921 
 

beginning at a position of approximately 200 million in assets 
to over $1 billion in assets today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — All of that, Mr. Speaker, with the 
Saskatchewan people still owning 25 per cent of that company 
through the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What you’re telling us . . . Mr. Speaker, 
supplementary. What you’re telling us, Madam Minister, is that 
we have a smaller piece of a bigger pie, but the wealthy 
investors in Ontario, who have bought up Saskoil, will benefit 
from this purchase. And the people of Saskatchewan will still 
continue to receive zero in dividends from this company. 
Nothing goes into the treasury as a result of selling 25 per cent 
of the equity for $97 million. 
 
That being the case, can you explain why it was the equity of 
the people of Saskatchewan which was used to purchase this 
new company to increase the profits for the out-of-province 
investors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, point one: it is totally false 
to say that the people of Saskatchewan get nothing out of this 
company. That is totally false. If the member would look at the 
increase of production on both oil and gas just within the 
province of Saskatchewan, he will see a substantial increase. 
That means royalties — royalties, Mr. Speaker — royalties on 
gas development that never happened — never happened — 
before Saskoil went through public participation, which is 
happening today. 
 
Secondly, taxation, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s through local 
taxation in the R.M. or corporate taxation with head office in 
Saskatchewan paid to the government, I find the argument 
ludicrous. On one hand, you know, they say, when they look at 
Weyerhaeuser, don’t let anybody from outside come in and 
invest. Here we have a Saskatchewan company that wants to 
invest, increase its assets, pay more taxes and a lot of other 
things and look at outside, and they say, well you can’t go out. 
You can’t come in and you can’t go out. What do they want? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — A new question. The minister says that 
Saskoil is going to be paying new taxes as a result of this 
purchase. That’s totally not true, Minister, because what has 
happened is Saskoil has purchased another tax write-off of $100 
million. They did not pay any taxes last year at all. And what 
we have, we have, Madam Minister, a corporation that is not 
contributing as a result of selling off equity for the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
Can you tell us and the people of this province, Madam 
Minister, how many Saskatchewan jobs the further sell-off of 
Saskoil has created in this province? And secondly, can you tell 
us how much money this purchase brings into the treasury of 
the province of Saskatchewan? And can you tell us who in 
Saskatchewan benefitted from this sweetheart deal — from this 
sell-off — other than ICG (Intercity Gas) Corporation of 
Toronto and a few investors  

who own 5 per cent of the shares in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, this year Saskoil on taxes 
— and I speak of property taxes — will pay approximately 800 
to $1 million — 1 million. Their corporate tax . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, they will. The member is wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I might remind the member as a Crown corporation in the old 
days it paid nothing because it was a Crown corporation and 
had a preferred position under the government. That is not the 
case today, Mr. Speaker; they will in fact be paying their taxes. 
 
I can only suggest to the member again that he take a look at the 
facts and figures. He talks about give-away when, in fact, 
Saskoil is bringing much into this province. He will see an 
increase on the jobs at Saskoil, probably up to around 30 or 50 
jobs within a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a final question to the minister. 
Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan . . . Madam 
Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. We’re 
having some problems hearing the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan 
have put up $97 million and what did we get? We didn’t get any 
new jobs in Saskatchewan; we got less ownership. We got $150 
million in new debt in ICG in a volatile oil and gas and interest 
rate market. Your sell-off policies have cheated the people of 
Saskatchewan out of $97 million. How is that a good deal for 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, once again in fact, the 
member will see some new jobs created, some new jobs . . . At 
least 30 with the recent acquisition. 
 
I would also remind him now that Saskoil is called Saskoil and 
Gas. And with all the development that they have been doing on 
Saskatchewan property on the gas side that, in fact, there have 
been several hundred jobs, Mr. Speaker, on the west side of the 
province that have been there due to Saskoil and Gas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

House Business 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I address my question to the 
House Leader, and today I wrote a letter to the minister asking 
him that we have an opportunity to review the report that has 
just been tabled. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

922 
 

I wonder if you would, Mr. Minister, allow the opposition the 
privilege to have a review of the report, let’s say from now until 
we resume at 7 o’clock, and work with other House business 
until that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I did get a letter from the 
opposition House Leader a short time ago, and it asks, Mr. 
Speaker, that before proceeding with Bill 2 that the annual 
report be tabled . . . or Bill 20, as quickly as we could. The 
minute that I got the letter, I asked the minister to table it. It’s 
been tabled. 
 
And I know . . . I might have been, Mr. Speaker, under the 
misconception that they were very anxious to get on with the 
Bill; they’ve been hollering for it for a few days so . . . and 
they’ve called quorum a couple of times — well once, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I was quite prepared, I was quite prepared 
to take Bill 20 to maybe 5 o’clock and then go into Bill 1, and 
then maybe do some estimates. I was quite prepared to do that, 
but I was under, obviously, the misconception that they wanted 
to get on with Bill 20 with all due dispatch, and so we put it on, 
Mr. Speaker. They now have the report. 
 
I’m still quite prepared, Mr. Speaker, to do Bill 20 until, say, 5 
o’clock and then go to Bill 1 at 7 o’clock, but I’m trying to 
co-operate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the press and everyone in 
the province will obviously know that the government tabled 
this report only minutes ago in order to force the opposition to 
go with the main speaker on the Bill without reviewing the 
report. And I’d just ask the minister again, in light of that, in the 
spirit of co-operation, whether you would consider, for 
example, going with the interest rate motion which comes up 
before the Bill, or Bill 1, or anything we agree with, to give the 
Leader of the Opposition an opportunity to review the report. 
And we would be back at 7 o’clock. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I just make the point that 
the Leader of the Opposition was able to talk for about an hour 
and a half or two hours yesterday without the annual report, and 
very eloquently, I might add. 
 
And let me say, Mr. Speaker, because I have this inherent desire 
— it’s something from my ethnic background — to co-operate 
and make everybody happy, I’d be very pleased, Mr. Speaker, if 
the opposition is agreeing, to go to Bill 1 till, say, 5 o’clock; 
and then come back to Bill 20 at 7 o’clock. And on the 
assumption that we finish Bill 20 before 10, we will go to 
Justice estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister 
one more time — one more time. We have seen the government 
play nonsense with this report, tabling it only minutes before 
the Leader of the Opposition gets up to give his main address, 
and then says that he will move Bill 20 to this evening only if 
we agree to pass it before 10 o’clock. You know that’s 
nonsense. And what I want to  

ask you again, whether you’ll give us the approval and your 
secure word that we will deal with Bill 1 at 2:30 and then move 
to Bill 20 at 7 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that’s what I 
said. Now I know members opposite get a little sensitive, and I 
know that humour is not a long suit among members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. I thought that even the most serious person in the 
world, Mr. Speaker, would have guessed that we’re not going to 
get through Bill 20 tonight, you know? So in an effort to add a 
little levity to the proceedings, Mr. Speaker, in an effort to add a 
little levity to the proceedings, I made jest, Mr. Speaker. I 
promise you that I won’t do that again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding of our agreement is that we will 
do Bill 20 . . . Bill 1, pardon me, Bill 1 at 2:30 until about 5 
o’clock. At 7 o’clock we will come back and we will deal with 
Bill 20. And I was going to inject a little levity and suggest that 
we stop the clock at 10, but I won’t do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Developments at Code Inquiry 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister for 
Consumer Affairs, I’ll direct my question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, can you tell this House whether or not your 
government’s lawyer up at the Code inquiry has informed you 
of the latest development in this sad story of the lost savings of 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Has your lawyer informed you that the pay-out of 12 to 15 cents 
that was promised by the Premier of Alberta in December, has 
now become 5 cents on the dollar? Has your lawyer informed 
you of that, and have you informed, in turn, the investors on 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we’re aware of the recent 
restatement of the pay-outs. We also have reports from the 
lawyers as to the Code report. Let me just tell the hon. member 
that the government has not changed its position. One, there 
will not be a provincial inquiry; and secondly, we will await the 
Code report which is expected in the next couple of weeks. And 
I’m sure that the investors have been notified, as they have been 
throughout the course of this, by the appropriate trustees. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — New question, Mr. Speaker. We’re not here 
talking today about a provincial inquiry in Saskatchewan. 
We’re talking about the actions of your colleagues in Alberta. 
Have you made representations to your colleagues in Alberta 
that this is totally unacceptable, to change their position from a 
12 to 15 cent pay-out, to now a 5 per cent pay-out? Have you 
made representations to your friends in Alberta that this is not 
acceptable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My understanding of the pay-out is based 
on valuation of the real property assets, and that’s a calculation 
done by the trustees, Mr. Speaker. The  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

923 
 

Alberta government has said that if they are negligent that they 
would compensate. I don’t think that that changes as a result of 
the recalculation of the real property values. So I think that the 
question is premature. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I ended up 
last evening on this Bill, I was saying that even the Soviet 
Union now is getting involved in public participation, and 
recently they announced a plan to present public share offerings 
within their state farms in order to raise capital and to give 
greater control to the local people. So even the Soviet Union, 
along with other countries around the world, Mr. Speaker, 
understand the opportunities that public participation indeed 
gives to the ordinary people — if that’s the right way to use that 
word, the ordinary people — as the Soviets are doing with their 
farmers. They recognize that public participation will do well. 
 
Government ownership of companies and industries really 
hasn’t worked anywhere in the world, not to any length of time 
or to any great degree. And countries now across the world are 
discovering that, Mr. Speaker, and are setting about changing 
that very thing. And one of the objectives of the public 
participation movement is to take as much control out of the 
lives of people and out of the hands of big government and put 
this control, rather, into the hands of citizens — less regulations 
and less legislation for ordinary people to deal with. 
 
And that’s probably one of the reason, among others, that the 
NDP Party in Saskatchewan is opposing public participation 
now. They believe in big government; they believe in 
legislation; they believe in regulations. They believe that 
nothing can be done in this Legislative Assembly without first 
providing a Bill to do that. 
 
Well, they’re discovering that that’s not quite right, that this 
government has indeed streamlined the method of operating 
government, that indeed has shrunk the size of government and 
that can deliver — can deliver to the farmers, can deliver to 
business, can indeed deliver all types of programs to our 
seniors, and education and all the rest of it — without big, 
heavy, burdensome legislation and regulations. 
 
The NDP are certainly the great architects of big government. 
And we lived through that years ago with the family of Crown 
corporations. They indeed want to take over business and 
industry. They want to add people to the public payroll. And 
that’s the only way that really they think they are creating jobs 
in this province is with big government. And if you stop and 
analyse it, Mr. Speaker, that’s not job creation at all. That’s just 
going through the motions of telling somebody to show up 
somewhere and get back on the public dole. 
 

Well they’re not only out of step with the people of 
Saskatchewan, but they are now out of step with their socialist 
friends around the world, as I mentioned, in Australia and in 
France and in other areas. Other socialist parties around the 
world have left the Canadian NDP far behind. Other socialist 
parties around the world are indeed keeping up with the times, 
while the Saskatchewan NDP has been standing still. Not only 
have they been standing still, Mr. Speaker, but indeed they still 
have their heads buried in the sand; they’re living in the past. 
They can’t seem to get up with the modern age and the modern 
era and what the people are now looking for and what they’re 
demanding. 
 
And you know, continually we hear cries again coming from 
the opposition benches of calling an election, calling an 
election. Well I point out that the member from Saskatoon 
University shouldn’t be in too big a hurry to call an election, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, indeed he still wants to close uranium 
mines. 
 
I wonder if he would care to go up into northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and share that information with those that work in 
the uranium mines, and tell them that he’s of the opinion that 
they should be closed and tell them that those jobs for the North 
are no good, and then seek re-election. I wonder where he 
would get to. 
 
And I think that the member from Athabasca has a lot of 
difficulty with his member from Saskatoon University on that 
thing alone, because he recognizes that indeed the uranium 
mines provide opportunity, provide jobs for our people in the 
North. 
 
We’ve had many early successes, Mr. Speaker, on public 
participation initiatives in Saskatchewan, and I would just like 
to for a moment take a brief look at some of those. I mentioned 
earlier yesterday how I spoke to the annual SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) convention 
about how public participation can indeed benefit local 
communities. 
 
Look at the benefits obtained in the communities now of Prince 
Albert and Meadow Lake. The public participation initiative has 
brought a tremendous boost to the city of Prince Albert with the 
sale of the pulp mill, in which the Government of Saskatchewan 
was heavily involved. 
 
When the government was involved, Mr. Speaker, the Prince 
Albert pulp mill was losing $91,000 a day — losing $91,000 a 
day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, when you were involved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The member from Saskatoon South, 
speaking from his chair, indicates that that’s not right. Well, we 
went through that debate last year and we know that that’s right. 
And he’ll be one of those that would be crying for an election 
call, Mr. Speaker, and I welcome that opportunity, because the 
member from Saskatoon South who goes around preaching 
against public participation, he will have some degree of 
difficulty too in his re-election bid because he is out of step 
with the people of Saskatoon South. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

924 
 

Now the member from Prince Albert, chiding from his seat. I 
welcome the opportunity to go up to Prince Albert with him, 
talk to the people in the pulp mill, talk to the people in the paper 
mill, tell them that privatization and public participation doesn’t 
work, and ask them for their vote. Don’t be in such a hurry to 
call that election, boys, because you’re going to have enough 
trouble when the time comes. 
 
But since the sale by the government to a business company, 
the pulp mill has become a profitable organization, Mr. 
Speaker, no longer losing that $91,000 a day. It has also built 
the province’s first paper mill, a welcome addition to 
Saskatchewan, with 170 new jobs and a monthly payroll, a 
monthly payroll of a half a million dollars going into that Prince 
Albert economy. And you can imagine the tremendous boost 
that that is for that economy in Price Albert, while the member 
from Prince Albert sits there and decries public participation. 
It’s beyond belief, it’s beyond belief, Mr. Speaker, that that 
member was elected and that he will even have a chance of ever 
getting re-elected. 
 
Look at Meadow Lake where a public participation initiative 
has brought a great lift to the entire area. The saw mill at 
Meadow Lake, sold by the government to the employees of that 
mill and 10 local Indian bands. As a result of the sale, local 
residents in Meadow Lake are now owners, rather than simply 
passive observers in one of the community’s major enterprises. 
 
And in addition, because of that move, so far, Mr. Speaker, so 
far, two new companies are looking at locating in the Meadow 
Lake region with yet prospects of more new jobs. And the 
member from Athabasca had better pay attention because it’s 
pretty important to his people as well, and he’s nodding his 
head in agreement and he recognizes that that is a major 
contribution to his area as well. 
 
Look at the outstanding success we’ve enjoyed in the natural 
gas industry as a result of public participation initiatives. The 
transfer of natural gas reserves from the government to Saskoil 
and other companies helped contribute to the drilling of a 
record 750 gas wells in 1988, compared to the drilling of about 
a hundred wells during the period 1975 to 1982. Can you 
imagine that, Mr. Speaker — 100 wells in 1975 to 1982! It’s 
almost an impossibility to believe, but there it is. And that of 
course, ’75 to ’82, is when the NDP were in power. So we’re 
looking at 100 wells, you know, per year during the period ’75 
to ’82, compared to 750 alone in one year under this 
administration. 
 
Look at the success of offerings of bonds and shares in Crown 
corporations. These sales have shown us that the people of 
Saskatchewan do want to participate in their companies: the 
sale of SaskPower bonds raised $343 million, with 42,000 
residents making purchases, Mr. Speaker; and TeleBonds raised 
more than $100 million, from 32,000 purchases. That’s 74,000 
people in this province, Mr. Speaker — 74,000 making 
purchases in two, only two bond offerings; 74,000 people right 
there who believe in public participation. They must, because 
they’re putting up their money. That’s how much they believe 
in it. 
 

And will the NDP there prevent these people from investing 
their money right here at home rather than in areas outside of 
the province? You know, that money will be paid to our 
Saskatchewan residents, the interest on the dividends that 
accrue, and as a result that money stays right here in our 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker. No longer will it go off 
to eastern Canada or to the money markets to the United States 
or abroad, for instance. We can keep that right here at home. 
We can watch our province grow, and indeed our people 
participate in making our province grow as they grow with it. 
What can be better than that? 
 
Public participation — just think of those two words for a 
moment — public participation, where people will participate in 
the betterment of our economy, Mr. Speaker. And it’s hard to 
believe that the NDP are against it, but then they’re against 
almost everything. Then I ask you, you know, what have the 
people in the NDP to say to those 74,000, to those 74,000 that 
have invested, that do believe in it. 
 
You know, it is important for the economic growth of this 
province that Saskatchewan people begin to invest their savings 
at home because, as I mentioned, that certainly helps contribute 
to our economic development and growth. 
 
We in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are among the highest 
savers in Canada, with $6.2 billion placed in savings accounts 
or in mortgages and term deposits with the chartered banks. The 
problem is that much of this money is reinvested in economic 
growth outside of Saskatchewan, while our Crown companies, 
to finance their large projects, are forced to borrow money, as I 
mentioned, from Toronto or New York or even Tokyo. 
 
So it only makes eminent sense to allow Saskatchewan people 
to invest in the building and the development of our province, 
and benefit from our growth by keeping that interest money 
right here at home. Through public participation, we are 
beginning to make considerable progress in that area. 
 
Another success in our public participation program — right 
here at home in my city, my home city of Regina. It’s been the 
WESTBRIDGE corporation, now one of the largest computer 
service companies in western Canada. It was created by the 
merger of SaskCOMP and the computer portions of SaskTel 
and two private companies. 
 
WESTBRIDGE has its head office located right here in Regina. 
Fifty new jobs have already been created by this new company, 
and projections are for another 200, another 200 new jobs as a 
result of out-of-province contract that WESTBRIDGE will be 
developing. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the government sector in 
Saskatchewan owns billions of dollars of wealth in the form of 
land, Crown corporations, numerous government facilities, and 
other assets. Public participation will utilize these assets more 
effectively to build and to diversify our economy. 
 
Public participation offers all Saskatchewan people — all  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

925 
 

Saskatchewan people — new opportunities: opportunities to 
participate in our economy, opportunity to benefit from the 
growth of our economy, and opportunity to build a stronger 
province — participating, benefitting, and building. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what public participation is all about, and I’m 
proud to say that there is no question that I will support Bill No. 
1. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take part in this 
debate and examine some of the aspects of this Bill that are 
before us — Bill No. 1 which is to privatize in Saskatchewan, 
to carry out the government’s program of privatization. 
 
And the first question a person has to ask when looking at this 
particular Bill is, is there an extreme urgency that this matter be 
dealt with. Well I think the urgency of this Bill can be 
illustrated, Mr. Speaker, by looking at when this Bill last 
appeared on the order paper of this House. If the members were 
to go back and if the public wanted to look, they could go back 
to last year. 
 
On June 1, 1988, a Bill received first reading in this House. It 
was called Bill No. 55, An Act to establish the Public 
Participation Program. If you examine that Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
which I have here in my hand, you will find that it is virtually 
identical to Bill No. 1 which we have on the order paper, and 
which the Minister of Urban Affairs was just discussing, a Bill 
which he believes to be of great urgency to the people of 
Saskatchewan. If you examine one of the other aspects of Bill 
No. 55 last year, Bill No. 55 last year, which is the same as Bill 
No. 1 now, you will find the coming into force section of the 
Bill reads as follows: 
 

Sections 6 and 7 (well it comes into force on the day of 
assent) and sections 6 and 7 of this Act come into force on 
the day assent but are retroactive and are deemed to have 
been in force on and from April 1, 1988. 
 

I heard a member across the way the other day saying that, you 
know, we shouldn’t have retroactive legislation. But here was 
Bill 55, introduced on June 1, 1988, but retroactive to April 1, 
1988, which illustrates, I think, Mr. Speaker, the lack of 
urgency of this Bill last year. And if you examine Bill 1 which 
is before us now which we’re debating, you’ll find that the 
same coming into force clause is on Bill 1 as was in Bill 55 last 
year. 
 
So really what Bill No. 1 is, is an attempt by this government to 
showcase privatization. Now they call it public participation, 
but I think that myth has been dispelled to a great degree by 
many of the comments that have been made on this particular 
Bill and at other times in this House. So it is a Bill to privatize. 
 
They have brought in a number of other Bills following Bill No. 
1, down to Bill 20. And Bill No. 20 has to do with the 
privatization of the Potash Corporation in Saskatchewan. And 
the government has fenced us in. In other words, they’ve taken 
the people of Saskatchewan  

hostage through their representatives in this Chamber. And they 
said, here’s Bill No. 1, here’s Bill No. 20, both dealing with 
privatization in Saskatchewan, and you’re not going anywhere. 
We’re not going to discuss anything else until we deal with 
those two Bills. 
 
We’ve seen it. We’ve seen it in this House. So the government 
of this province has the arrogance to take the people of 
Saskatchewan hostage and say, you’re not going to go 
anywhere else until you discuss these two Bills and pass them. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan will know what the 
government is putting aside in order to discuss these Bills — 
Bill No. 1 in this particular case. They’re putting aside other 
important business, sacrificing it for the time being because 
they say Bill No. 1 and Bill No. 20, the Bills that are holding 
the people of Saskatchewan hostage, are more important. 
 
They’re more important, Mr. Speaker, than what we see on the 
order paper. The first item under government business is 
government motions. We’ve attempted time and time again to 
force this government to the position where it would deal with 
the interest rate policies of the federal government. The 
government has used every manoeuvre to avoid discussing that 
issue, and their current manoeuvre, Mr. Speaker, is to put on the 
order paper of the House, government motion no. 1 by the 
Minister of Highways, which deals with the national monetary 
policy, not to be discussed, not to be discussed, Mr. Speaker, 
not to interfere with their privatization plan, but merely to 
stymie the New Democratic opposition from forcing the 
government to deal with the federal government interest rate 
policy. 
 
Because every time that government motion comes up, the 
government members say, stand. You’re hostage, you’re 
hostage to these two Bills on privatization — Bill No. 1 dealing 
with privatization, Bill No. 20 dealing with privatization of 
potash in Saskatchewan. 
 
So there is no urgency. The government has a Bill here which is 
showcasing privatization as they see it. And they’re suggesting 
that we must deal with Bill 20 before we can go on to other 
important legislation such as farm legislation, which this 
government has brought forward not a bit of — not a bit of farm 
legislation to deal with the serious farm crisis in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think you have to examine, when you’re examining 
privatization and how this government is reacting to what’s 
happening in Saskatchewan, to find out what is their 
philosophy. I want to go back just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, to 
another government that sat on that side of the House before, 
and that government had a very vindictive policy; they had a 
spiteful policy. And it deals with the Meadow Lake pulp mill. 
 
The government of Premier Thatcher in 1971 was about to be 
defeated. It had a Bill before this House dealing with . . . or it 
had contracts before it dealing with the Meadow Lake pulp mill. 
They knew they were going to be defeated; the people of 
Saskatchewan knew they were going to be defeated; everyone 
in this House knew they were going to be defeated; the media 
knew they were  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

926 
 

going to be defeated. It’s just a question of when they called the 
election. 
 
And in the dying hours on the eve of that Liberal government’s 
defeat led by Mr. Thatcher — and Mr. Steuart was the minister 
that was signing the agreements, supported by the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who has turned from being a Liberal to 
now a Tory — mind you it’s just a short hop over the fence 
from being a Liberal to a Tory, but he’s made it over that fence 
and he still pursues that objective, his objectives that he had 
when he was a Liberal. 
 
Now in the dying hours, in the dying hours of that government 
in 1971 they signed agreements on the Meadow Lake pulp mill 
which cost the people untold millions of dollars to get out of — 
about $6 million to get out of. Why was it necessary to get out 
of those agreements, Mr. Speaker? Well the environmental 
protection aspects of the agreements were questionable, the 
reforestation policy was lacking, and it was a poor economic 
deal for the province of Saskatchewan. The cost to avoid those 
agreements was $6 million. 
 
Now is the philosophy of this government similar with regard to 
Crown corporations? Well let me go to the key person, one of 
the key people with regard to privatization — and he’s enjoying 
his newspaper right now — the Deputy Premier of the province. 
And he said in Crown corporations, February 3, 1988: 
 

We’re going to do what we can, though, to make it very 
difficult for you people to take over again when you get 
back into power, if that ever happens, because our desire is 
to have these things as broadly distributed as possible, so 
that it’s very difficult for you folks . . . 
 

Now first of all he acknowledges we’re going to get back into 
power. I thank him for that. And I think those words are 
prophetic when they were uttered in the Crown . . . CIC (Crown 
investments corporation) committee — Crown corporations. 
 
But he says, we’re going to make it difficult for you people. He 
carries his vindictive and spiteful attitude, his philosophy, to the 
extent that he’s here to punish these people here, forgetting all 
the while that the people he’ll be punishing, if the people of 
Saskatchewan decide to change their mind, he’ll be punishing 
them. And he acknowledges they’re going to change their mind 
because he says we’ll be back in power. 
 
That is an attitude which may cost the people of Saskatchewan 
a lot of grief and a lot of money in the future — that spiteful 
attitude, that narrow attitude that says, similar to the Liberal 
government before, that says to the members of this Assembly: 
we’re going to get you people. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, that’s different from the policy of a New 
Democratic government when it was in power in this province. 
When the New Democrats were the government in this 
province, they brought not in policies . . . they didn’t bring in 
policies that were spiteful. They didn’t do things that couldn’t 
be undone. They didn’t do  

things that couldn’t be undone. They looked to the future and 
they said, some day maybe we won’t be the government; we 
should allow the people of Saskatchewan the maximum amount 
of flexibility that’s required to run this province in the best 
interest of all the people. 
 
But the policy of the previous Liberal government was to sign 
the agreements in the dying hours of their reign. Cost us $6 
million to get out of those contracts. And this government says, 
we’re going to make it difficult for you people; we’re going to 
spread those Crown corporations around so you can never 
implement the will of the people of Saskatchewan without great 
difficulty and great cost. That is a vindictive, spiteful, scorched 
earth policy. The people of Saskatchewan do not deserve that. 
 
What is suggested by the minister when he sat in that Crown 
Corporations Committee was that he had the desire to divest 
himself of those Crown corporations in such a way that the 
government won’t be able to re-enter these businesses. That’s 
the attitude. In other words, he’s saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan, we’re cutting off those retreats. Now he says to 
the people of Saskatchewan: we’re holding you hostage; we’re 
holding you hostage until you pass these Bills. That’s what he’s 
saying. 
 
This government said that they would never, they would never 
privatize a utility. And whenever they said that, they constantly 
pointed to SaskPower Corporation and SaskTel, said: we’ll 
never, we’ll never privatize those. Well it’s important that we 
examine the record of this government about privatizing Crown 
corporations. Let’s take SaskPower Corporation; let’s take the 
coal aspect of SaskPower Corporation. This province has 
hundreds of years of coal reserves, hundreds of years of coal 
reserves. It’s a heritage for the people. In 1982, this government 
took the coal reserves of the people of Saskatchewan and sold 
them off. 
 
Immediately prior to that, they sold off a $45 million drag-line 
to an Alberta corporation. I suppose this was the front end of 
their privatization plan — public participation. They were going 
to let the Manalta Coal of Alberta publicly participate in the 
business of Saskatchewan people. They sold them a $45 million 
drag-line. 
 
And Manalta Coal, of course, they ran up a pretty good deal 
with this government because they were in their corner, and 
they said: well look, we don’t really have . . . we don’t want to 
strain our resources in taking over this drag-line from you; can 
you give us some kind of a deal? So this minister here said, well 
sure, we can give you a deal. He said, the Government of 
Saskatchewan will guarantee all of Manalta’s loans. 
 
Can you imagine? If you’ve really got public participation, all 
the people of Saskatchewan would love to get a deal like that. 
But the people of Saskatchewan, I believe, have a more rational 
approach than that, so he sold a $45 million drag-line to 
Manalta Coal of Alberta, and he . . . the Saskatchewan 
Government guaranteed Manalta’s loans, 1982. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

927 
 

(1500) 
 
In 1984, this government, once again to Manalta Coal of 
Alberta, said, well you’ve got the drag-line, we might as well 
sell you the coalfields. And I suppose they had a little 
prompting from Manalta Coal saying, well we’d like the 
coalfields. And this government says, well what kind of deal 
can we cut for you? And they said, name your price. And the 
member from Yorkton, who was in charge then for SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) said, well, we’ll cut you a 
deal, we’ll cut you a deal like you’ve never seen before. 
 
Now we say that the assets there are worth $129 million. So the 
minister in charge of SPC said, tell you what we’re going to do, 
we’re going to give it to you for $102 million. And Manalta 
Coal said, well just a minute now, we don’t want to put a strain 
on our finances. You know the province got lots of backing. 
Why don’t you give us a little better deal? So the member from 
Yorkton said, well sure, we can cut a little better deal than that. 
He says, we’ll lend you $89 million with which to make the 
deal. And Manalta must have thought that was a pretty good 
deal because they said, we’ll take it. We’ll take it. 
 
So they got the drag-line for $45 million, Manalta Coal of 
Alberta, an Alberta Corporation; then they got the coal field, 
$102 million for $129 million asset, and we lent them $89 
million to make the deal. That’s privatization by this 
government. And they try to justify this, selling off our heritage 
to an Alberta corporation at cut-rate prices. That’s their 
privatization. 
 
Yes. And they say, well don’t worry, he says, this is going to 
help the situation within SaskPower corporation. They had just 
privatized a good chunk of SaskPower, but they said, this is 
going to help the situation. 
 
But what was the situation? If you look at the losses within 
SaskPower corporation, in 1982 they were $30 million; in 1983 
they were $29 million; 1984 they were $22 million, and in 1985 
another $22 million of losses in SPC. Well their privatization 
deal didn’t help the losses in SPC. 
 
Alberta big business got a deal like we all dream of but will 
never happen to us. It will just happen to their big-business 
friends that they’re privatizing to. Yes, they got the coal mine 
and we got the shaft, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let’s deal with another aspect of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and this privatization thrust by the government 
opposite. Take natural gas — natural gas. Well SaskPower 
corporation said, we’ve got these gas fields and we should be 
able to cut some kind of a deal with our private friends on that, 
so they made a deal with Saskoil. Now keep in mind that they 
said Saskoil was going to be an illustration of their privatization 
process, how it was good for the people of Saskatchewan, how 
they could participate in this privatization. 
 
Saskoil preferred shares now are owned 75 per cent outside of 
Saskatchewan. So they said to this corporation where the 
preferred shares are now 75 per cent owned outside of 
Saskatchewan, we want to cut a deal with you on natural gas. 
We got all this natural gas reserves over in  

SPC and we want to sort of shift it over into the private sector. 
 
In 1988 this PC government announced another privatization 
thrust, and it said that they had privatized SPC’s natural gas 
reserves by selling 510 billion cubic feet of gas to Saskoil. Now 
that’s a huge amount of gas. That is almost six times the total 
annual sales volume of gas — six times the total annual sales of 
natural gas — and they sold it to Saskoil. That’s 15 years of 
consumption by the 232,000 residential customers in 
Saskatchewan, 15 years consumption sold off to Saskoil. 
 
Well I guess you have to ask what kind of a deal did they make. 
Maybe they’d . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. Maybe they’d 
learned something from the first deals when they sold the 
coalfields. Now they’re selling the gas fields, selling the gas 
fields. 
 
Well what was the deal? They announced that the sale price was 
$325 million. But it’s estimated — if you estimate the price of 
the gas at the current price at that time at $1.93 per cubic 
thousand feet — that the price would be $984 million. So they 
sold off an approximate $984 million asset for one-third the 
cost. Now that is a deal. 
 
And I suppose if you were sitting on their side of the House 
they would say that’s even a better deal than we did with the 
coal. You know, on the coal we really didn’t give those people 
we were privatizing it to very much of a deal. But on this one 
we give them it for one-third the price that its worth. 
 
Now I suspect to you that some people will say, well even given 
that, isn’t it a good deal that they sold off — privatized — the 
natural gas and the coal? Well it happens that the natural gas 
function within SaskPower Corporation was the one that was 
showing a profit, and the electrical one is the one that’s 
showing a loss. So what they’ve done again is they sold off the 
home quarter to rescue the farm; sold off the home quarter to 
rescue the farm. 
 
That’s the second deal by this government in SPC, and the 
indications are quite clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government intends to sell off SaskEnergy, which is, in effect, 
SaskPower Corporation. We expect in due course, shortly, to 
have this government bring in legislation which will accomplish 
that. 
 
Here is a corporation, SaskPower Corporation, they said — and 
they specifically drew attention to it every time they said they 
would never, would never privatize a utility, they drew attention 
to SaskPower and SaskTel. They’ve sold off the coal; they’ve 
sold off the gas; now they’re going to sell SaskEnergy, we 
suspect. This is all by a government that said they’d never 
privatize this utility. 
 
Is there any doubt that the people of Saskatchewan begin to 
wonder about the word of this government when before an 
election they tell you the deficit’s going to be $389 million, and 
after the election they say that it’s 1.2 billion. It’s the same 
story. They told us the same story about coal; the same story 
about gas to Saskoil; the same story will come up with 
SaskEnergy. And it’s the same as  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

928 
 

the budget story. Before the election it’s one thing; after, they’ll 
tell you another thing. 
 
Well I want to deal for a moment with SaskTel. This is another 
Crown corporation this government said that they would never 
sell because it’s a utility — never sell it. And true to their action 
— you notice I don’t say true to their word — true to their 
action, the same thing is happening in SaskTel that happened in 
SPC. They began in SaskTel by selling off the cable television. 
Well that was only a few million dollars, hardly worth spending 
any time on. 
 
Then they sold off the computer function within SaskTel to 
WESTBRIDGE. Now you’ll understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that WESTBRIDGE is made up of the SaskCOMP, plus the 
computer function from SaskTel, plus a very good friend of the 
Conservative Party, very good friend of the Conservative Party. 
 
Now some people might say: well, you know, that’s just small 
potatoes; the computer function within SaskTel, it’s nothing. 
Well last year in Crown Corporations Committee on June 7 
during the examination of SaskTel, I asked the minister: what is 
the estimated value of business that’s being transferred over? 
And I’m reading right out of the verbatim account in Crown 
Corporations Committee. The minister said the estimated value 
of business is $34.25 million being transferred over — $34 
million. Another Crown corporation, a utility which this 
government gave us their word that they would not privatize. 
 
They’ve privatized cable TV; they’ve privatized the computer 
function, a $34 million business turnover; and now they’re 
doing the telephone books, they’re doing the telephone books. 
 
You notice that the . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, the computer 
function was sold off to a private printing company — well it’s 
their mainstay of business was printing — along with 
SaskCOMP and SaskTel computer function to their printing 
friend. When the telephone books comes up, it’s sold off to 
another printing friend of this government, Brigdens, and on 
what I expect will be a sweetheart deal. 
 
Now it’s difficult to get information about these things because 
the government won’t give you information about the deals. So 
the full consequence of these deals will not be known to the 
public for some time yet. But they can go on this government’s 
record about the kind of deals they make, I’m sure of that. 
 
They suggest to us that it’s not necessary they keep their 
promises. There’s an article I read, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in The 
Globe and Mail on April 11 of this year. And it says, “Boosters 
foresee powerhouse in unleashed SaskEnergy.” Well that’s the 
one I’m talking about, they’re going to privatize next, from a 
corporation they said they would . . . a utility they said they 
would never privatize. And one of the spokesmen in this, I 
suppose you could say the key spokesperson, is one Mr. George 
Hill. And the article reads, from The Globe and Mail, April 11: 
 

Criticism of the privatization of SaskEnergy has been 
harsh. (Well that’s true.) Opponents remind  

(the Premier) that he once promised to refrain from 
privatizing any of Saskatchewan’s public utilities. 
 
Mr. Hill shrugs the promise off, however. “The opposition 
will attempt to say he changed his mind. I say, so what?” 
 

Pardon me, it goes on a little further, the quote goes on a little 
further. 
 

“. . . It happens every day of the week in everybody’s 
life.” 
 

So here we have Mr. George Hill, former president of the 
Conservative Party in Saskatchewan who says: so the Premier 
promised never to privatize this public utility. And Mr. George 
Hill, the president, former president of the PC Party, now the 
president of the corporation says, so what! That’s how good the 
word of the Premier of Saskatchewan is in the eyes of Mr. Hill, 
Mr. George Hill, the president of Sask Power Corporation. 
 

SaskPower reported a net income of $292-million in 1988, 
but most of the profit came from the sale of its petroleum 
and natural gas properties to SaskOil last year, which 
added $170-million . . . 
 

(1515) 
 
And there’s some question raised in this article about control of 
the private corporation. And they interviewed Mr. Roy 
Billinton, an engineering professor at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and a former PURC (public utilities review 
commission) commissioner. He believes that SaskPower could 
have reduced its debt without selling shares in SaskEnergy. 
 
Now the Government of Saskatchewan became a bit disturbed 
about PURC because they got the misunderstood view that they 
were a public utilities review commission when the government 
appointed them. They thought they had some regulatory 
function on this government’s Crown corporations across the 
way, but they misunderstood. They didn’t understand the 
nuances of the Deputy Premier and the Premier when they 
appointed them. They were appointed for a show-piece. They 
were there to be advertised as saying, well now we’ve got 
arm’s-length control of the utilities by PURC. 
 
It became pretty evident that PURC was kicking over the traces, 
as the farmer would say, from time to time. It was a little 
unruly. They wouldn’t accept the view that they were just 
supposed to be a show-case for their government, and that they 
took seriously that they’re supposed to be a public utilities 
review committee . . . or commission. So the government 
sacked them, the government sacked PURC, got rid of it. 
 
Its solemn promise in 1982 was that it would bring in an agency 
such as PURC and PURC would call the shots with regard to 
utility rates. Well PURC has gone the way of all the other 
promises such as they would never privatize Sask Power 
Corporation, they would never privatize SaskTel. PURC’s gone 
that same way, down the drain. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

929 
 

SaskTel directory business, I want to get back to that for a 
moment, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is the 
deal? Well the deal is this, that the employees will own 46 per 
cent of DirectWEST, which is the new company, through a 
venture capital corporation. 
 
And what is a venture capital corporation? Well it’s a manner in 
which the taxpayers of the province can support business by 
writing off losses on their taxes. So in effect it’s not private 
enterprise, but it’s taxpayer-sponsored private enterprise 
because they’re using venture capital. Forty-four per cent of that 
company will be held by Brigdens. 
 
Brigdens is a very good friend of this government. As a matter 
of fact, Brigdens is the company that printed the ironclad 
guarantee from the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden that 
they would never tamper with health care in Saskatchewan; 
they would take off the utilization charges on health care. 
That’s the same printer that printed for the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden the ironclad guarantee on health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that guarantee was about as good as their comment that 
they would never privatize SPC or that they would never 
privatize SaskTel or that they would keep PURC there to keep 
an arm’s-length control over the utilities of Saskatchewan. 
 
In this printing company that’s taking over the telephone book, 
it’s taking over the telephone book because the minister of 
telephones quite frankly couldn’t handle it — couldn’t handle 
it; it was too big for him. You know, this minister of telephones, 
believe it or not, in order to get to this privatization position on 
SaskTel telephone book, he had a blooper in the telephone book 
in Saskatoon a couple of years ago that cost SaskTel $60,000 to 
correct — 60,000 bucks. 
 
When I questioned him in Crown corporations afterwards as to 
whether this problem was solved, he said, oh yes, this 
problem’s all solved and it’s not going to happen again. Well 
after that — you wouldn’t believe this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
if you got a look at the correspondence I’ve been sending the 
minister of telephones about that, you would find that there’s 
been another big blooper since then, only it’s much larger, 
much larger. 
 
It had to do with the Regina telephone book, and I think it’s that 
software program the minister of telephones brought over from 
Israel. It wasn’t working out quite right. Maybe he brought that 
over on purpose. Maybe he wanted the telephone book situation 
in turmoil so he could say to the people of Saskatchewan, well, 
it’s obvious Crown corporations can’t handle these things and 
we’re going to privatize it. So he privatized it to his friends at 
Brigdens. 
 
Well, when he privatizes a company and they cut a deal, they 
really cut a deal; they really cut a deal. Just like on the 
coalfields, the gas to Saskoil, on the computer function, and 
now on the phone books, they cut a deal that popped the eyes 
right out of the people that are going to take it over. 
 

Employee investors — this is what it says in SaskTel’s selling 
directory business, March 8, ’89 in the Leader-Post: 
 

Employee-investors may have the option of either a payroll 
deduction plan or loan guarantees and interest-free loans 
. . . Plus, employee-investors will be eligible for a 
40-per-cent tax credit, up to $1,400 on their investment. 
 

Now this is not privatization like they say they want. This is 
taxpayer-subsidized private enterprise. That’s what this 
government is doing — taxpayer-subsidized private enterprise. 
 
Well, on this further privatization they’re having, this other Bill 
20 along with Bill 1, the two privatization Bills which are 
holding the people of Saskatchewan hostage, saying you can’t 
go anywhere until you discuss these and deal with them, they 
say, well we’re going to cause public participation in the 
corporation. 
 
It’s very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you read the 
Bill. And I have the Bill No. 20 right here. It refers to 
non-resident. Now why would they bother defining this if they 
weren’t going to use it? You know, it’s like Brian Mulroney, 
that slogan of his: use it or lose it. Use it or lose it. This 
government has put in a clause here that is going to be used — 
it’s going to be used. And it says: 
 

“non-resident” means: 
 
(i)  an individual, other than a Canadian citizen, who is 

not ordinarily resident in Canada; 
 

It goes on to a second definition: 
 

(ii) a corporation incorporated, formed or otherwise 
organized elsewhere in Canada; 

 
It goes on to a further definition: 
 

(iii)  the government of a foreign state or a political 
subdivision of a foreign state or an agent of either; 

 
So these are the definitions of non-resident. And I suggest to 
you, in their privatization that’s shown itself in Saskoil, where 
75 per cent of the preferred shares are owned or controlled 
outside of Saskatchewan, that’s not participation, that’s a 
give-away to people outside of Saskatchewan. If they have a 
clause in here which defines non-resident individuals, 
corporations, or governments of a foreign state, they’re going to 
use it — they’re going to use it. The governments of the foreign 
states will get up to 45 per cent; other Canadians will get up to 
55 per cent. 
 
This is not what the people of Saskatchewan want. How are 
they going to make the people of Saskatchewan swallow this? 
Well their attempt will be quite clear, and I want to get to that in 
a moment. But first I want to refer to a leaflet on public 
participation put out by the minister in charge of public 
participation. And what does it say? Right in the minister’s 
message it says: 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

930 
 

As minister I want to be fair and open throughout the 
public participation process so that all Saskatchewan 
people may realize the opportunities that await them. 
 

The operative words there, “I want to be fair and open 
throughout the process . . .” Well this minister has not be very 
fair or open. They’ve kept information back. We can’t find out 
about some of these deals they’ve cut. Most of the deals they’ve 
cut — can’t get information on them. 
 
The question is: how are they going to make the people of 
Saskatchewan swallow this? 
 
It’s pretty clear how they’re going to do that, and it’s contained 
in the answer to a couple of returns I received in this House. I 
talked earlier about privatizing SaskPower corporation. In the 
four-year period from May 1, ’84 to May 17, ’88, that’s 1984 to 
’87, SaskPower corporation spent $3.3 million on advertising to 
two advertising companies. 
 
SaskPower is being privatized. Some of that advertising was 
leading up to privatization. Some of it was about giving away 
the coalfields. Some of it was about giving away the gas in a 
sweetheart deal to Saskoil. Some of it was about cable 
television. Some of it was about selling the computer function 
to WESTBRIDGE, and SaskCOMP, turning over SaskCOMP 
to WESTBRIDGE. That’s where they spent the money. 
SaskPower corporation spent $3.3 million. 
 
SaskTel — you remember TeleBonds, things like that? Well we 
haven’t even got to the TeleBond expenses on this, likely 
because this cuts off on May 17, ’88; TeleBonds came after 
that. SaskTel’s costs of advertising for four years under this 
government were $6.1 million. 
 
Now when Jimmy Garner was the minister of Highways here, I 
thought he was a big spender. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And he was. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, this Minister of Telephones, this 
Minister of Finance puts him and everyone else to shame. This 
corporation that he controls, which he is now in the process of 
privatizing computer function and phone books, spent $6.1 
million on advertising. Privatization advertisements are 
threaded throughout all the departments, agencies of this 
government — Crown corporations. The advertising budget for 
those four years just for those two advertising companies were 
$46.6 million. 
 
Now if the people of Saskatchewan thought they saw a lot of 
advertising on privatization up to this point, just have them 
watch their televisions, watch their newspapers, listen to their 
radios, look for the billboard signs, look for the literature, and 
they will see a veritable avalanche of advertising, because the 
most is yet to come. 
 
This government’s already spent, in four years, $46.6 million. I 
understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they spent well over $2 
million advertising TeleBonds — well over $2 million. Now 
they’re going to spend a veritable fortune on advertising 
SaskEnergy privatization, on  

advertising potash privatization. 
 
(1530) 
 
So I think it becomes clear to the people of Saskatchewan that 
they are being sold a bill of goods by this government, this 
government who solemnly — solemnly swore that it would be 
much better in Saskatchewan when they were government. 
They said, we would not privatize any utilities. The Premier’s 
solemn word, which cannot be taken at face value any longer, 
said he wouldn’t privatize SaskPower corporation. They 
privatized the drag-line, they privatized the coalfield, they 
privatized the gas to Saskoil, and they’re going to privatize 
SaskEnergy. 
 
When they get that done, all we’ll have left of SaskPower is the 
part that costs money to support. The profit-making parts will 
all be gone and we’ll be stuck with the electric utility. That’s 
the plan of this government. That’s the plan of this government. 
 
You can’t take the word of this Premier and his ministers when 
they say they’re not going to privatize SaskTel because they’ve 
begun it. Two steps have been done already. Three steps have 
been done already. They’re now in the process of holding 
people hostage in this province, not allowing us to discuss the 
cost of money, not allowing us to discuss important farm issues, 
while they say, you’re hostages and you sit here until you’ve 
dealt with Bill 1, Bill 20. 
 
I think that is not the way the people of Saskatchewan would 
want its government to perform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I do not agree that the people who are 
given the honour and the responsibility of being the government 
of this province should practise such a policy that was clearly 
set out by the Deputy Premier and Crown Corporations 
Committee that he’s going to make it difficult for you people to 
do what you want to do in the future. No government should 
bind the hands of the people of Saskatchewan into the future. 
Every Government of Saskatchewan should maintain that kind 
of flexibility so that the people are making the decision, not 
some government like this one that will be gone and defeated in 
the near future. They should maintain a kind of flexibility that 
will give the people of Saskatchewan the best operation of this 
province, because I’m proud of this province, and I think all 
members should be proud of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I find myself in opposition to this 
show-piece Bill on privatization which was in the last session as 
Bill No. 55 and hasn’t changed one whit, and is retroactive. 
Something this government is opposed to — it’s retroactive. 
 
I cannot support that Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s 
unfortunate that the government attempts to foist this kind of 
regime on the people of Saskatchewan with this huge, massive 
advertising campaign which has already exceeded $46 million 
and will go a lot higher. Therefore,  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

931 
 

I’m opposed to this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m pleased to enter this debate this afternoon on Bill 
1, a Bill that I think the people of this province are becoming to 
fear, frankly. And I think, Mr. Speaker, in the outset of my 
remarks, I would want to indicate that I’m getting a sense from 
the people of Saskatchewan that they think the privatization 
mode that this government has put itself into has gone too far. 
And I think they were willing to, at one point in time, have a 
look at different ways of delivering programs to them. 
 
But as they look through the list of privatizations that this 
government has embarked upon, they come to notice that it’s 
costing. It’s costing jobs, it’s costing revenue to the coffers of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and what’s more, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s causing us to lose an awful lot of young 
people in this province who’ve moved to other areas so that 
they can find employment. 
 
I listened with some interest to the member from Regina South 
in his remarks on this Bill. And he was talking about the people 
of Saskatchewan wanting smaller government, that they were 
opposed to big government, and I think in a small way he may 
be right. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I think the 
people of this province are looking for, first and foremost, is 
competent government. I think the people of Saskatchewan are 
looking for a government that is decent, a government that is 
competent, and a government that has a vision for our future. 
 
Now this government embarks on its privatization mode, gets 
into its privatization mode and decides to unload assets. And 
what do the people of Saskatchewan see? What’s been 
happening since 1982 when this government started 
privatization? They call it public participation, but I want to say 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not public participation. It 
might be a nice phrase for what they’re doing, but really what 
they’re doing is destroying the future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been an example of privatization in my 
home community, and I’d like to talk to you a little bit about 
that example of privatization. And let me, first of all, say that it 
is privatization. It certainly wasn’t public participation because 
the public had no involvement in that particular sales 
transaction. What it was was a sell-off of Saskatchewan assets 
to a multinational corporation. 
 
Now there can be arguments made for having the PAPCO 
(Prince Albert Pulp Company) assets, the pulp mill in Prince 
Albert in the private hands and in the private sector. And I want 
to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that no one on this side of the 
House is opposed to the company that bought it, but what I will 
say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that people on this side of 
the House are opposed to the way and the method that this 
government used to dispose of those assets. 
 
And I want to make it clear to the members on that side of the 
House, if they still don’t understand, that people in Prince 
Albert never accepted the way they privatized that  

pulp mill. People in Prince Albert don’t believe that you got a 
deal, a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. People of 
Prince Albert and people of that area know what you’ve done. 
They know that you sold that mill when the pulp and paper 
industry was at the bottom of the scale, and they know that you 
sold that mill for about $100 million less than what it should 
have been sold for. 
 
They also know that the company you sold it to will not be 
making any payments to the people of this province, because 
that’s the kind of a deal that you wrote into it. They know that 
your government wrote in there that they had to retain . . . to 
receive thirteen and a half per cent before they made any 
payments; thirteen and a half per cent on investment. And I tell 
you, thinking business men and women in this province know 
that you don’t give away a quarter of a billion dollars worth of 
assets, $100 million undervalued, and make your people happy. 
 
And I want to tell you as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 
understand clearly that this government is building 32 
kilometres of highways where that company wants them, and 
when that company wants them, in every single year. And they 
know that that money that you’re giving away to build those 
highways means that we don’t get Highway 302 from the 
penitentiary west of Prince Albert repaired, that we have to 
have our school buses and our children driving back and forth 
on a highway that this cabinet and that these ministers promised 
to repair on four different occasions, that they promised to 
upgrade that on four different times. 
 
And they know why that’s not happening, because this 
government has chosen their friends and their friends don’t 
happen to be the people who live on the Lily Plain highway, 
they happen to be Tacoma from Washington, and that’s fair and 
fine, but understand that they know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And the argument, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
isn’t whether or not that be in public or private hands; that’s not 
the argument. The argument is that you displayed 
incompetence, and you got a terrible deal for the people of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — This minister from Regina South was 
speaking the other day about the business community and how 
they speak in glowing terms of his government’s privatization 
moves and the way they’ve handled this economy. Well I tell 
you, the majority of the business people are afraid of telling you 
the truth, Mr. Minister, because of the way you’ve intimidated 
them since you’ve been government in 1982. And they know 
that one cross word against this government means lost 
contracts, means that any business that they do with this 
government will no longer be there as soon as the word funnels 
back to the ministers. And that’s why you’re not hearing what 
the business community are saying about you. 
 
And I tell you, they don’t talk about the way you’ve delivered 
government and how you’ve run this province  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

932 
 

economically, because they know what you’ve done. They 
understand what a $13 billion debt means. They understand 
what you filling the pockets of your friends means. And if those 
are the only business people, your close friends, that you’re 
talking to, and if that’s what you’re using to guide what you’re 
doing in this legislature, well I want to tell you, and I want to 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this government is on the wrong 
track. 
 
What has privatization done? And it’s nothing new; it’s been 
happening before this piece of legislation was introduced to this 
House. What’s been happening since ’82? Let me share a few 
examples with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to members on 
that side of the House. 
 
One of the first moves you made was to privatize the 
Department of Highways. Well, did that privatization mean 
more jobs? No it didn’t. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it meant a loss of 
hundreds of jobs of people who had served this province 
working on the Department of Highways for many, many years, 
people who are now out scurrying, looking for work. And I 
want to tell you that I know a lot of them who live in my riding, 
and I’ve talked with them, people who are living on 
unemployment insurance now for the first time ever in their 
lives, simply because this government decided to privatize the 
Department of Highways. 
 
Well now, so we lost hundreds of jobs, but did our roads 
improve? I’ve travelled from one end of this province to the 
other, and I’m sure members on that side have, and I haven’t 
seen an improvement in the highways since 1982 since you 
privatized the Department of Highways. But I tell you what that 
privatization has done, it’s created a new industry, and if this is 
their kind of diversification, then they can have it. 
 
And I want to tell you what kind of an industry it’s created. It’s 
created jobs for people cutting up little red signs and jobs for 
people going in and pounding in stakes into the sides of the 
highways where the pot-holes are so bad that you have to slow 
down before you can continue on the highway. That’s the 
industry that the privatization of the Department of Highways 
has created. 
 
Has it created any less cost in terms of repairing or maintaining 
highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Of course it hasn’t. The 
privatization of the Department of Highways, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, didn’t work. This government wouldn’t admit it, but 
that’s fine. They don’t have to admit it; the people of this 
province know what’s happened, and the people of this 
province are what counts, and the people of this province are 
the folks that are going to send you a strong message whenever 
you call the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that when this government embarked upon the privatization of 
the school-based dental program and fired 400 capable, 
competent young women and men in this province who served 
the children of our province well doing preventive maintenance 
on their teeth — the children came to see them as their friends, 
to see them as providing a service that they were happy with, 
and their  

parents came to see them as providing a service that their 
children were happy with — and by throwing those 400 young 
men and women out of work, did that mean we have lower 
taxes in Saskatchewan? No it didn’t, because in every 
consecutive budget that this government’s delivered, they’ve 
gone up. 
 
Did it mean that our young children, our young boys and girls 
have got a better quality of dental care? No it didn’t. What did it 
mean? What did it mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It meant that we 
had 400 people in this province looking for work, looking for 
work that they couldn’t find. It meant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
people left this province in droves, like we lost the 6,000 in the 
month of February this year. That’s what these forms of 
privatization have caused, and that’s what they’ve meant. 
 
(1545) 
 
Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would this government embark 
upon privatization of the dental plan? Now what’s the rationale? 
The other day the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, I believe it 
was, stood up in this House and said to one of my colleagues 
that that privatization has meant that those children are getting a 
better quality of service. Well let’s talk about that better quality 
of service. This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, promised 
dentists in rural Saskatchewan, and that dentists were going to 
be giving a better quality of care. And I want to say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that that hasn’t happened. What you have now 
is parents who have to take their kids out of school and drive 50 
and 100 miles to find a dentist who’s now overbooked because 
of the way you’ve scrapped and privatized the dental plan. 
That’s what’s really happened. 
 
You haven’t improved the quality of service. You haven’t cut 
the cost to government, so you haven’t been able to lower the 
taxes. You’ve put young men and women out of work, on 
unemployment insurance, some of them, I’m sure. Some of 
them, I’m sure, have left this province looking for employment 
elsewhere. That’s what you’ve done. You’ve destroyed one of 
the finest programs that the people of this province and people 
of North America have ever had a chance to have a look at. But 
why? Did it make economic sense? No, because it didn’t save 
any money. Chased people out of this province. Did it deliver a 
better quality of service, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I say to you, no 
it didn’t, because the people that were looking after the young 
children’s teeth in this province were competent, capable people 
who were looking at a new way of delivering dental care and 
who were part of delivering a new way of delivering dental care 
to the people and the young people in this province. 
 
And the program was working, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not 
just a figment of the opposition’s imagination to say that it was 
working. The parents knew it was working; the children knew it 
was working. Everybody . . . The teachers knew it was working, 
and everybody but your government knew it was working. 
 
So why embark upon it? I say to you that this government has 
got its blinders on. It’s moving towards privatization, and that’s 
its only motive right now. That’s its only reason for existence. 
We’ve sat in this session for, I think it’s 29  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

933 
 

days; today is day 29. It may . . . I think it is. And you’ve 
introduced 20 pieces of legislation. The first one you started out 
with was this Bill 1 — this Bill on privatization. And 
everything since then, until we hit the potash privatization Bill, 
has been fluff. 
 
You haven’t introduced any Bills to deal with the waiting lists 
in this province. You haven’t introduced any legislation that is 
going to stop the out-migration of our young people. You 
haven’t introduced any legislation that is going to solve 
environmental concerns in this province. You haven’t 
introduced any legislation that is going to stop farmers from 
losing their land, from packing up their furniture and moving 
off of their farms. There’s been no stop in terms of what the 
agricultural credit corporation is doing with farm foreclosures; 
that goes on. Our young men and women leave the province; 
that goes on. The waiting lists aren’t declining; that goes on. 
 
And what does this government do? We’ve been asking it to 
introduce some substantial legislation so that we can deal with 
the concerns that the people of Saskatchewan are telling us they 
have. But what do we get? We get a government that’s trying to 
ram privatization through this legislature, ram privatization 
down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan, who are 
becoming increasingly aware that it’s not a good deal for them. 
 
And the other day they introduce another piece of privatization 
legislation, the potash Bill. Today we get the financial statement 
finally, close to the deadline when this government by its own 
rules would have to give it to us so we could scrutinize last 
year’s operation of the potash corporation, to find that it makes 
over $100 million last year. 
 
And where is this government going? They’re out scurrying 
around the world looking for people to buy off this valuable 
corporation. What a shame, what a shame, Mr. Speaker, when a 
government is so blinded by ideology that they haven’t taken 
the time to have a look at what they’re doing to the province; 
that they haven’t had a chance, they haven’t taken the time to sit 
down and look at the future of our children and of their 
children. 
 
They haven’t come up with a plan to generate revenue to 
deliver a decent system of health care. They haven’t had time to 
generate a plan that would deliver a good system of education. 
They haven’t had time to invest some thought into how they’re 
going to keep Saskatchewan small businesses open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at a government that’s void of a 
plan, void of ideas, and doesn’t really deserve to govern any 
longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — But, Mr. Speaker, who are they planning 
for? Very few people, I will tell you. They’re planning for the 
Chuck Childers of this world and for his family. They’re 
planning for defeated cabinet minister Paul Schoenhals, who is 
now employed in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
They’re planning for some of their rich friends, or friends that 
they’re planning to make rich by the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation  

of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was driving on Monday morning, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatoon, 
and on CBC radio I happened to hear an interview with a 
consultant in the potash industry from the southern states. Well 
now, this gentleman was very well aware of the potash industry 
in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and in North America. And he was 
asked about the health of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and what the direction of this potash corporation 
will be in terms of its financial well-being. And he said, it’s one 
of the best times for that potash corporation; it’s going to make 
nothing but money; it’s got a bright future; it’s a very healthy 
corporation, or could be. 
 
Well now the interviewer asked this fellow that works with the 
big potash giants to buy up other potash companies, which is 
what I think he is about on this one, how did he feel about the 
privatization of the potash corporation? Well, he says, it’s a 
great thing. Sure it’s a great thing for the people he represents. 
For those that want to buy shares in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, it’s a very good thing. 
 
But you see, he didn’t live in Saskatchewan, and he wasn’t 
raising his family in Saskatchewan, and he wasn’t concerned 
with the province in 1995 or in the year 2000. He was 
concerned with the profits of the people he represents in the 
potash industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this move towards privatization of potash 
clearly indicates that this PC government is concerned about the 
same people that this consultant in the potash industry in the 
southern States is — not the men and women who work in this 
province, not the people who want to raise their families in 
Saskatchewan, but for the multinational potash giants. 
 
We’ve got an industry here that has in the 1970s, when there 
was competent management under Allan Blakeney’s 
administration, delivered tens of millions, hundreds of millions 
of dollars into general revenue in this province to deliver the 
services that I’ve talked about. It wasn’t until this government 
took over in the 1980s that the potash corporation began 
experiencing some financial difficulties. We all understand that 
markets are cyclical and there’ll be times when profits are 
higher and profits will be lower in certain years, and we all 
understand that. But, Mr. Speaker, my leader, the member from 
Riversdale, yesterday outlined clearly that this government was 
setting that corporation up for privatization. 
 
I think in the 1980s there were two reasons that the potash 
corporation had some financial difficulties. One was the lack of 
competent management, and the second was that this 
government was draining off money out of there, much more 
money than that corporation could afford to deliver at that time. 
 
So you have a corporation with $600 million debt, I believe the 
figure is, and what they’re trying to do is destroy the image of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to set it up for 
privatization. No plan for the future, no thoughts about what we 
can expect for revenue from the private potash industry that the 
Blakeney  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

934 
 

administration in the 1970s had troubles dealing with. What 
they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is set it up so that the people of this 
province are going to be in for a long and a vicious battle to try 
and generate the revenue to deliver the services that they 
demand and that they’re used to, and that they’re going to be 
getting again under another New Democrat administration. 
 
I said before in the course of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government doesn’t have a plan, and I think it’s clear that they 
don’t. We’ve talked about, members on this side of the House, 
how we in Saskatchewan have used the combination of private 
enterprise and the co-operative sector and public enterprise in 
order to deliver some stability to our economy. And this 
government has moved ahead and is destroying two of those 
sectors that we’ve used so effectively in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this province at one time 
had a department of co-operatives, and that’s conspicuously 
absent in the last few years, and I think it’s because this 
government doesn’t believe in the co-operative sector. We have 
built, working with private enterprise, a system of Crown 
corporations in this province that helped to stimulate this 
economy at times when things weren’t so good. And when 
times were bad, we’ve used those three sectors in order to make 
things work. And this privatization, this Bill 1 and Bill 20, is 
another move in that direction. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a few months ago, when this government, 
when this Premier was talking about privatization, he made a 
commitment to the people of the province that he wouldn’t be 
privatizing any of the utilities; that those, he felt, were 
necessary as publicly owned companies. And he told the people 
no, we’re not going to privatize SaskPower corporation, and he 
promised them that they wouldn’t privatize SaskTel. He 
promised us that those would stay in public hands because those 
services could be delivered more effectively and more 
economically by using those corporations. 
 
And what has he done? Mr. Speaker, what has he done? He’s 
moving on SaskPower with a vengeance. They’re splitting that 
corporation apart, the utility side from the energy side. They’re 
trying to make two separate entities, and one of them will be 
attractive to all their rich friends, no doubt — the energy 
portion. And they’re asking private investors to come in and 
take over that energy portion and take those profits wherever 
you happen to go — that’s fine, come on in, we’ll cut you a 
deal. Because we don’t believe . . . well we’re going to break 
our word, number one, because we’d rather have it in your 
hands and those profits in your pockets than those profits being 
generated back to the people of the province through lower 
energy rates. Our word doesn’t mean anything. We’ve decided 
to destroy this corporation, so we will. 
 
And so they’re promising to introduce a Bill later on in this 
session that will do that, and what are they going to leave the 
people with? We’re going to be left with the utility portion of 
that corporation, which never made any  

money, and, Mr. Speaker, never will. 
 
That corporation was designed to take from the revenue side, 
the energy side, and put that into the utility side and keep the 
cost of power in this province affordable — affordable for small 
businesses, for farm families who are major users of electrical 
energy in Saskatchewan. That’s how that corporation was 
designed. And you know, by golly, it worked, because we’ve 
had some reasonable energy rates in this province. 
 
But what are they doing? Because of their ideology, they’ve 
decided to split this company apart, sell off the money-making 
part to their friends. And it doesn’t make sense. Any business 
person or any farmer can tell that when you lose the ability to 
generate wealth in your particular operation, there’s only a 
couple of things that can happen, and one of them is you’re just 
not going to be around. You declare bankruptcy. You move on 
to something else. And that’s what’s happening to this 
government. That’s what they’re doing to that particular 
corporation. 
 
(1600) 
 
In terms of SaskTel, they promised us that they weren’t going 
to be privatizing. And the yellow pages are gone. The yellow 
pages were one of the most lucrative portions of SaskTel, 
consistently, year by year generating revenue back into the 
hands of that corporation so that they could keep the rates 
down. And this government’s selling it. 
 
And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, in the case of Weyerhaeuser, 
if, even if this government were to sit down and look at these 
Crowns on a one-on-one, case-by-case individual and have an 
assessment of it — if they’ve determined to sell it, have an 
independent appraisal in terms of its worth; table that so the 
people of the province know that they’re getting a worthwhile 
value for what they’re selling, and then go out and try and find 
someone who’s willing to pay a fair market price for it. But 
that’s not how this government operates. That’s not what they 
want. 
 
What they do is decide how much their friends can on paper 
pay for it, what they think the lowest price that they could 
possibly sell the asset for. Then they huddle in their little 
cabinet room and go out and tell their friends, have we got a 
deal for you, my friends! It’s time for your nose to be in the 
public trough, so what we’re going to do is we’re going to 
create some more subsidized free enterprise, subsidized by the 
people of this province. Never mind what the assets are worth; 
that’s not important. It’s a matter of how much you think you 
can get away with giving to your friends without getting caught. 
 
So as I said, the cabinet sits down and makes a decision as to 
what the people will accept, what they think they’ll accept. 
They undervalue the assets of whatever they’re going to unload 
to their pals. They go out and have a little handshake on this, 
then they go out and tell the folks of Saskatchewan what a 
great, great job this public participation is. Well, who 
participates? Is it the average men and women of this province 
who have been participating in the privatization of the 
corporations, the Crown corporations that they’ve privatized so 
far? I tell  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

935 
 

you, it’s not. 
 
You ask the guy on Main Street in Esterhazy or in Melville, 
where I was the other day; you ask those folks how they 
benefitted by giving away $40 million worth of highways 
equipment for $6 million. Because you see they don’t have it in 
their pocket, and they never will have it in their pocket, but 
your friends from the States that came up here to buy that 
equipment have it in their pocket. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, this government is going to have 
a hard time to sell the privatization of the potash corporation. 
That’s why this government is going to have a hard time to sell 
the concept of privatizing the utilities. Because you see people 
think they’ve gone too far. They were willing to look at a 
privatized Department of Highways in Saskatchewan where 
local contractors would be doing what was done by the 
Department of Highways. They found that reasonably 
acceptable. They certainly weren’t happy with giving away all 
of the equipment, but they can understand that if it was going to 
be done at fair value, that our local contractors were going to be 
getting the work, that that was acceptable. 
 
But you see at the same time, after this privatization has taken 
place, what we’ve seen is small contractors in Saskatchewan 
and big contractors in Saskatchewan, who used to make their 
living working for the Department of Highways, you’ve seen 
these companies gone bankrupt. You’ve seen the employees 
that they had around, leaving the province to go find work in 
other provinces and in other areas of Canada. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that’s all because, as I started 
to say, this government doesn’t believe in a mixed economy. 
And the history of Saskatchewan is that when we’ve done well, 
it’s because we’ve used the mixed economy, and that we’ve 
used the three different sectors in order to deliver economic 
stability to the people. And history will show you, if you look 
back, every time we’ve had economic problems, every time 
we’ve been dealing with deficits in Saskatchewan, every time 
we’ve been dealing with mismanagement, it’s been a 
government that doesn’t believe in that mixed economy that we 
speak of on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan understand that services 
have to be delivered using a mixed economy, or it doesn’t work. 
And I would ask any of the back-benchers on that side of the 
House, if they were to be honest with themselves and if they 
were to talk to the average person in their constituency about 
how they feel about the privatization of the potash corporation, 
or how they feel about the privatization of SaskPower, or how 
they feel about the privatization of SaskTel, and if they were to 
be honest, they would come back to this cabinet and they would 
tell this cabinet that it isn’t going to sell, that people don’t want 
it. 
 
But you see, there’s one of two problems; either they’re not 
being honest with themselves and going back to their 
constituencies to hear the truth, or when they get in here and 
when they sit around a caucus table, the group of four aren’t 
listening any more. And I tend to believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
they know full well, the back-benchers on the government side, 
that they know full well that their  

constituents aren’t accepting the privatization of the utilities. 
But I think that this government has turned inside itself and are 
no longer listening. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this one sector economy that this 
government is trying to deliver, what has it done for us? Has it 
lowered personal income tax in Saskatchewan, or has it created 
employment opportunities for young people? It hasn’t done 
neither of those, Mr. Speaker. We lose thousands of people, but 
it doesn’t change the mind of this government. They’re still on 
their same road with no bends. They’re still carrying on with 
their give-aways and sweetheart deals to big business. They’ve 
forgotten about Saskatchewan people in favour of Pocklington 
and Manalta Coal from Alberta, and Weyerhaeuser, and tax 
breaks to their big friends, the oil companies — and the list 
goes on. 
 
But people, Mr. Speaker, are starting to understand that the 
motto of this government is, Saskatchewan up for sale. No 
longer, Saskatchewan open for business — if it ever was — it’s, 
Saskatchewan up for sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so many examples of where privatization 
hasn’t worked. In 1985 they decided to privatize Saskoil. Well 
did that mean more jobs in Saskatchewan? Did that mean more 
families fed on the profits of Saskoil? Did that mean more 
revenue for the people of Saskatchewan into general revenue? 
No it didn’t. It meant within 6 months we lost 25 per cent of the 
work-force of that corporation, and it means that 75 per cent of 
those shares offered are no longer in Saskatchewan. So it may 
be called Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not going to end up 
Saskoil, because the Saskatchewan people no longer have 
control of it. 
 
This government now tells us that privatization is going to be 
the economic cure for what ails this province. They’re telling us 
that the privatization of the potash corporation and of 
SaskPower and of SaskTel is going to put us on a better 
economic base in Saskatchewan. Well they’ve been privatizing 
since 1982 and it hasn’t done that for us, because we’ve seen an 
increase in unemployment in Saskatchewan from ’82 to over 9 
per cent from around 4 per cent. 
 
We’ve seen this population decline. We’ve seen Saskatchewan 
businesses bankrupt at a level that we’ve never faced in this 
province since they were government in the 1930s. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And individual bankruptcies. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — My colleague says we’ve seen individual 
bankruptcies unparalleled, and she’s right. 
 
So has privatization been working? I say to you, no. Has 
diversification been working? I say to you, no, because it hasn’t 
happened. It’s all rhetoric. It’s a litany of one-liners, and people 
are getting a little disappointed that the government doesn’t 
recognize you need more to govern than just a list of one-liners 
to be pulled out every time they want to go on an election 
campaign. 
 
And this is the same government that talks about support for 
rural Saskatchewan. Well I want to know how  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

936 
 

privatization of SaskPower is going to help the farmers in small 
town Saskatchewan. Is it going to mean that their power rates 
go down? Not really. They got in the mail a couple of weeks 
ago, a few weeks ago, and they get one every month now — 
they get two bills, one for the utility portion, one for the 
revenue portion, the energy portion. Did that cut the cost of 
their power bill? 
 
And shortly after, they get a nice little calendar from that 
corporation that has the numbers going this way instead of this 
way. Well it was an innovative idea. But I tell you, it was an 
expensive idea, and it didn’t cut the cost of power to the farmers 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen when our power 
rates rise to the point when we start chasing industry that is 
fuelled by natural gas rates, industry that is fuelled by energy 
costs? I mean, we have enough problems in Saskatchewan here 
having markets far away from us. And we know that. We on 
this side understand that, and that’s why we always thought it 
was important to keep the cost of energy down for our 
manufacturing industry and for our farming communities and 
for our small businesses. 
 
And is privatization going to do that? I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not going to cut the cost. It’s not going to improve service. 
It’s not going to do any of those things. And has all this 
privatization helped us? Has it meant strong economic growth 
patterns in Saskatchewan? No, it doesn’t. 
 
When I look at the statistics across Canada, when I look for the 
year of 1987, the economic growth and the gross domestic 
product in constant 1981 dollars, I see a have-not province, a 
province like Newfoundland with an increase of 3.9 per cent in 
1987. What was the rate in Saskatchewan? The rate in 
Saskatchewan was 1.6 per cent. And the same, Mr. Speaker, 
goes for 1988. Newfoundland had an increase of 3.6 per cent; 
Saskatchewan 2.1 per cent. 
 
Now if this privatization is working, if these guys really are 
building and diversifying as I hear time and time again 
whenever they do get up speak, which isn’t often — if it’s 
working, then tell me why all of these economic growth 
indicators would show otherwise? If the program of 
privatization and diversification, as they see it, is working, tell 
me then why unemployment is over 9 per cent in 
Saskatchewan? If economic development and privatization is 
working, then tell me why we lost 6,000 people in February to 
other provinces? 
 
You can look at every major indicator, every major economic 
indicator that is published by provincial . . . Even by your own 
economic indicators you can look at. You can look at what is 
published by the federal government’s and it shows you clearly 
that what this government is doing isn’t working. 
 
So what, Mr. Speaker, is the solution? The solution, I would 
suggest, is that this government rethink its priorities and start 
dealing with some of the issues that we’ve been asking them to 
deal with. Forget about your privatization for privatization’s 
sake. Start looking at the problems with health care; start 
looking at the number of  

business bankruptcies that we’re facing in Saskatchewan; start 
looking seriously at what’s happening to the agricultural 
community. Instead, 20 pieces of legislation. The only 
substantive ones are ones to sell off Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I would ask them to ask themselves why are young people 
leaving? Why do we have an increase in the number of people 
dependent on welfare of over 50 per cent since 1982? Why have 
all of these things been happening? Instead of standing in this 
legislature and making speeches that would blame an 
administration that hasn’t governed for seven years, they should 
be looking at what they’ve been doing since they’ve been 
elected and doing a positive critique of the things that they’ve 
done and trying to improve on their mistakes. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, I guess even government, a government 
in its second term as arrogant as this government has become, 
has to sometimes stop and have a look at what it’s been doing 
and have a reassessment of its priorities. But this government’s 
not doing that. 
 
I’ve been in this House since 1986. I’ve been happy to represent 
the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake. And what I’ve tried to 
do with members on that side of the House is to share some of 
the concerns of people from my area and from other areas that I 
deal with when I travel around this province. I’ve tried to share 
with them some ideas in terms of putting a priority on small 
business, which has been, and should be, and would continue to 
be if they allowed it to happen, one of the best tools to generate 
employment. But that hasn’t happened. 
 
I’ve seen the announcements consistently — we’re creating so 
many jobs through this program, so many jobs through this 
program. But in reality what’s been happening? Unemployment 
rises, people leave, provincial income tax rises, the provincial 
debt is going above and beyond what anybody ever dreamt it 
would be. And why doesn’t this government listen? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric is becoming endless and the solutions 
are non-existent. And I see the Minister of Education back 
again; he’s chirping on. If you had been here a little earlier, Mr. 
Minister, I was sharing with you the ideas that the member from 
Regina South may have had in terms of people wanting small 
government. And I indicated to him that I think he’s probably 
right. But you know what else they want is competent 
government and decent government, and they don’t see it from 
you people. And that’s why I would suggest to you before you 
embark on a move like this one, a privatization move, that you 
would check a little closely with the people, a little closer, to 
find out exactly what they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the test 
of a good government would be a government that cares to 
listen, and in that regard I would say to you that this PC 
government has clearly failed. 
 
Saskatchewan up for sale, and that’s not what our people  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

937 
 

want. 
 
There’s some understanding among people in Saskatchewan as 
to how we can best run this economy, and they’re not listening 
to that. They’re listening to their big-business friends who have 
one motive, and that’s to generate profits for themselves. And 
that’s fair enough because that’s what they’re there for, but the 
role of government is to protect the people of Saskatchewan 
from that happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, in 1981 the unemployment rate in 
Saskatchewan was 4.7 per cent — 21,000 people. Do you 
know, in the last year we have almost lost 21,000 people. So 
basically what that says to me is that those who were on 
unemployment in 1981, and may not be the same people but 
clearly it’s about the same numbers, haven’t been able to find 
employment opportunities in this province. They took off. They 
moved to other jurisdictions because there was nothing here for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has been 
a good corporation for the people of this province. I will agree 
that there were years when it didn’t make money. But as I said 
before, it’s been . . . every time they didn’t make money was 
under the administration of this PC government. 
 
They never looked at the potash corporation’s balance and loss 
sheet in terms of the kind of management it was getting. The 
first thing they did when they started taking more money out of 
the corporation to keep their deficit down than it was making, 
was go out and buy a bunch more advertising and go out and 
tell the people of this province that the potash corporation’s an 
albatross around their neck. Never mind analysing and deciding 
how better to make that corporation generate profits, as it did 
under the administration that preceded them. That isn’t what 
they did. They went out and bought privatization to tell the 
people . . . or bought advertising to tell the people that they’ve 
got to get rid of the corporation, that it’s no longer valuable and 
that government can’t run it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly this government can’t run it, but 
there was a government that could. And I want to say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that there will be a government that can run a 
Crown corporation again in this province right after the next 
election. 
 
I talked about the privatization of the dental plan and the fact 
that that did little in terms of the economy of this province, or in 
terms of the quality of service that it delivered. We talked about 
the privatization of the highway system and what benefits the 
people of Saskatchewan accrued because of that. 
 
And all across this province people are becoming frightened of 
what this government is doing in terms of privatization. All 
across this province people are saying that this government has 
gone too far. All across this province people are starting to feel 
that they’ve been betrayed. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that the PC government on this side of the House will be paying 
for it. 
 
This privatization hasn’t decreased the size of the deficit.  

And whenever I go around this province people will say to me, 
well look, they sold all of these assets off; where did the money 
go? We used to have surplus budgets in Saskatchewan. These 
guys got in in 1982, started selling off assets. Well where did 
the money go? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every year that this government has 
delivered a budget, it’s been a deficit budget. So if there’s 
revenue generated from the sell-off of these assets, where’s the 
money going? Who’s benefitting by privatization? Is it the 
small, independent grocery stores? Has it been the independent 
implement dealers in Saskatchewan? Has it been the working 
men and women of Saskatchewan? Well who has it been? Who 
has it been? Has it been former cabinet ministers who were 
defeated in ’82 and some of them defeated in ’86? Yes, they’ve 
benefitted. Has it been Mr. Hill, former president of the PC 
Party in Saskatchewan? Sure, he benefitted. 
 
But what about the average men and women in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, when they keep asking me why the total 
provincial debt has increased to $13 billion. They can’t 
understand what you’re doing with these assets. They can’t 
understand why you’re selling them off and that there’s nothing 
to show for them. They don’t understand why their families 
have to wait on long hospital waiting lists in Regina and 
Saskatoon. They don’t understand that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand why their children 
have to leave this province to find employment. Mr. Speaker, in 
my riding I know of about seven or eight bricklayers, people 
who work in that industry and have been bricklayers for years, 
hard-working men they are, wanting to support their families by 
working in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not where they work to support their 
families. They’ve been working in southern Ontario and they’ve 
been working in Manitoba. They’ve been working in British 
Columbia, but they haven’t been working at home. And when 
they go away for a period of three weeks and four weeks, 
they’re glad to get back to Saskatchewan. And they don’t 
understand how privatization has helped them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t understand why the debt in general revenue is $3.9 
million. And they don’t understand why they have to pay this 
new flat tax. They don’t understand how privatization has 
caused an increase in their personal income tax to make us the 
second highest taxed province in Canada. 
 
In 1982 the Premier of this province, the now Premier of this 
province, promised to reduce personal income tax by 10 per 
cent. And they don’t understand why the provincial sales is now 
at 7 per cent as opposed to 5 per cent, when this Premier and his 
cabinet ministers who were travelling the province promised to 
eliminate that provincial sales tax in the first four years of 
government. They don’t understand why they’re looking at an 
increase of 40 per cent in their sales tax. If privatization and this 
building and diversifying has worked, then why have all these 
increased costs happened? 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the business  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

938 
 

community don’t understand why every fee that they deal with 
has increased, some of them 250 per cent since 1982, if building 
and diversifying has worked. 
 
They don’t understand why all of these rates have gone up to 
the amount that they have. And what’s more, they don’t 
understand why colleagues of theirs, neighbours of theirs who 
have been in business for 30 and 40 and 50 years have closed 
their doors and shut their small businesses down. 
 
If building and diversifying had worked and if open for 
business had worked . . . These people weren’t poor managers; 
they were competent business people. But because of the 
economy that this government has created, this Premier and his 
cabinet has created, they found it no longer possible to keep 
their doors open. 
 
Because you see, Mr. Speaker, what this government has done, 
not only through privatization but just because of their 
ideology, is they’ve destroyed the middle income people who 
used to be able to shop in those stores. So you see they don’t 
. . . they’re starting to understand clearly that poor people don’t 
buy in their stores. Poor people don’t buy fridges and stoves or 
cars. And that’s what’s happened. 
 
So I ask this government to rethink their priorities, Mr. Speaker, 
to have a closer look at what’s really happening in this province 
and to develop some new plans so that people will again have 
faith in government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Every indicator, every economic indicator, as I mentioned 
before, will show that this economy in Saskatchewan is in some 
very, very tough times. Housing starts is at an all time low in 
Saskatchewan; the construction industry are almost at a 
standstill; small contractors are closing their doors, moving out 
of the province. So if building and diversifying this style had 
worked, why would all of these things have been happening? 
 
This government has undermined health care through 
privatization. We’ve lost jobs and population because of 
privatization. There’s a threat to the future of this province 
because of privatization. In short, Mr. Speaker, privatization 
Tory style hasn’t worked. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as I look at this Bill, this 
privatization Bill that again moves power and more power and 
more power into the hands of the cabinet of this government, I 
fear for the future of this province. And I want to say as well, 
Mr. Speaker, that I’ll be working with my colleagues on this 
side of the House to try and deliver the message the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking me and other members of this 
legislature to share with those folks. 
 
(1630) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll be fighting what I 
consider to be a desperate move by a desperate government, 
because members on this side of the House care about 
Saskatchewan’s future. The real losers, Mr. Speaker, clearly are 
the children who will inherit this  

province from us, and the real tragedy is that this government is 
selling off their birthright. 
 
Mr. Speaker, privatization hasn’t worked, and there has to be, I 
would suggest, another way of delivering government without a 
wholesale sell-off. And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
the fight when the SaskPower Bill comes in is going to be 
opposed by members of this side of this House long and hard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And the minister over there says it’s 
SaskEnergy. The minister over there refers to SaskEnergy as 
being separate and apart from SaskPower. Well I want to tell 
you, Mr. Minister, that’s one of the reasons to try and make you 
understand what you’re doing is you’re destroying a very 
valuable Crown corporation by not understanding that the 
utility part and the energy part are one parcel, and one won’t 
work without the other. 
 
And you can sit there behind your rose-coloured glasses and 
you can refer to it as SaskEnergy, and you could be proud of 
sending out two envelopes with two separate bills every month. 
But the people of this province know that two-bill Hill is 
destroying the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And I’m 
going to tell you that you’re in for a fight from members on this 
side of the House like you never saw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — You may not care about the future of this 
province, Mr. Minister. You may not care about the future of 
the children of this province. But I’m going to tell you that 
you’re not going to watch the New Democrat caucus sit idly by 
while you tear the guts out of this province by trying to 
privatize the SaskPower corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — You may figure you can slip through the 
privatization of the utilities, but I want to say to you, Mr. 
Minister, the people out there aren’t going to allow you to. I 
think you’re going to see one of the biggest fights that’s been in 
this legislature for many a year. And I want to tell you that it’s 
not a crusade, it’s common sense; it’s common sense that you 
don’t sell out the future of your province. Even though you may 
not understand that, I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, my 
colleagues and I will be putting up a scrap in this legislature on 
the privatization of SaskPower, that you won’t have seen for a 
long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I conclude my remarks on Bill No. 1, this 
privatization Bill, I want to say that the nature of this Bill 
frightens me because it’s taking power out of the legislature of 
this province, as most pieces of legislation that they introduce 
do. It puts the power into the hands of the cabinet around a little 
table where four or five people can determine the future of this 
province. And that’s why we’re getting the kind of government, 
because they’re no longer including their caucus or the people 
of Saskatchewan in their decisions. And that’s one of the 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, why I want to oppose this Bill and why I 
will be opposing this Bill. 
 
  



 
April 20, 1989 

939 
 

I’d like to see, as well, in my concluding remarks, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to share with some of the back-benchers on that side of 
the House — I’d like to know why they’re not standing up and 
speaking to this piece of legislation that is going to change the 
whole nature of this province. I’d like to know where the 
member from Biggar is on this, and I’d like to know where the 
member from Rosthern and Shellbrook-Torch River are. 
 
And I’d like to know where the member from Rosthern, if 
they’ll ever let him get up in this legislature and speak again, 
I’d like to know where he stands on this privatization Bill. And 
I’m going to be asking him where he stands on the privatization 
of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Because his people, 
the people of his riding, have a right to know the true facts 
about privatization Tory style. They’ve got the right to know 
where he stands personally on it. 
 
I watched the column of his, Mr. Speaker, when he had his little 
tours of privatization, as a matter of fact, in his home riding. 
And he was sharing through a column with the good folks of his 
riding, how he was so surprised and amazed that people are 
looking forward to increased number of liquor outlets and the 
privatization of the liquor stores. 
 
Well now that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the reasons that I referred 
to these people no longer listening to their folks, because I 
happen to know some people in his riding. I know the people 
who elected him in 1986 who weren’t in favour of liquor 
advertising, who aren’t in favour of an increased number of 
liquor outlets, who aren’t in favour of competition and retailing 
of liquor, which is privatization Tory style, and I want to know 
where that member’s going to be. 
 
And I think the people of his riding have a right to know where 
he is on this. It’s not enough to write a flowery column in The 
Saskatchewan Valley News. He’s got to be accountable for 
those decisions. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
all members of that House should be making a speech on a 
piece of legislation that is important as this privatization Bill, 
because their people in their ridings have the right to know. 
 
So I say in closing, Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely no hesitation 
in indicating to you and to other members of this House that 
there is no way that I’ll be supporting Bill No. 1, this Bill on 
privatization. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hesitated a moment 
before I took my place, thinking that in the tradition of the 
House the debate would now fall to the government side, 
expecting a government member to want to enter this debate. I 
am surprised that no member opposite wishes to speak on this 
legislation, which is clearly the flagship legislation for their 
government’s privatization agenda. 
 
I’m surprised that no member opposite would want to speak. 
And I would join with my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake in 
saying I think if these members are true  

to their responsibilities to the people who elected them, they 
ought to be standing in this House and ought to be voicing their 
opinion on this legislation. Take a position — take a position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in anybody’s judgement this is a 
historic debate in which we are engaged, and at the very outset 
let me say, that we should be involved in this particular debate 
at this particular time is indicative of a great number of things 
about this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly, that we should be involved in this debate 
on privatization now at this time is indicative of the arrogance 
of this group of men and women entrusted to govern the 
province — indicative of their arrogance and indicative of their 
total disregard for this legislature and for all that it represents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are here debating Bill No. 1, An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program, an Act to establish 
privatization in this province. Well, Mr. Minister, unless you’ve 
been away from the province for the last seven years, the people 
of Saskatchewan know that this government has been engaged 
in privatization since they were first elected. It is only now that 
we have the opportunity in this House to debate legislation 
about public participation, their euphemism for what everybody 
knows is privatization. 
 
For over a year, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a full department with 
a minister in place, and a bevy of staff and a budget, engaged in 
the sell-off of Saskatchewan. That’s the sign, Mr. Speaker, of a 
government that has total disregard for the opinions of the 
people that are represented here in this House, a government 
that has undertaken a program for which they have no mandate 
from the people of this province, no mandate. It’s a sign, a clear 
indication of an arrogant government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that kind of arrogance, in my view, Mr. Speaker, is the 
kind of arrogance that defeats governments. It’s the kind of 
arrogance that the people of this province simply will not 
tolerate, and they will indicate their lack of tolerance for this 
kind of arrogance come the next election, mark my word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that we should be debating this 
legislation at this time is also indicative in my mind that 
members opposite are clearly out of touch, out of touch with the 
reality which is Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously they have but one agenda and one plan. It’s 
privatization, privatization, privatization. As others have so 
correctly pointed out, we are now at day 29 of this sitting of the 
legislature and we have heard nothing else from this 
government but privatization. 
 
I might ask members present, have we seen in this session, have 
we seen legislation to deal with the crisis in the family farm? 
Have we seen one bit of legislation in this session to deal with 
youth unemployment? Have we seen a bit of legislation in this 
session that would somehow  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

940 
 

improve health care and social services in our province? Have 
we seen an action of this government to deal with the outflow 
of young people from Saskatchewan? 
 
One after another, we’ve just seen privatization, privatization, 
privatization. Bill 1, Bill 20 to sell of the potash corporation, a 
Bill that’s supposed to be coming tomorrow to sell off 
SaskPower. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, how do you spell 
irrelevant? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The minister asks how do you spell irrelevant. 
He ought to know because he is, he is. In the view of the people 
of Saskatchewan, he and his agenda, this privatization, is 
irrelevant to the concerns they’re facing this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government hasn’t heard, I want to remind 
them that blocks away from this building there are people living 
in poverty. If this government hasn’t heard, I want to remind 
them that we now have the second highest poverty rate in this 
country. 
 
This government would be well advised to forget this 
privatization mania and start dealing with the real problems of 
real people in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s as if they are 
blinded, that they are blinded to the reality which faces people 
in this province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am reminded a bit of a train that is somehow 
rampaging through this province, out of control, and there in 
that locomotive sits the chief engineer, the Premier, and his 
crew, and the train now has but one car and that’s the fancy 
dining car, first-class. And there’s a few people on that car — 
free rides for the rich — but the rest of the province, the rest of 
the province, well they’re lined up on the siding and there’s no 
place on this train for them. And they’re forgotten by this 
government. They’re forgotten by that engineer and his crew on 
this rampage to sell off Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, then by way of introduction, that we should be 
debating this legislation at this time when there are real 
problems facing the real people of Saskatchewan indicates the 
arrogance of this government. It indicates, as well, that they are 
now out of touch, and further, it indicates their bankruptcy — 
bankruptcy of ideas. 
 
Obviously privatization is failing, but they have no plan B, no 
second choice. And so we’re committed and there’s no stopping 
them, Mr. Speaker, so it seems. 
 
When I say, Mr. Speaker, that this government is bankrupt, 
bankrupt of ideas and perhaps the bankruptcy runs a little 
deeper than that. 
 
If you’ll just permit me an aside, Mr. Speaker, some weeks ago 
I received a letter. It came addressed to our home in an 
envelope marked “personal and confidential.” Thinking a letter 
that comes “personal and confidential” carries some 
importance, I was anxious to open it. I opened it, Mr. Speaker, 
and I found it was a letter from none other than the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. Now in this letter that was 
marked personal and confidential to myself, Mr. Speaker, I find 
it  

signed by a Mr. Alf Bentley, finance chairman for the 
Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, bagman for the Tories in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bentley in his letter to me says: 
 

 It is for this very reason that I am writing to you today to 
ask for your financial support for this very worthy cause. 
 

Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan must be facing some pretty hard times 
when they have to fund-raise among the MLAs on this side of 
the House. I tell you, they’re not only bankrupt of ideas in that 
party, it now appears that they’re bankrupt of finances too. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would have promptly put this in the 
garbage with the rest of the junk mail that arrives at our house if 
it were not for the first sentence of this letter. Because when 
Mr. Bentley wrote me, asking for funds for his Tory Party, he 
began the letter with this sentence — and it just so happens that 
I heartily agree with Mr. Bentley’s assessment here. He says to 
me in this personal and confidential letter: 
 

Dear Mr. Calvert: Since the Government of Premier Grant 
. . . (oh sorry, the Premier) was re-elected, the economy of 
Saskatchewan has been somewhat precarious, to say the 
least. 
 

Precarious, to say the least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are going to understand this government’s 
blind commitment to privatization, I think we do have to 
understand the reality of what Mr. Bentley says, the reality of 
the precarious situation that this government has put the 
province of Saskatchewan in. It’s not just Mr. Bentley who 
thinks that the financial affairs of this province are on shaky 
ground. He has the support of his own Minister of Finance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think in this privatization debate it is 
essential that the people of this province are fully apprised of 
just how precarious, just how precarious the financial situation 
of Saskatchewan is today. 
 
And so the figures I bring to this debate are not my figures or 
the figures of an NDP researcher, they are the figures of the 
hon. Minister of Finance. They have his name signed here at the 
bottom, and they are from the Saskatchewan economic and 
financial position of July 1986 and the Saskatchewan economic 
and financial position of September 1988. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when this group of men and women came to 
office, the Minister of Finance says they inherited cash money 
in the bank, $139 million. That’s what he says in this statement. 
Now by the end of 1986 we find ourselves in quite a different 
financial situation. By the time we get to September, 1988, this 
same Minister of Finance tells us we now have a deficit of $3.6 
billion. 
 
From a surplus of $139 million cash money in the bank  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

941 
 

when these men and women took over after 11 successive years 
of balanced and surplus budgets, we have in these short years 
now a deficit of $3.6 billion in the operating side of 
government. And this year, now, the Minister of Finance tells 
us that deficit will climb up to $3.9 billion. 
 
And so from a cash position of 140 million, when they took 
over in the operations of government, they’ve now run up a 
debt of almost $4 billion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — 3.9 — $4 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did a little bit of calculating on this. Mr. Speaker, 
if we started to pay this debt off that they ran up in these seven 
short years, if we started to pay it off just at a dollar a minute — 
one dollar a minute, $60 an hour — do you know how long it 
would take to pay it off, Mr. Speaker? Well it would take 7,200 
years at a dollar a minute. That’s the kind of debt that these men 
and women have put on to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . sit down and figure that out? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Now the Minister of Finance wants to know 
who would bother figuring that out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He never figures anything out. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — This minister is the one who never figures 
anything out, as my colleague points out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the size of debt that has 
been put on to the people of Saskatchewan by this government 
in seven years. That is just in the operations of government, 
that’s not in the Crown corporations. If we look at the total debt 
of the province today since these people came into office, I 
think we’re up now approaching $13 billion, which means, 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, in anybody’s judgement, that this 
province is now bankrupt. If they sold off every asset, if they 
sold off every asset we still couldn’t pay the debt. We’d still be 
$3 billion short. 
 
What that means more specifically, Mr. Speaker, is what we see 
in this year’s budget, where this year we’re now paying $381 
million — $381 million — a year just on the interest payments 
on that debt. That’s more than a million dollars a day. 
 
Do you know what we could do, Mr. Speaker, with $381 
million? Do you know how many hospitals we could build in a 
year, or how many schools or how many miles of road we could 
build? Do you know how many jobs we could provide, how 
many family farms we could save with $381 million a year? But 
we can’t do any of that now, not a bit of it, because that $381 
million now leaves the province to pay the bankers and the 
bond dealers. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, to any observer, this group of men and 
women elected in 1982 have bankrupt the province. They have 
put us in a financial mess that can  

only be described as bankrupt and have now put us on welfare 
as we go to Ottawa, hat in hand, for transfer payments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Speaker, what is their answer? 
What is their answer to the financial mess that they’ve created? 
Well it’s privatization. It’s privatization. Their strategy now is 
very simple. If it makes money, then sell it. If it makes money, 
give it away. If it moves, sell it. The strategy is very simple. 
 
Never mind, Mr. Speaker, never mind if it’s a public utility that 
generations have built; never mind if they made a solemn 
commitment only months ago never to sell that public utility; 
never mind if it’s SaskTel or SaskPower. You know, if it makes 
money, you sell it. 
 
Never mind if it involves a God-given natural resource, given in 
abundance to the people of this province. Never mind if it’s 12 
million acres of timberland, or never mind if it’s uranium or 
never mind if it’s potash. If it makes money, sell it off. Mr. 
Speaker, in my view it’s economic insanity; this course of 
privatization is economic insanity. 
 
You know, one of the great ironies, one of the great ironies of 
the most recent provincial budget is that the Minister of Finance 
took from the profits of the Crown corporations $200 million to 
fund the operations of government. It’s that same minister who 
yesterday in this House introduces and speaks to legislation that 
would sell off, sell off that asset, thereby losing the revenue 
which he himself uses this year to fund hospitals and to fund 
schools and to fund opportunities for Saskatchewan people. It’s 
one of the great ironies of that budget that the very source of 
revenue the Minister of Finance uses, he wants to give away — 
to foreigners, to foreigners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their strategy is simple. They’ve got themselves 
into a financial mess and their only way out, as they see it, is to 
try and sell their way out, sell off the assets. And so if it makes 
money, if it makes money, sell it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have followed with considerable interest the 
privatization of Sask Minerals, and it is a prime example of this 
government’s failure — failure — in privatization. I want to lift 
that example again today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the late 1940s, Sask Minerals was built by the people of this 
province to accomplish both economic and social goals. It was 
built to develop a natural Saskatchewan resource and to return 
the benefits of that resource, the economic benefits, to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It had also a social objective. There 
was a goal to provide employment, to provide employment for 
young men and women who were coming home from the war, 
and to provide that employment, not in urban Saskatchewan but 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Once founded, that corporation, owned by the people of this 
province, has a success story perhaps unequalled. In its 40 years 
of existence, Mr. Speaker, Sask Minerals, with the sodium 
sulphate plants at Chaplin, Fox Valley and formerly at 
Bishopric, with the acquisition of the peat  
  



 
April 20, 1989 

942 
 

moss division, in its 40 years of history that Crown corporation 
paid out $60 million — $60 million — in wages to employees; 
it paid to the governments of Saskatchewan $15 million in 
royalties, as any resource company must do; it paid to the local 
communities where it was located $2 million in grants in lieu of 
taxes; it paid all of its own debt load; it paid for all of its own 
expansion; and it returned, that little corporation, it returned to 
the people of Saskatchewan over $40 million in dividends. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In a small company. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — A small company. $40 million in dividends 
which we, the people of Saskatchewan, shared in the building 
of roads, in the funding of medicare, in the provision of 
education — $40 million, 40 years of proud history. 
 
Only in one of those years did it ever lose money. What 
happened? What happened to that proud asset of the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Well what happened to it was what they choose to describe as 
public participation. How, and how those words can be applied 
to what happened to Sask Minerals, Mr. Speaker, is completely 
beyond me, because the minister of privatization went out and 
negotiated a deal, a secret deal, Mr. Speaker, with two 
corporations, two of their corporate friends, one located in 
Toronto and one located in Quebec — Kam-Kotia of Toronto, 
Premier Cdn of Quebec. 
 
He went out and negotiated this little deal, and then he 
announces to the public of Saskatchewan, through the press, 
that he is considering the sale of Sask Minerals. He announces 
that he is considering the sale. While the ink is drying on the 
deal, the minister is going around saying that he is considering 
the sale and he will be consulting, he will be consulting. 
 
Well about a week later, or a few days later, he went out to . . . 
made a flying trip into Chaplin and then up to Carrot River, not 
to consult, Mr. Speaker, but to go to those communities and 
announce that Sask Minerals had been sold. And did he go and 
offer the employees a chance to participate in the share 
offering? No. Did he offer a share offering to the people of 
Saskatchewan? No, he just went out to those communities, 
announced it’s gone, it’s over. And you’ll like it, he said. 
 
A few days later we get the announcement that the 
corporation’s been sold, lock, stock, and barrel — lock, stock, 
and barrel to the two out-of-province interests. What did we get, 
we the people of Saskatchewan, for this asset of ours? What did 
we get? Well the minister a year ago was telling us we got, for 
the sodium sulphate division, $12.5 million. And he said, we 
got for the peat moss division, $3.4 million. Well add that 
together, you get about $15.9 million, that’s what he said. And 
then he printed his annual report for this year and put those 
same figures in there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, then we find in the Kam-Kotia annual report, 
did in fact Kam-Kotia pay $12.5 million for Sask Minerals, the 
sodium sulphate? No, they didn’t, they paid  

$12.1 million. Now that’s a $400,000 error on the part of the 
minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But that’s nothing. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — But I suppose that is nothing for him and for 
his government, but I’ll tell you that’s something for the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some other interesting comparisons that 
can be made between the last annual report of Sask Minerals 
and the current report of Kam-Kotia. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
read to you the names and the addresses of the directors of 
Kam-Kotia. Now there’s a Mr. Brissenden from Toronto, 
Ontario; there’s an R.P. Douglas from British Columbia; there’s 
a Mr. Kachmar from Toronto, Ontario; there’s a Mr. R. Lavertu 
from North York, Ontario; there’s a Mr. Sloan from Toronto, 
Ontario; there’s an H.E. Neal from Toronto, Ontario; there’s an 
A.W. White from Orangeville, Ontario; and then there is a R.J. 
Hicks from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, one guy. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — One guy from Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, let 
me read you the board of directors of Sask Minerals. 
 
Well the member from Swift Current . . . from Regina; an Ian 
Disbery from Regina; a Robert Berry from Central Butte, 
Saskatchewan; a Richard Gleim from Chaplin, Saskatchewan; a 
Martin Chabot from Zenon Park, Saskatchewan; a Merlin 
Materi from Fox Valley, Saskatchewan. Quite a change, quite a 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look in the annual report of Sask Minerals and I find that the 
auditing firm is the firm of Burroughs, Weber & Partners. 
Where are they from? Swift Current, Saskatchewan. I look in 
the annual report of Kam-Kotia Mines, the new owner of Sask 
Minerals, and I find that their auditing firm is located where? 
Toronto, Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re here talking about an asset of the people of 
Saskatchewan that was worth in the neighbourhood of $20 
million — $20 million. This week we get the Bill that is going 
to privatize, to sell off to foreign interests, an asset worth $2 
billion — $2 billion. And they will repeat the kind of 
performance that we’ve seen with Sask Minerals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province deserve something 
better. They deserve something better from the men and women 
they elected to govern in their interests. They expect something 
a lot better than this Margaret Thatcher-style privatization that’s 
being inflicted on the people of Saskatchewan without a 
mandate. 
 
It’s economic, in my view, Mr. Speaker, it’s economic insanity. 
And I’ll tell you, it’s not only economic insanity to be selling 
off the assets of our province in a desperate attempt to get 
yourself out of debt . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It being 5 o’clock, the House 
now stands adjourned until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


