





























































Hansard: August 14, 1989


August 14, 1989 
 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 – An act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I move third reading, I would like to make a 
few remarks on Bill 20, An Act respecting the reorganization of the Potash Corporation. 
 
We had a rather vigorous debate, I think it fair to say, on Thursday last on the conflicting visions. And 
conflicting is perhaps a strong word, but the members opposite talked about a mixed economy, and of course 
when we looked at the facts leading to that debate, of course they did not mean a mixed economy. Their view 
of the economy is that it had to be government. And they had a single view of the economy, Mr. Speaker, and 
that it is this government that has been practising, and I say practising, Mr. Speaker, a truly mixed economy. 
 
We have involved the private sector; we have strongly involved the co-operative movement; we have 
involved government. We have taken it a step further, Mr. Speaker, and it is the government under the 
leadership of Grant Devine that is for the first time, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: – Of course the hon. member would like to acknowledge that we don’t use members’ names. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – With the leadership of our Premier, that for the first time, Mr. Speaker, in the history of 
our great province that is truly involving the people, the people as individuals, not as a collective but the 
people as individuals, in the economic development of this province. And it is this government under the 
leadership of our Premier that for the first time is allowing the employees, the workers, to have a say and a 
participation in the ownership of the companies in which they work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Now the NDP say that the potash corporation changes are revolutionary, that there’s a 
revolution going on. That’s a very strong word, Mr. Speaker, I say that there are some fundamental changes, 
fundamental changes involving the people as individuals. And they are fundamental. 
 
And we do have a different view of how the economy should develop. We don’t believe that government has 
to own, and those were the choices given in the past. We believe that the government can be a catalyst to 
build and we don’t hesitate to use government, and the Cargill plant’s a prime example. And we don’t hesitate 
to use the instruments of government, either the tax system on labour-sponsored venture capital or stock 
savings plans or venture capital programs. And we certainly don’t hesitate, as we’ve both debated and know, 
use the ability of government financial instruments to encourage economic development. So there are 
different views. 
 
And there are different views about how the potash corporation fits into the scheme of the potash industry. 
And one thing that was left out of the debate the other day, Mr. Speaker, was alluded to and, and I think in 
fairness, alluded to by the member from Saskatoon Fairview when he briefly mentioned Canpotex. And of 
course the New Democratic Party believes that the potash corporation should pull out of Canpotex. And we 
should take a very quick look at what Canpotex means. Canpotex is an organization of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan potash companies, and it is their selling agency outside of North America. And I said 
Saskatchewan and I’ve repeated Saskatchewan because it’s important. 



 
And what happened with the NDP view of the potash corporation was that it became the government’s view 
of the potash corporation and not a view of the Saskatchewan industry. And by the decision of the NDP to 
pull out of Canpotex, they were in effect saying that we want PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
perhaps to do well – although there were lots of doubts about that – to the detriment of every other single 
potash company in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But we believe, Mr. Speaker, that the employees in those other potash companies in this province are just as 
much people of this province and just as much entitled to be treated fairly by government as the employees of 
the potash corporation. 
 
So the NDP said, no, we’re going to pull out of Canpotex and we are going to drive the other Saskatchewan 
companies hopefully out of business. And that was the basic thrust – that was the basic thrust. 
 
It was very much a potash view, under the NDP, because of government ownership, as opposed to a 
government view representing all of the people. And there was, I think it fair to say, a totally different view of 
Canpotex and how the industry in this province, the industry, all of the industry, has to be encouraged, has to 
be allowed to grow, not to the detriment of anybody. When we talk about Canpotex and we know that in 
North America there’s open competitions – not to the detriment of anybody, that’s not the objective, it’s to try 
and get the maximum benefit for the people of this province to sell as much Saskatchewan potash around the 
world. And of course we’ve had record sales. We’ve had record sales in the last year of Saskatchewan 
people’s potash. 
 
So having said all of that, we have a differing view of how economic development should take place. One 
says government. We have a different view of how the potash industry should develop, that we don’t think 
that the government instrument should be used to drive others out of business. 
 
So we’ve also talked about the matter of control And I can restate often enough because, as I indicated, 
perhaps my powers of persuasion are failing me, but when we talked about control, we talked about the very, 
very strong constraints to ensure that control stays in the hands of the people of this province. No individual, 
no government, no agent of government, no corporation, or groups or them acting in concert, can own more 
than 5 per cent. 
 
Foreign investment number cannot exceed 45 per cent. But that of itself, when we talk about the 45 per cent, 
also has a fundamental constraint in that they may have 45 per cent of the shares, but they can never vote 
more than 25 per cent of the votes cast at a meeting. It’s not even 25 per cent of the votes in total; it’s 25 per 
cent of the votes cast at a meeting. So if they had a full 45 per cent walked into a meeting with all their shares, 
it’s still only 25 per cent – only 25 per cent. 
 
And I reiterate that, Mr. Speaker, because other than the member from Fairview, it seems to have been 
ignored by members opposite, and I’ve given some rather specific examples of how that works. Take a 
simplistic example of 100 shares, 40 held by government, and say that the government doesn’t exercise its 
right to vote that it has; so there are not 15 shares owned by Saskatchewan employees and the people of this 
province, and 45 owned by foreigners. I’m taking the worst case scenario. At a meeting, that 45 per cent by 
law, can only be 25 per cent, and those 15 shares held by Saskatchewan people would in fact constitute 75 per 
cent of the vote – a tremendous, tremendous protection and control for the people of our great province. 
 
And then we talked about ownership, and we talked about our different views of protecting the industry. The 
NDP have said, and said it very well and repeated it again over the last long debate, that in order to control an 
industry and in order to control a resource, you have to own it. We don’t’ believe that to be true. The 
government doesn’t own the forest industry but it controls it, not just by legislation but by forest management 
licensing agreements. The government doesn’t own the oil industry. We control it through our taxation and 
legislation. We don’t own the natural gas industry. We control it through legislation, through our taxing 
policies. And obviously in this government’s view, we continue to control our potash industry and our 
resource through our legislation. 
 
And the NDP were on a bit of a . . . the horns of a dilemma, if I may say, when we talk about control. Because 
historically the Leader of the Opposition has patted himself on the back and said what a great job he did with 



the Trudeau charter of rights when he said that we now protect our resources – okay? – and then saying that 
we’ve got to own the potash corporation to do that. Very contradictory position. 
 
Either the Leader of the Opposition was less than candid on the impact of the changes to the charter and 
provincial control of resources in which case one would have to say there was an example of abject failure; or 
if he was unsuccessful, then we certainly don’t need the potash corporation for the purposes of government 
control of the industry. 
 
(0815) 
 
He cannot have it both ways. And that contradiction came loud and clear during the debate, and it was 
interesting that the Leader of the Opposition failed, failed to make reference to that during the debate, and I 
think that the silence of the Leader of the Opposition on the changes to the charter and the constitution is of 
itself proof that the province does not have to own the corporation to control and own its resource. 
 
And we talked about value. And the NDP say that the value of the corporation is replacement value. And of 
course that doesn’t hold up to scrutiny because if companies could make a profit at replacement value, they 
would be building new mines everywhere. Manitoba would have a mine. Every other country would be awash 
in potash mines. They can’t make money at replacement value. 
 
And we gave the example . . . and I was using the facts and figures given by the Leader of the Opposition 
when he talked about a million tonne potash mine, $500 million. And when we look at the interest charges on 
$500 million, that would be $40 a tonne; depreciation was $25 a tonne; potash sales between 80 and $85 a 
tonne. If you were to build a new mine, then virtually all of the money, $75 of the 80 to $85 would go just to 
pay depreciation and interest, and you haven’t begun to pay employees or operating costs of sales costs. And 
they can't make money, they can’t make money in that environment. 
 
So the value is not what the NDP says it is. The value is what the market-place says it is. And that’s a 
fundamental difference. And I’ve given some simple examples, Mr. Speaker. If someone wants to build a $5 
million house beside the sewage lagoon in Regina and someone comes along and says, I’ll offer you $50,000 
for that house; the owners says well I paid well I paid $5 million, replacement value is $5 million. He says, 
I’m not paying you more than $50,000 to live beside a sewage lagoon. Then obviously the market has 
determined what that value is. And if someone puts a $2 million house in Saskatoon beside a packing plant, 
and someone comes along and says I’ll offer you $50,000 for that $2 million house, the owners says, well 
replacement value is 2 million. But it’s not worth more than $50,000 for me to live beside a packing plant. So 
the market decides. 
 
I gave another simple example, Mr. Speaker, of someone going out and buying a car, $15,000 automobile. A 
year later someone comes along and offers them 10. And they said well replacement value to me is $15,000. 
I’m not paying more than $10,000 for a year-old car. So the market determines. So replacement value is not, 
when we look at the situation, is not an example of value, that in fact the market will determine what that 
value is. 
 
So then the NDP said that oh, we’re rewarding our rich friends and our business friends in – big-business 
friends, I’m sorry; I thought that was one word, I’m sorry, the way you use it over there – in the investment 
houses in the financial community of Canada, because those people will get a commission for selling the 
shares to the people. And keep in mind I did remind them that many, if not all of them, made contributions to 
the New Democratic Party, and they knew that; we know that. They kind of dropped it after that when that 
was brought forward to them. 
 
But I mean if people use a real estate agent to sell a house, they get a commission. And that agent will try and 
get the best possible price. And of course that’s what happened when we try and get people to go out and 
market our shares. We pay them a commission to get the highest possible price and the widest distribution. 
 
So we have different views. We have a different view on economic development, the relationship of the 
industry, the importance of the industry, I think we both agree on that the potash industry is vitally important 
to this province. 
 



But we believe that the potash corporation will be stronger, Mr. Speaker, because of the initiatives of this 
government. Not only the changes in management, the changes in management . . . And as I’ve said, I thought 
it was rather a low day in this legislature when we saw the personal attacks on the chairman of the potash 
corporation. I think they were at the lowest the other night in a the debate from the member from Prince 
Albert, who had a vicious personal attack . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- P.A.-Duck Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – P.A.-Duck Lake, had a vicious personal attack on the president of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. And I’ve stated, Mr. Speaker, that the management of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan today is now considered one of the best, if not the best, managed potash corporation of any in 
the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – But the personal attacks went on. The personal attacks went on because the individual was 
an American, that came up. The fact that the NDP had non-Canadians in senior management, we weren’t 
critical of that. But I guess it’s acceptable for the New Democratic Party to have non-Canadians in senior 
management, but not acceptable for this government. The fact that the individual has now got landed 
immigrant status was not a factor in the NDP thinking. No, it was a straight personal slam and a personal 
attack, without foundation and without merit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There were some side issues. I look forward this morning to the participation of the member from Regina 
Rosemont, the member from Regina Rosemont who has articulated so well the true New Democratic Party 
position when he has stated, and stated publicly that the NDP should nationalize and take over the whole 
industry, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the member from Rosemont said. That’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Before they put a gag . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well some members say they had a gag order on the member from Rosemont, they had a 
gag order on the member from Rosemont. I thought his silence was important, Mr. Speaker, his silence, 
because there were several very strongly held views. A couple of members from Saskatoon, Saskatoon 
Sutherland, I believe for his silence in this debate. It was interesting. And Saskatoon Centre, silence. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, she spoke, I’m sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Not during the committee debate, Mr. Speaker. So there was either a gag order on people 
that have views over there, Mr. Speaker, of total government ownership for the potash corporations, or they 
went to ground on their own. I have difficulty knowing some of them and the vigour with which some of 
them participate in debates, that the latter is right. 
 
So why did the NDP leader, Leader of the Opposition, fear the participation of some members in the debate? 
Why? Why, Mr. Speaker? Because he knows that his position on privatization is not accepted by the people 
of this province, and he also knows that the extreme position within his own party is even less acceptable to 
the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – And let me just comment on the part that the NDP have railed on several occasions that 
what we’re doing is not acceptable to the people. And I’m going to remind many that about a week ago there 
was an article in the Regina Leader-Post by Mr. Petrie, that given the legislation for time allocation, that the 
Leader of the Opposition had a week to rally public support s he did with SaskEnergy. And I think every one 
of us, in fairness, has seen the results of the rallying cry of the Leader of the Opposition. We have all seen the 
results. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It fell on deaf ears. 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – It fell on deaf ears. It fell on deaf ears, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, even within some of the 
New Democratic Party themselves, some of the New Democratic party themselves who had doubts at the 
beginning of government nationalization of the industry, and believe today that there should be a right of the 
people of this province as individuals to participate in the economic development of the potash corporation. 
 
We know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that there are New Democratic Party members who want to buy shares. We 
know that there are New Democratic Party members that have bought shares in Saskoil and WESTBRIDGE, 
and they’re silent, they’re silent when they listen to the Leader of the Opposition because a significant 
percentage of New Democratic Party members believe what this government is doing is right. It is right for 
the potash corporation . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – It is right for the potash resource of this province, owned by the people of this province, 
and it is right for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. So the rallying cry fell short. It fell on deaf ears. 
 
And we look, Mr. Speaker, at a protracted debate. It’s not that they didn’t have time. It’s not that the New 
Democratic Party didn’t have time to rally the people. They had four months. And they say, Mr. Speaker, that 
they were muzzled in committee because they only the two days. But let’s take a look at the hours of those 
two days, Mr. Speaker, because we had nearly 20 hours of debate in committee, nearly the equivalent of four 
days, Mr. Speaker. I believe that that’s more than the opposition had when the NDP nationalized the potash 
industry, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not that they didn’t have the time. 
 
They had time. They had a great deal of time. They had a tremendous amount of time, and I think the results 
are clear. The people have spoken. The people have spoken, Mr. Speaker. The vast majority of the people of 
this province believe that we can control our resources without ownership, that we can manage and control 
our great potash reserves and our resource without government ownership, that there is a letter way to do it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we look to the future of the potash corporation as it now embarks on a new journey with the people having 
shares. And we’ve stated, Mr. Speaker, that it is our view that it is right in the tie of the history of the potash 
corporation for a public issue, for other investors to be able to participate in that corporation for a public 
issue, for other investors to be able to participate in that corporation. 
 
And one of the objective that I have little doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the potash corporation will use that 
opportunity to diversify so that it is no longer a single product of a single commodity mining company but a 
far more diversified company, a company that will be able to weather the cycles of potash, the peaks and the 
valleys of potash, and be able to have am ore stable company thus making a bigger contribution to be 
economic development of our great province. We believe that that opportunity is there. 
 
(0830) 
 
We believe as well, Mr. Speaker, that the people themselves, collectively, the taxpayers should not have to 
take all the risk of potash, that they shouldn’t have to put up futures moneys in potash for the growth and 
diversification of the company, that investors can do that. And we believe that the company will be able to 
compete more effectively in a tremendously competitive world with the changes that this legislature is 
proposing to make. 
 
The employees, Mr. Speaker, have been a vital part of all of our privatization efforts and, of course, will 
continue to be in the privatization of the potash corporation. This government and the potash corporation will 
take a very attractive package to its employees, a very attractive package. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I’m sure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – And the hon. member says, I’m sure. What’s wrong with that? Why should we not 
encourage the employees, the enterprises in this province, to have a say and to be able to participate in their 
own company? This government believe that is a right course of action, believes it to be a correct course of 
action. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that direction of employees having the chance to buy shares and 



participate in their company is far more the Saskatchewan way than the government ownership way as 
proposed by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Speaker, we talk about that and we both debated the history of this province to some 
extent. But you know we had the co-op movement, Mr. Speaker, build up, which was the people of this 
province coming together and building enterprises. It wasn’t the government imposing a co-operative 
movement. It was coming from the people, Mr. Speaker; the people were doing it themselves. And that was 
the history. 
 
And our development was the people doing it. The government ownership is a new phenomenon in this 
province relative to its history, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t happen, it did not happen until the 1970s. It didn’t 
happen. And I think members opposite will freely acknowledge that the people were never quite comfortable 
with this new direction of government ownership as opposed to people participation. And that’ simply what 
this government intends to restore, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that the future of the corporation, with the changes we make, is a great one. And we believe that 
the corporation will be a far more stable contributor to the economic growth and diversification of this 
province. We believe that the employees of the potash corporation will take up the opportunity that will be 
presented to them to take an ownership role in the corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, we have every confidence 
that the people of our great province are going to take advantage of the opportunity that will be presented to 
them to participate, to contribute to the economic development, not only of the potash corporation, but of this 
great province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I move third reading of Bill No. 20. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Mr. Speaker, this Act has been improperly named from the very beginning. This Act has 
nothing to do with the reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; it has everything to do with 
the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t simply say that in a rhetorical sense because you just have to examine the provisions of the Bill 
where the first thing that the Crown corporation does is to sell all of its assets to another company. And we 
heard about that company the other day. We heard that it was a former construction company that’s been 
bought up and the name has been changed to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan incorporated. And the 
very first thing the Bill does in section 3 is to provide for sale of the assets to this new company. 
 
So it has nothing whatever to do, Mr. Speaker, with the reorganization of the Crown corporation. Rather it has 
to do with the sell-off of all the assets of the potash corporation. And the potash corporation that we have 
known for the last 14 years in this province, the last 13 years, is just going to disappear off the face of the 
earth, and there’ll be nothing there is in its place except a private company, and it is that private company that 
I’m going to be addressing in my remarks to the House this morning. 
 
I think it probably understates the case to say that the people of Saskatchewan are surprised, even shocked, 
that the government has actually decided to go ahead with this bill and that we’ve actually taken it to third 
reading, and apparently with the government majority, we’ll pass this Bill this morning – surprised or even 
shocked because they have been expressing their view as clearly and loudly as they can about how they feel 
about this government’s privatization thrust. 
 
Now of course privatization wasn’t invented by this government in 1989. This government has been 
privatizing away for some time, Mr. Speaker, starting back with the highway equipment sell-off and the 
laying off of all of the highway workers, and continuing right through to this bill here. But privatization in 
1989 gained a new prominence because of the way in which the government presented the menu for this 
session in the throne speech. 
 



The privatization thrust at that time consisted of three major initiatives: the privatization of SaskEnergy, the 
gas division of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation; the privatization of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance); and the privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And that throne speech began to 
focus people’s attention upon the plans of this government so far as the sell-off of public assets are concerned. 
And over the course of this session, their attention has grown more intense as the government has actually 
proceeded with some of these plans. 
 
And of course the SaskEnergy privatization Bill, when it hit this House, we walked out and we went around 
the province to consult the people and get their views, and did we get their views, Mr. Speaker? Did we get 
their views? We got them in spades. And the people opposite just can’t help but have understood what the 
people were saying, what the people were thinking, how strongly they felt about the government’s 
privatization thrust. 
 
The particular issue in front of them at the time was the privatization of SaskPower, but the views that they 
were expressing extended well beyond that and covered the government’s other privatization plans. And I 
don’t know how much more the people could have done to convince this government that that was their view. 
 
Certainly every time their view was plumbed or probed by public opinion surveys, the government has to 
have got the answer that the people are opposed, and not just opposed by some small plurality, Mr. Speaker, 
but opposed by margins of two or three to one – two or three to one; and not just SaskPower, but SGI and the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and any other privatization plans of that nature that the people were 
asked about. 
 
Now what do the people of this province have to do in order to bring home to the government opposite what 
their views are with respect to this issue? What do they want? Some of my colleagues say, defeat them. 
We’ve challenged again and again for this government to do exactly that. We have made the point over and 
over again that they have no mandate to carry forward this privatization thrust. They simply have no mandate. 
 
The people of this province, when they re-elected that government in 1986, did not realize that they were 
voting for this particular agenda. They did not realize that they were voting to sell off the assets that the 
people of this province have owned and controlled for a long, long time. And as I say, Mr. Speaker, they have 
tried, the people have tried in every way that they can to get through to the government, to get through to the 
government members to tell them no, we don’t want you proceeding with these plans. We want to keep things 
more or less as they are. We want to continue to own our Sask Power Corporation and our SGI, and we want 
to continue to own and operate our very own potash corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Heaven knows, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House tried our best to convey that 
view, to convey that information and that opinion to members opposite. We girded ourself for this particular 
debate and came in here and fought it out as hard as we know how to fight. Every member on this side of the 
house got up and spoke on second reading, and spoke with passion and conviction and intensity, and at 
length, to try and get through to government members that what they’re trying to do with this Bill is not in the 
best interests of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And all we got in return for most of that debate, Mr. Speaker, was a wall of silence. All we 
got in return was just catcalls from across the floor criticizing the way in which we were putting our 
arguments, harassing us as we attempted to develop our arguments, accusing us of talking too long, accusing 
us of wasting their precious time. 
 
It made no difference, Mr. Speaker, that all of us on this side of the House were here on our own nickel. We 
were here paying our own expenses; we weren’t here to try and drag it out to make money out of it or 
anything like that. We were here because the people of this province elected us to come here and express, on 
their behalf, our view; and particularly to express their views on a subject like this where they have done 
everything they possibly can to make their opposition to these plans clear. Everything that they can do, they 
have done, and yet this government has persisted in going ahead with this Bill. 



 
Well I’m proud of the way the people on this side of the House have handled themselves in this debate. I’m 
proud of it. And we’ve tried everything we can to penetrate the fog over there and to make these people 
understand just what is at issue here and how the people feel about this issue. 
 
Now I guess you can say, Mr. Speaker, from one particular perspective, that we have failed. We have failed in 
the sense that this bill, as I understand the determination of the members’ opposite, is going to pass this 
morning, and in that sense we have failed. But, Mr. Speaker, in another, and in the real sense, we have not 
failed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – It is the government opposite who has failed. The only reason that they were able to get it 
through, Mr. Speaker, the only reason that they were able to thwart the people’s expressed will and get this 
thing through was to ram it through the device of closure. And they used their government majority and they 
used it shamelessly in order to limit debate in this House. 
 
And we went through that debate at length so I won’t repeat those arguments, Mr. Speaker. But the kernel of 
it, the nub of the question is that they decided that they had heard enough. They had decided that debate 
should just sop. They just couldn’t take it any more, Mr. Speaker. They couldn’t take the sigh of day after 
day, opposition members getting up and driving right to the heart of the matter with arguments that 
represented the view of the vast majority of people in this province. And increasingly it became an 
embarrassment to them. Increasingly it became a political problem, a political problem of unmanageable and 
insurmountable proportions, and finally they decided that they only thing they could do was to cut off debate, 
muzzle us and stop this, and pass this Bill. And I say, shame. My colleagues say shame; I join them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(0845) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Now I want to review particularly the proceedings in the committee. I want to perhaps put 
into better perspective some of the assessments and analysis of the committee proceedings that have been 
expressed by the minister. 
 
I want to say though as I move to that, that as we went through that committee and as we went through the 
whole of the second reading debate on the Bill, we heard, Mr. Speaker, a very, very old idea being expressed, 
being expressed by the government. This notion of privatization is not some brand new idea that was just 
cooked up by the members opposite or by some of their advisers. This privatization view represents the same 
old right-wing, tired old rhetoric that we’ve been facing in this province since Tommy Douglas was first 
elected premier. 
 
Since he was first elected the premier, we have had a group of people in this province, who, for the most part, 
have been a minority, a small minority view, who have been opposed to the idea of the public ownership of 
assets. In particular, they’ve been opposed to the idea of Crown corporations. And so they fought against 
initiatives of the Douglas government in that direction, they fought against initiatives of the Lloyd and 
Blakeney governments, and they continue to this day to follow an agenda that say simply this, Mr. Speaker: 
sell off the Crown corporations, sell off the public assets, transfer public assets to private hands. 
 
And that is a notion, Mr. Speaker, as I spoke on at length during my second reading speech, that is a notion 
which is foreign to Saskatchewan. That is a motion which the majority of people in this province just don’t 
accept, and that’s why that minority, reactionary, old right-wing view of Crown corporations has never been 
accepted in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – The late premier Thatcher came to office in 1964 espousing just such a view – government 
had to get out of business, government had to withdraw, government had to let the private sector do it Mr. 
Speaker, when premier Thatcher came to power and remained in power for seven years, he took an accurate 



reading of the public opinion of this province. He took an accurate reading of the views of the citizens of this 
province. And during this term of office, Mr. Speaker, he never moved to implement that program. He never 
moved to privatize the Crown corporations. He was urged to do so. It was that same old slice of right-wing 
reactionary opinion in this province which were urging him to sell off SGI and to sell off some of the other 
Crown corporation. But Thatcher looked at the situation in this province and he listened to what the people 
were saying to him and he never followed that agenda. 
 
Now the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, who worked with premier Thatcher at that time, apparently 
didn’t share those views, apparently he continued to harbour in his mind the notion that Crown corporations 
are a bad thing, that the ownership of assets by the people of this province is a bad thing, and that that little 
tiny slice of right-wing reactionary view in this province was really the right view, and under proper 
conditions, at some time in the future, he, the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, would be able to 
implement that agenda. 
 
And here he is, suddenly elected to office after having jumped ship, suddenly elected to office, suddenly 
elevated to the position of Minister of Finance and minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and he gets this marvellous opportunity to implement his little agenda. And here we are, and 
here we are selling off the largest potash corporation in the world. 
 
Here we have a potash corporations which is owned by every man, woman, and child in this province – 
everybody here is an owners. The government doesn’t own it. It’s not a question of government ownership. 
They’re simply the stewards. They’re simply the people who are operating under a trust to manage those 
assets in the best interests of all of the people. The people didn’t elect this government to sell off their assets, 
particularly not to sell them off on the terms in this Bill, but they didn’t’ elect them to sell it off at all. And 
they’re doing to pay a price for it, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to pay a price. They’re going to pay a large 
price. In my opinion, the people of this province are going to exact that price from them when the time comes. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Tell me the number of my shares. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Now the member from Wilkie asks one of those dazzling questions that we’ve become 
accustomed to hearing from him, he asks for the number of his shares. And I will tell the member for Wilkie 
that Crown corporations do not issue shares. He’s asked the question four or five times now, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m going to try and answer him, answer it. Crown corporations do not issue shares, Mr. Member. Crown 
corporations don’t have to share issues. Everybody in this House knows, with perhaps the exception of the 
member from Wilkie, that Crown corporations are owned by all of the people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And I have heard the Deputy Premier express exactly that point of view, so if the member of 
Wilkie doesn’t agree with me, he should talk to the Deputy Premier. And I’ve heard the minister responsible 
here, the Minister of Finance, express that same view, so perhaps the member from Wilkie could talk to those 
people and find out how Crown corporations work. 
 
The fact of the matter is that whether he likes it or not, the member from Wilkie is a shareholder in the largest 
potash corporation in the world, as am I, and as is every man, woman, and child in this province. And it is 
their corporation that we’re . . . it is their corporation that we’re talking about selling. It’s not the 
government’s corporation. It’s not the corporation owned by the member from Wilkie or by the Minister of 
Finance; it is out corporation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: – Order, order. The debate across the floor seems to be interfering with the member for 
Fairview. I’d ask the member from moose jaw North and from Wilkie . . . order . . . and from Wilkie to allow 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview to make his points. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I was making the point, Mr. Speaker, how unfair the original 
closure motion of the government had been to limit debate on this very important question. 
 



I want to come back to that because nowhere did we realize the significance of that more clearly than when 
we got to the committee stage of this bill last Thursday and last Friday. Then it became perfectly clear to us 
on this side of the House what that motion was really all about. Oh I know it was about the way in which we 
were hammering away at them during second reading and those speeches that were having their political 
effect, their political impact, taking their political toll on the members opposite. 
 
But when we got to the committee stage, we really found out what that closure motion was all about because 
the committee stage was limited to two days, 18 hours of consideration. And we on this side of the House, as 
we are entitled to do and as we must do, began to ask the minister questions about the bill. We went through 
it, looked at all of the clauses of it and all of the concepts contained in it, and we asked the minister some hard 
questions. And the minister didn’t answer the minister answered virtually nothing. The minister stonewalled 
us hour after hour after hour. We’d ask him a question; he’d get up and make a political speech but not 
answer the question. We’d ask it again, and again he’d stand up, make a political speech and not answer. 
 
We must have received . . . I think this morning was the 40th time that the minister has tried to explain to us 
how it is that the shares owned by foreign investors will be voted. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that after 40 
explanations, we hear the words he’s saying but we still don’t understand and still don’t believe that that 
provision can possibly be implemented and applied at any general meeting of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan incorporated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: –ms, it’s going to take an army of accountants and Philadelphia lawyers in order to simply 
determine who’s got the right to vote how many shares at any meeting of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. It’s just simply not going to work. And the minister could get up here and go through that little 
song and dance another 40 times and he still wouldn’t be able to clarify how, at a particular meeting of the 
potash corporation, that provision is going to prove to be workable. 
 
I want to just review with you, Mr. Speaker, some of the questions that we asked, some of the subject areas 
that we got into where the minister just simply refused to give us answers to the questions or information that 
we were seeking. 
 
The first has to do with the cherished and hallowed notion of how this corporation is gong to diversify in the 
future, how it’s going to diversify. Because what we’re faced with, with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 20, is 
that one of its professed goals as I guess we read in the paper – we haven’t really heard it come across the 
floor of this House –but one of the ideas here is that this new corporation is going to diversify. 
 
So we asked the minister, what does this mean> How is it going to diversify? What are the plans? Well we 
haven’t really thought ahead that far. We haven’t really figured that out yet. We don’t really have any plans. 
But we’re going to make them; we’re going to make them. As soon as this Bill gets through the House and as 
soon as we get a little time, we’re going to sit down and we’re going to figure out how we’re going to 
diversify. 
 
Now that’s the answer that we got from the minister, paraphrased in my own words but I think I’m perfectly 
accurate, again and again and again. I mean it went on over hours, Mr. Speaker. Now if this had been a 
normal type of proceeding where we were not faced with a limit of tow days of committee, we would have 
stayed with that minister on that question until he got up and came clean; until he either told us what their 
diversification plans were, or admitted that they don’t have any diversification plans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – But with debate limited to 18 hours, all the minister had to do was to continue to get up in his 
place and stonewall us for 18 hours, and at the end of 18 hours, he doesn’t have to answer the questions. And 
that’s what happened. 
 
And so it was with evaluation. Now with evaluation I have to admit that the minister did give us one 
evaluation. In quotes, he said that his financial people, his brokers, the firm to handle the share issue, had 
evaluated the potash corporation at 800 to $900. 



 
Now that’s what he told us, but that’s all he told us, Mr. Speaker. He would not table the evaluation. He 
would not reveal to us anything more than the bottom line figure. He talked about methodology but he just 
spieled off a whole lot of words, and we were left in the position of having no evaluation in front of us, so that 
we were not in a position to evaluate the evaluation. 
 
If this had been a normal Bill, Mr. Speaker, we would have kept that minister in committee until he put that 
evaluation on the table, or at least until he was able to satisfy us that it was a competent evaluation that took 
into account all of the factors that ought to have been taken into account. He never did it – never did it. 
 
Didn’t have to. All he had to do was to stonewall us for 18 hours and that would be it; the subject disappears. 
Last we heard about evaluation. I’m going to come back to evaluation in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, but first 
of all I want to talk about some of the other frustrations that we had during committee. 
 
We spend a long time talking about the share offerings – when would shares be offered, what kind of shares, 
what kind of prices, how many shares. Now we did get from the minister one tiny bit of information here, Mr. 
Speaker. We learned from the minister that he was looking at, it was possible, there was a window this might 
be done in late September or early October. And he reiterated that a number of times. So we had to conclude 
that that is their plan. 
 
Also outside the House, he and others are quoted as saying that that is the plan. There will be a share issue 
late September, early October. Now we don’t know how many shares, we don’t know what portion of the 
total shares will be put on the market, we don’t know their price, and we couldn’t’ find these things out. 
Again the minister just told us as little as he possible could and then just stonewalled, put up the big stone 
wall and just answered the questions without answering the questions – answered the questions, Mr. Speaker, 
by making a political speech. 
 
Again, if this had been a normal proceeding where the opposition s free to do the role that it must do in a 
democracy, to do the role that the rules of this House permit, to fulfil the role that the people expect us to fill, 
we could have kept this minister here and we would have kept this minister here until we got the answers we 
wanted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(0900) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And again, he hid behind the gag order and simply didn’t provide us with the information, 
and finally the time expired on Friday night and we had to vote the Bill off. 
 
Another subject that we tried our hardest to explore was the kind of political advertising that we may expect 
after this bill is passed and in advance of the first share offerings. And we tried hard with the minister here – 
what kind of advertising; where’s it going to be, radio, television, newspapers; who’s going t handle it; how 
much is it going to cost; how big is it going to be; how big is this campaign going to be; how expensive for 
the taxpayers of this province is that campaign going to be? 
 
Not a sliver of information there, Mr. Speaker, not a sliver. And again – and I say this without fear of 
contradiction – in normal proceedings we would have kept this minister here until we got an answer to that 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And again the minister hid behind the gag order, knowing that all he had to do was to come 
to 11 o’clock Friday evening and the pressure to answer that question disappears as the House has to vote off 
the Bill, as the committee has to vote off the Bill – democracy in action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the very antithesis, the very opposite of democracy. It is stonewalling after having gagged 
the opposition and taking advantage of the terms of the special order to avoid the obligation of the minister to 
come to this House and to answer precisely those kinds of questions. 



 
And finally, the use of the proceeds. We are told that this potash corporation is going to return, on the 
minister’s figure, we’re going to realize some $800 million out of it. We know from information that he gave 
us that the first share offering will be between 200 and $400 million. Let’s assume it’s 400 million, and that 
indicates to me, Mr. Chairman, that they’re going to put half the potash corporation on the market next month, 
next month to sell off. 
 
So we asked him, what’s he going to do with the money? I think we got some kind of an answer, although I’m 
not certain at all what information it was that the minister was intending to convey. Here’s the answer, as I 
understood it: we’re not sure – we’re not sure – but we’re thinking about that though. That’s important and 
we’re thinking about it. What we’re thinking of doing, well, what we’re thinking about doing is we’re going 
to walk around and talk to the people and see what they want us to do with this money. We’re going to go 
around and consult with people, how do you want us to spend this money? 
 
Now that’s not what they’ve been saying to us. We know very well that this government has been running an 
unmanageable operation for the last seven years. From a fiscal and financial point of view, it’s been a 
disaster. It’s been a continuing deficit right from the beginning. And they’ve gotten to the point where they 
just have no way to balance the books. And so they moved to the alternative of selling off the assets in order 
to try and cover the deficit. Now there’s no doubt that that’s what they’re doing. And it’s deliberate and it also 
accomplishes the right-wing agenda of the member from Qu’Appelle and others who have wanted these 
Crown corporation to get out of the hands of the people for a long time – for a very long time. 
 
Now these are things, Mr. Speaker, that he must have known. And, I mean he must have said down and 
thought about what we’re going to do with all this money. But at the end of the day, after literally hours of 
questioning the minister on this point, the answer came down to simply this – we’re not sure, we’re not sure. 
Some time after this bill is passed and after we’ve sold the shares and we got the money together, then we’re 
going to sit around the table and we’re going to talk to a few people and we’re going to think about it and 
we’re going to do something with it, but we’re not sure what. 
 
We said, is it going to be applied to debts? Is it going to be applied to any part of this $4 billion deficit on the 
ordinary operating accounts of the government? Well we’re not sure, maybe. Could be, could do a little bit of 
that; we’re not sure. 
 
And what about the total government debt of some $14 billion. Is it going to be applied to that? The minister 
says, well, we’re not sure, maybe; maybe apply a little bit to that, but we’re going to go around and consult 
and we’re going to make up our mind later. 
 
There’s only one conclusion, Mr. Speaker. There’s only one conclusion. Just look at the timing; look at the 
nature of the political problem that the government has gotten itself into with this privatization thrust of theirs, 
and you come to the simple conclusion that the government is going to use the proceeds of the sale of the 
potash corporation as a political slush fund – a political slush fund, a slush fund that’s going to be there in 
order to give out little goodies at election time in order to try and buy enough votes to cling to power. A 
shame, Mr. Speaker, a damnable shame. 
 
I said during my second reading speech and I repeat now: the purpose for the sell-off of public assets ought 
not to be simply to cover the deficit – that was the point that I made during second reading – because that’s 
like selling off the home quarter in order to pay off a debt. You lose your income-producing asset. You just 
give away the ability that you have to earn money, and we’re talking about a corporation here that made $106 
million last year, and that is going to make a lot of money in a lot of years in the future. We all know that. But 
don’t do it just to cover the deficit. 
 
Well now we learn from the Minister of Finance that these proceeds aren’t even going to be used to cover the 
deficit. They’re going to be used for some unstated future purpose that the minister will decide only after he 
has finished consulting the people of Saskatchewan. And I dare say that that consultation is going to take 
place in the weeks prior to and during the election campaign. That’s when that consultation is going to take 
place, and these are going to be election goodies administered from an election slush fund. 
 



A related point, Mr. Speaker, a related point. Let’s just assume for the moment that the minister was not 
stonewalling. Let’s assume for the minute that the minister was not just trying to put in 18 hours, was not just 
trying to give us as little information as possible. Let’s assume that the minister actually stood in this House 
with the top officials of the potash corporation surrounding him, and for 18 hours was telling us how it really 
is, was telling us that there are no plans respecting the diversification and expansion or anything like that. 
Let’s assume that. 
 
Let’s assume that the minister has only had that one valuation, that one rather . . . almost point evaluation, at 
least deficient valuation by his stockbrokers, and that’s all he’s got. Let’s assume that’s so. And he hasn’t 
tried to get any other valuations or to evaluate it from any other perspective except what his financial advisers 
will tell him what the investors on the market will pay for them. 
 
And let’s assume that he was telling us the real story about the use of the proceeds, that he really hadn’t made 
up his mind. Let’s say that he didn’t know anything about the timing of the share offerings for sure and that 
he didn’t know what the price would be and he didn’t know all of those details that he was denying he knew. 
 
And let’s say that he really didn’t know what kind of an advertising campaign they weren’t going to have 
starting next week or the week later, or how much that’s likely to cost. Let’s assume he was telling us the real 
truth when he said there was no budget for that that had been prepared so he couldn’t share any figures with 
us. 
 
And let’s assume that he was also telling us the real truth when he told us that they hadn’t decided what kind 
of options they were going to give to senior officers of the company to purchase shares in this new 
corporation. Let’s assume all that is right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consider this – consider this. That share offering, if it’s going to be made in late September or 
early October, is going to be made six or seven weeks from now. As we stand here today and debate this Bill, 
that share offering will be six, seven, maybe eight weeks down the road. 
 
We know also that the prospectus has to be filed three weeks before the share offering is to go on the market. 
So the prospectus has to be filed and approved by the Securities Commission about three or four weeks from 
now. And yet the minister comes in the House and says that he doesn’t know, he doesn’t know the answers to 
these questions, that he hasn’t talked about these things and discussed them and considered recommendations 
and made decisions, and cabinet hasn’t looked at these questions, and the potash corporation hasn’t got any 
plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that must be the . . . what the minister is saying is that he’s just totally incompetent to carry 
forward this plan. That’s what he’s telling us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition were the premier of this province, and 
some minister came into this house a scant six or seven weeks before the share offering was to hit the market 
and told this House that he didn’t know what plans there would be for diversification, and he really only had 
this one little one-sided valuation of the selling price of the corporation, and he didn’t know what he was 
going to do with the proceeds, and they hadn’t decided what would be in the prospectus, and they hadn’t 
decided what kind of stock options would be available for officers, and he hadn’t decided when the shares 
would be put on sale or how much they’d be sold for, didn’t even know for certain what the commission 
would be for the stockbrokers – although I think clearly that’s going to be 5 per cent, but he said that wasn’t 
for sure either – and didn’t have any plan in effect to know what kind of advertising there’s be, starting next 
week or the week after – I’ll tell you, if the member from Riversdale had been premier of this province, that 
minister would be fired on the spot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – That minister wouldn’t have lasted through consideration of the Committee of the Whole. 
He’d have been replaced by a minister right there who would be prepared to stand up and give those answers. 
 



IF that is the case, if we were told the exact situation on those answers, Mr. Speaker, then this bill most 
certainly should not go forward – should not go forward. There are decisions, which the government has to 
make, which any government has to make before it can decide to do such a monumental thing, such an 
important action as the privatization of the potash corporation. And if they really are as horribly unprepared 
for this privatization as the Minister of Finance told us they are, then they’ve got no business in here trying to 
get the permission of this House to sell that corporation. 
 
These are questions that ought to have been assessed and answered, and the answers ought to have been 
assessed and answered, and the answers ought to have been given to this House on the consideration of that 
Bill, or that Bill ought not to have even been presented to this House. They had no business bringing that Bill 
before this House unless and until he had the answer to fundamental kinds of questions like that. 
 
And that point, Mr. Speaker, makes it even more incredible that debate would have been closed, that closure 
would have been invoked. I mean here is a government that doesn’t have the faintest idea what it’s going to 
do tomorrow on this Bill, that they want to rush tomorrow. We don’t get what we’re going to do when we get 
there, but please get us there. No, we’re not going to let you get there. Well if you’re not going to let us get 
there, we’re going to force our way there, we’re going to gag your ability to debate, and we’re going to shut 
off debate, and we’re going to muzzle the opposition. We’re going to get the Bill through even though we 
don’t know what we’re going to do after the Bill is passed. That is ridiculous; that is shameful; that should 
never, ever happen in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(0915) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Now I want to go to the subject of valuation. I want to go to the subject of valuation, Mr. 
Speaker, with this caveat. We on this side of the House, reflecting, as I say, the majority view of the people of 
this province, are totally opposed to the privatization of this corporation. There can be no doubt of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if it is to be privatized, if we’re actually going to go ahead with this thing, then surely we 
have to consider very carefully what we’re going to sell it for, what’s going to be the selling price. 
 
The minister uses a simplistic idea of a person who owns a $15,000 care and somebody comes along and 
offers him 10, and the owner says no, I want 15, so he can’t sell the car. And that’s supposed to, I think, 
convince us that his idea of the valuation, that sort of clinches it. Well it doesn’t clinch it, Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t clinch it. 
 
You’re going to sell an asset, you’re going to decide you’re going to sell an asset, you don’t just go out and 
ask somebody, what do you think this is worth? And they say, well I think it’s worth $10,000. So you say, 
well okay, I’ll sell it for $10,000. I mean nobody conducts their business like that. Nobody in commerce 
conducts their business like that. We don’t conduct our own personal lives like that. 
 
Let me give a better example. Let me give what I think is a more relevant example. Let’s say that I am the 
owner of a section of farm land. And let’s say that that land, considering a whole multitude of factors, 
including the long-range picture in agriculture, is worth about $400 an acre, and it would cost me about $400 
an acre to buy similar land in a similar district. And that’s what it’s worth to me. And according to my 
calculations made while the minister was speaking, Mr. Speaker, that $400 an acre for a section of land would 
be a $256,000 section of land. 
 
Now let’s say that I decide today that I may just sell that land. I think I will sell that land. I want to get out of 
farming. I want to be a member of the legislature and come here and sit here month after month. I’m going to 
sell the farm. I want $400 an acre. But I go to some expert, some real estate sales person, and I say to the real 
estate sales person, what is this land worth? And he says, well I don’t know how much it’s worth but on 
today’s market you sell that land, you’re going to sell it at $150 an acre. That’s what he says to me. And 
according to my calculations that $96,000. 
 
Now do I simply go ahead and sell my land for $96,000? And is that all there is to it? Or do I say this may not 
be the right to sell. Looking back in the ‘70s at the market then and the market in the early ‘80s, and looking 



at the long-run projection for agriculture, this may not be the right to sell, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have to sell my 
land today for $150 an acre; I can hold on. I can wait until that price bounces back. I can wait until the 
international agriculture situation clears up and other conditions clear up, and I can sell that land at a decent 
price. I don’t have to sell today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t have to sell today; they don’t have to sell next month; they don’t have to sell in early 
October. They can hold on. And if their expert evaluators, who are stockbrokers, if they’re correct when they 
value our potash corporation at $800 million, I’ll eat my hat. I’ll eat my hat. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what the stockbrokers are telling them is simply how much that corporation could be sold 
for on the market today – not last decade, not next year, not the next decade, not on the long run – but how 
much today. And that’s a disastrous price; $800 million is a disastrous price by whatever yardstick you want 
to use. 
 
And we tried them all out on the minister. We asked him what would be the replacement cost of that mine, of 
all that property. He said that the replacement cost of that . . . well he really didn’t say. We suggested that at 
$300 per tonne to construct it, the replacement cost of that mine would be 2.4 billion, not 800 million, but 2.4 
billion. Well he argued with that figure and he gave us replacement costs that were lower. But on his costs, 
the cost of replacement would be about 1.6 billion, which happens to be twice as much as his valuation. 
 
All that says, Mr. Speaker, assuming for the moment that the stockbrokers are the people who should be 
evaluating a potash mine, and assuming for the moment that they know what they’re talking about, all that 
says is that we ought not to be selling it now. 
 
Now I want to speak directly through you, Mr. Speaker, to members opposite. I mean I don’t have any idea 
why you people agreed with this plan to privatize the potash corporations. I’ve no idea what goes on in your 
mind that would lead you to the conclusion that that was a good idea. But let’s just leave that aside. 
 
You’re in the position of having agreed to this thing and let the Minister of Finance go ahead and sell it off. 
But what about the price? I mean, surely you’re not just going to sit there and let him give it away for $800 
million. That would be a stupid and foolish thing to do. And surely you won’t let him do it. Stop him – stop 
him! Tell him the plain, simple facts of life. Tell him . . . I don’t want to sell my farm at $150 an acre; I’ll 
hold on to till the price is better. 
 
That’s all I’m asking you to do – hang on until the price is better. Any expert in the potash industry in the 
world will tell you that there’s a lull in the market at this pint in 1989, that we were on an upswing, but 
because of the particular agriculture conditions this spring in the United States, we’re on a little bit of a lull. 
 
But they’ll tell you at the same time that on the whole the market is rising and the market will continue to rise 
and there’ll be a greater equilibrium between demand and supply going right through 1994 to 1995. Well tell 
him not to do it now; tell him to wait. Hang on, hang on until ’91 or ’92 or’94 until the market’s better. There 
is absolutely no reason why there should be a fire sale on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – There is no reason of any sort. And if you were to do that on top of this Bill, that would be 
such an outrage to the people of this province, such a terrible outrage. Bad enough that you sell off their assets 
without their permission, bad enough that you sell off their assets in the face of their stated and determined 
opposition, but to sell it off at a fire sale price is inexcusable and irresponsible, and you must not do it. 
 
Now here I am speaking directly to members opposite through you, Mr. Speaker, to tell you to at least – at 
least – apply your common sense to that extend. Don’t let them give it away. And that in effect is what 
they’re doing. Not only is the replacement value so much out of line with the estimate they have from their 
stockbrokers, but any other method that you want to use to evaluate this corporation leads you to the same 
conclusion. 
 
If you were to consider price as a multiple of a price/earnings ratio, for example, which is a fair yardstick, 
which is a fair yardstick, then this is definitely the wrong time to sell. We’re here in this . . . (inaudible 



interjection) . . . I’d ask for the attention of the member from Regina Wascana because I will be able to finish 
my remarks more quickly if he gets off my case. 
 
I was talking about the price/earnings ratio. If we sell now at the price that is quoted to you by your 
stockbrokers then we’ll be selling at a price/earnings ratio of about 8 or 9:1. And that is just out of line with 
the long-term situation in the mining industry, in the potash industry, in the fertilizer industry, or in the stock-
market generally. I mean, a price/earnings ratio of 8 or 9:1 is foolish; I mean it just doesn’t go. 
 
It may be the situation right today. I mean if you look at the potash side of IMC (International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) or something like that, you may say, well that’s what their ratio is so it 
can’t be all that bad. But it is bad, and it’s very bad and it is not representative. 
 
And if you hang on, if you just wait till better times, then the day will come soon when the that price/earnings 
ratio will be back in sync, back to where it should be – 12 or 13 or 14”1. And in that kind of a market you’re 
going to . . . you won’t double the price you’re going to get, but you’ll almost double it. You won’t have to 
sell it for 800 million; you’ll be able to sell it for 1.4 billion, something like that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- When? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – Well the member asks when. I don’t know when. It maybe next year; it may be the year after; 
it may be 10 years from now. But be patient; there is absolutely no case to be made for conducting a fire sale 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan – no case at all. Don’t do it; wait for better times. 
 
If you’re to evaluate this corporation on the basis of discounted cash flow, then your numbers are altogether 
wrong. Now I don’t know how to do that precisely, so I can’t tell you what the right answer is. But the result, 
Mr. Speaker, is a valuation far higher than $800 million. With profits last year of $106 million and a good 
picture going in to the next decade, a good picture in potash, then on the basis of a discounted cash flow, you 
come out with a much higher value than $800 million. That $800 million that the minister brought into this 
House is really so artificial, because al lit says is at this moment on the stock market, at this moment, 
investors buying shares will only be prepared to pay this price. Therefore that is the price that you must take. 
 
Well boloney! That is not the price that we must take. We must wait for a better day when we can get a better 
price, and you have a responsibility to do that. You don’t own, they don’t own this corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
The people own this corporation. They are the trustees, they are the stewards, and they have a public 
obligation to realize from that sale the very best price that they can. 
 
And so I make the point and I make it will all the sincerity I can, that this is obviously, from the minister’s 
own numbers, the wrong time to do it. Besides when a firm of stockbrokers comes to you and they say, well 
we think this is worth 800 or 900 million, remember that they’re thinking about selling it. They want to be 
able to sell it, they want to sell it quickly, they want to earn their commissions, and they want to close the file. 
Remember that. They’re not going to come in here with some big figure that’s going to make the shares tough 
to sell. They’re going to come in as low as they think they can and still get your approval to going ahead with 
the deal. 
 
Now the member from Regina South who is very experienced in these matters, will know exactly what I’m 
talking about. Not that stockbrokers aren’t doing their job or not doing it properly, but they will do it from 
their own particular perspective. And that’s why it’s important to get a number of perspectives on questions 
like value, and to be careful; treat these assets as though they were you own, as though they were your own. 
 
Don’t sell it just accumulate a little slush fund; don’t sell it just in pursuit of an ideology. If you’ve got to sell 
this thing, if you’re hidebound determined to sell it, then at least sell it wisely and with prudence. 
 
I made a point, Mr. Speaker, and I made it in this House on committee about the foreign ownership 
provisions. And I want to repeat those remarks, Mr. Speaker, because they’re so important. And this is our 
last chance to do something about the foreign ownership provisions in that Bill. And I offer the opinion that 
these provisions are unacceptable and unwise and we ought not to do the thing that we’re doing. 
 



I don’t know why that 45 per cent provision is in the Bill. I don’t know why the provision is in the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, but I do know this, once the provisions is in the bill, once this House passes that provision, then we 
in this House forgo our ability to ever change that figure in a downward direction. 
 
Now let me just briefly say what I mean by that. Under the free trade agreement the American investors have 
an unlimited opportunity to invest in Canada, subject only to some very, very large transaction where they’re 
buying out entire businesses, they have free access to come up here and buy up our businesses and invest in 
our companies. 
 
(0930) 
 
We have one situation provided for in article 16 of the free trade agreement where Crown corporations are 
being sold off. And the Mulroney government put it in because it’s pursuing an agenda similar to yours where 
you’re selling off public assets. The one opportunity to limit American investment, to limit the opportunity of 
Americans to invest, you’ve got one chance, and that’s when you privatize – and that’s what we’re doing here 
this morning. And what you’re saying, what you’re saying when you’re going to pass this Bill allowing 45 per 
cent foreign ownership, is that for ever – for ever – American investors are going to be entitled to purchase 
shares in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan up to the limit of 45 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the handcuffing . . . what I mean by the term “powerlessness” is that never in the future 
can you change that number downwards. Our grandchildren 40 years from now, sitting in this legislature, 
deciding that American investment in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is just wrong, would never be 
able to bring that number down and say, 45 is wrong, it should be 25. They won’t be able to do it. They can’t 
change it from 45 to 10 per cent. They can’t change it from 45 to zero. They can’t even change it from 45 to 
40. 
 
I mean, you’re locking this in. and you’re locking it in in such a way that it can’t be changed. And I wonder 
why you’re doing that. I mean, I’m not going to even suggest the answer, but it escapes understanding, that’s 
what I mean by it. It escapes understanding that you would do such a thing. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Bob, you don’t believe what you just said. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – The member says I don’t believe what I said. And I want to say to the member that, first of 
all, I am not wrong, I am not wrong. And the minister says I’m not wrong. The Minister of Finance during 
committee admitted that my interpretation, which I have just given to this House, is the correct interpretation . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Now the minister says that I’m a lawyer and I should know better. But I want to say to the minister that while 
I am a lawyer, I’m afraid that I don’t share his view, because the provisions are perfectly clear and we have 
obtained the opinion of law firms who have larger knowledge of trade matter than I have. And I have put it to 
the minister directly that what I have said is the case, and he has accepted that it is the case, that it is the 
correct interpretation. And what he says, Mr. Speaker, what the minister says is that we think this is 
appropriate. And we don’t think it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, we think it is entirely inappropriate to set up a 
situation that is inflexible like that, where you just can’t ever change it. And so I don’t know why we would. 
 
Is it the case that we just can’t raise that much money on the Canadian stock exchanges or the Canadian 
money markets to handle this kind of a share offering? I don’t think so. I don’t think so. According to the 
government’s Bill on SaskEnergy tabled in this House, which ash been referred to the Barber Commission, 
the shares in that company were to be limited to Canada – not to Saskatchewan, but to Canada. So Canadians 
could wind up running our energy utility, whether they’re from Toronto or Montreal or Vancouver or Halifax, 
wherever they’re from, they could do that. But no foreign ownership was provided for in the Bill. And you’re 
entitled to do that; the government could set it up in such a way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am far from convinced, and the minister did not try very hard to persuade us, that these 
kind of numbers that he’s looking at can’t be raised in Canada. 
 
And what I said to the minister and what I repeat again is that surely in this Bill at least we can adopt the 
approach of going at it, limiting share holdings only to Canadians. And if at the end of the day, a year from 



now or so, the government realized that you can’t raise enough money in Canada to be able to handle that 
thin, then come back here and amend the Bill and we’ll allow some foreign investment – we’ll allow some 
foreign investment. But to just offer it up front, just to throw it away and say you are entitled to 45 per cent, is 
in my opinion the wrong thing to do, and we should not do it. 
 
One of the reasons why we shouldn’t do it has to do with what happens to the profits, what happens to the 
dividends. And that’s serious business, Mr. Speaker, because as thins are organized right now, all of the 
profits, all of the dividends from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan go to the people of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Hear, hear, that’s a good idea. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And that’s a good idea, as my colleague says, and that’s important. That’s important because 
just last year, for example, there was $106 million that were earned and that ought to go into the general 
revenue of this province for the benefit of all of us. 
 
Now if we go ahead with this plan, and if foreigners buy up to their limit of 45 per cent, as they will in the 
long run, then 45 per cent of all of the profits and dividends of the potash corporation’s activities in this 
province in the future will be heading out of Canada. It’ll be the same old story – out of Canada, down into 
the centres, the investment centres of the world, where it will be sued for the benefit of the people in those 
centre. And we in Saskatchewan will have lost that really valuable notion of exploiting our own resources 
ourselves, developing them ourselves for our own benefit, hanging on to the title, as it were, hanging on to 
ownership in the knowledge that ownership will bring profits and bring revenues, not just last year, not just 
this year, but for decades and centuries and millenia, and that’s important and we ought to respect it. 
 
Now I’ve made that argument. I think every member on this side of the House has made that argument, and 
members opposite have not accepted it, but it is so important that it has to be said and said again. 
 
Now the minister has . . . I’ve been giving the minister for explaining over and over and over again how those 
foreign shares are going to be voted. He has tried to explain to use I think 40 times – I wasn’t counting in the 
early stages, but I’ve been gibing him as he gets to 36, 37, 38 explanations, and this morning was the 40th time 
that the minister has tried to explain to the House how the foreign shares are going to be voted. 
 
And I must say, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, I still don’t know how it will work at an annual meeting 
when shares are being voted, how you’re going to count those shares. How many lawyers and how many 
accountants is it going to take to just sit down at an annual general meeting of this corporation to try and 
figure out what weight to give to the shares owned by the Chinese corporation, or what weight to give to the 
shares owned by the corporation from India, or what weight to give to the shares owned by the wealthy 
investor from South Korea? Because that share may not have the same value on one vote as it has on another, 
because it depends on how many votes are cast. And if somebody abstains from voting on one vote, then the 
calculations have to be done all over again. 
 
I mean, it just can’t work. You just sit down and figure out some numbers and take yourself through an annual 
general meeting and consider the things that have to be considered at an annual general meeting, and ask 
yourself the simple questions, what happens if there is an abstention? What happens if someone who owns 5 
per cent of the corporation abstains? Well you’ve got to sit down and recalculate the whole voting regime and 
come up with an entirely different weighting system for those foreign shares. Well its’ really just not going to 
work. And as I said, it’s going to take an army of accountants and an army of lawyers present at a meeting of 
the potash corporation in order to get through an agenda that has any controversy in it at all. 
 
But on the other side of that same question is the very, very grave notion that we are abandoning the 
ownership of this corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to explain this in just a few words. I way a few words 
because I’ve gone through this before in greater detail, but I think it important on third reading and it was 
raised during committee, why we’re denuding ourself of control of this Crown corporation. 
 
Consider our position, now, Mr. Speaker. We’re living in the province that is the worlds’ great supplier of 
potash, great to the pint of practically dominating the international industry. And we’re talking here about a 
Crown corporation that is by far the giant potash producer in the province of Saskatchewan, gigantic to the 
point where it dominates the Saskatchewan market. So you have the potash corporation dominating the 



Saskatchewan market which dominates the world market. And that’s a significant notion, Mr. Speaker. We 
have in our hands, under the stewardship of this government, a corporation which is in a position to dominate 
the potash industry in this world. 
 
Now I realize that that’s a generalization, and like many generalizations it sounds like an overstatement. But 
if you look at it carefully, this is how it really shakes down, Mr. Speaker. We do dominate the industry and 
the minister proved that. The minister and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan proved that a little more 
than a year ago in the context of the anti-dumping action in the United States. And you recall, Mr. Speaker, 
that the minister, with a stroke of a pen, with a press release, raised the world price of potash, practically 
doubled it, just like that. And nobody argued, nobody fought. The whole industry in Saskatchewan got in line 
behind the potash corporation and the rest of the world responded. Some of them didn’t respond fully and 
took advantage of market opportunities to undercut the price, but by and large the whole world responded to 
that initiative. 
 
Now that’s an incredibly important notion that we in little old Regina, Saskatchewan, the stewards of the 
world’ largest potash corporation, are able to dominate the industry to that extent. Now that’s a good feeling, 
isn’t it? Why would we just abandon that idea? Why would we just say, we’re not going to do that any more? 
We want to get out. That’s too much responsibility for that. Well the minister says I should be nice, and I will. 
I will. But I make that point, and I don’t abandon it for a moment. 
 
Let me draw an analogy. Again, the analogy is extreme but it’s very much to the point – and it is Saudi Arabia 
in the oil market. Saudi Arabia has such a large percentage of the world’s recoverable reserves of petroleum 
that Saudi Arabia can control the oil market of the world. If they want the price to go up, they can bring the 
price up; if they want the price to go down they know how to force the price down. And there’s all kinds of 
other things they can do on a policy level as a result of being in the dominant position in which they’re in. 
 
Now if you go to Saudi Arabia – and I’ve never been to Saudi Arabia – but if you look at Saudi Arabia you 
find that the oil in Saudi Arabia is owned by the state. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia owns all the oil . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member asks if that’s what I want. And that’s an impertinent remarks and 
quite beside the point. The point here is that in Saudi Arabia that is the situation. The King of Saudi Arabia is 
not about to privatize his oil fields. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia finds the oil, digs the well, pulls the oil out 
of the ground, transports it to the refineries, all of these things done by the state – not privatized, not sold off 
to Exxon or to one of the other giants, but done by the state and taken all the way through to refinery and 
actually does most of the refining, all of the interests of retaining its grip or its domination of the oil industry, 
of the international oil industry. 
 
(0945) 
 
Now here we are with the potash corporation doing a lot of the same things, not in quite the dominant position 
of the King of Saudi Arabia, but we’re mining almost half the potash, we’re pulling it out of the mines, we’re 
putting it in our refineries, we’re refining it, and we’re exporting it to the markets of the world. Quite an 
analogous position. And we’re doing it with all of that clout that follows from being in such a dominant 
position, and we’re forsaking it, Mr. Speaker. We’re just throwing it away. We’re just tossing it to the winds. 
We’re denuding ourself of control in that kind of a situation. That is shameful, that is shameful. And we’ve 
been making that argument in this House for a long time. 
 
It was heartening to see our foremost political columnist picking up on that point on the weekend in his 
political column, and think that was just right on. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Do you know who this foremost political columnist is? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – It was Dale Eisler of the Leader-Post and I read it in the Star-Phoenix. I thought he was right 
on, and my colleagues says it’s too late now. And I’m afraid it is too late now. But members opposite should 
know that in passing this Bill what they are doing is just tossing away the opportunity to play a dominant role 
in the potash markets of the world. 
 



Now the minister shakes her head, and I would just remind the minister, through you, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have proved we can do it we have proven we can do it. We have proven we can do it, and we can continue to 
do it, and it is irresponsible to throw away that opportunity. 
 
I will favour privatization of the potash industry in Saskatchewan at the precise time as that King of Saudi 
Arabia abandons his efforts to dominate the international oil market. That’s when I’ll do it. 
 
Now the minister spoke in committee about the plan that he has, this policy that he has to ensure that 
Saskatchewan remains a majority owners. And what I understood him to say is about this. He’ going to count 
the shares that are purchased by employees, and then he’s going to add to the shares that are picked up by the 
general public, and then the government is going to hold enough shares on top of that, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that something a little more than 50 per cent of the shares are held in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that was interesting to hear because I mean if you accept it on its face, it clears up the idea of just how 
much control Saskatchewan’s going to retain. 
 
Then he told us a couple of things. First of all, he refused to put it into the Bill; he refused to write it in. He 
was prepared to write in how much of the corporation foreign people could get – up to 45 per cent – and he 
was prepared to write in the companion notion that Canadians must own at 55 per cent. But he wasn’t 
prepared to write into the Bill that Saskatchewan people, that Saskatchewan interests would own at leas 50 
per cent. Why? Well I guess that’s not administerable. You can administer the 45 per cent and the 55 per cent, 
but you can’t administer the idea that we should retain majority control in this province. 
 
The second thing he told us, which was more dismaying, was to announce and to say that they were going to 
write into the prospectus, Mr. Speaker, the commitment that this government will not vote its shares, will not 
vote its shares. That just abandons any idea of Saskatchewan control over the affairs of PCS, absolutely 
abandons it. They’re gong to sit back, appoint their three directors, sit back – if indeed they going to appoint 
any directors – sit back and just watch the corporation operate. And apparently only in the most extreme 
conditions, which the minister will not define, are they going to retain the right to vote their shares. 
 
You see the situation, Mr. Speaker. I mean, we’re finished. The idea that Saskatchewan will control the affairs 
of this giant potash corporation is just a dream, it’s gone. As soon as we pass this bill and start making these 
transactions under the Bill, its’ gone, it’s lost. 
 
Why would we do such a thing? I mean, if we’ve got to have a share structure here and if, as the government 
says, we have to convert this into a private company and sell shares in it, and the government’s going to 
remain as a shareholder, then why in the world doesn’t the government behave like a shareholder? Why 
doesn’t the government accept and exercise its responsibilities as a shareholder to ensure that the business of 
this new corporation will be conducted in the interests of the people of this province? Why not? 
 
So those two points, Mr. Speaker – a refusal to write guarantees into the Bill about the level of Saskatchewan 
ownership, and the policy of not voting the shares held by the government—just abandons any notion of 
control of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. So not only are we abandoning any idea of dominating 
the market, but we abandon totally the idea that Saskatchewan people will have the governing voice in the 
role that’s left for the potash corporation after it’s been privatized. 
 
Now this abdication of leadership just can’t be emphasized enough, Mr. Speaker, because it seems to met hat 
of all the things that we do in this province, potash is unique. We produce oil, but we produce it in a world 
where many, many people produce more oil, and we are just bit players in that market. we produce a lot of 
agricultural products, but again we produce it in a world of a large number of producing countries, and we are 
just one of the actors. We’re strong actors, we play a strong, but we’re not dominant. We produce a little pulp 
and paper and lumber, but again we’re not dominant actors. 
 
In this one area, in this one sector of our economy, are we dominant, and it presents us with such an 
opportunity to manage the resource in the best interests of all of the people in this province. and it is an 
opportunity that ought not to be tossing away. Now the minister says you don’t have to own it in order to 
control it, and he gives us some examples like natural gas and forestry. But the minister’s missing the point, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s missing the point. 



 
Under the constitution of this country, and the minister knows this as well as anybody does, the power of 
provincial governments to control a situation, to make a situation come out of the way it wants to, is very, 
very limited – very limited. The amendments to the constitution in 1981 accorded to the provincial 
governments a power to tax, but it’s power that is also that is also shared with the federal government. but the 
federal government has not and will never give up its power with respect to international trade, and our potash 
is all internationally trade. 
 
And so our jurisdiction, as a province to manage this resource is severely limited. Our ability as a legislature, 
as a government, to manage this resource is very, very limited, and not until the day that we decided, that this 
legislature decided to enter the industry as a large owners, did we start to put together the pieces that were 
necessary in order to have the clout to really make a n impact on this industry, put together the pieces that 
would allow the government to adopt policies that would be in the interests of all of the people in this 
province. 
 
I mean it is important that we adopt policies that will ensure that this resource is exploited to the maximum 
extent possible and that we maximize the return for the people of this province. And as a bare government, as 
a bare regulator, our power to do so is severely limited, and here we are throwing that opportunity away – 
throwing away that lever and reducing our role to that of the regulator and the taxer, but losing our ability 
influence production and to influence price and to do other things that we can do through the agency of public 
ownership. and that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, and we’re giving it away. We’re just letting it drift away 
from our grasp. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that in no circumstance is this government going to be able to replace the 
revenue from the potash corporation by royalties and by taxation. That is just not going to happen. 
 
And members will recall my second reading speech, I traced the background for royalty and taxation revenue 
received by the province over the years, Mr. Speaker, and I think I proved quite conclusively that the level of 
royalty and taxation is not every going to make up for the profits received from the potash corporation in the 
long run. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That’s a bunch of garbage. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And that is not a bunch of garbage, Mr. Speaker, and you know it. You’ve been the minister 
– I’m having a direct conversation with him and I should address my remarks to you, Mr. Speaker – but the 
minister, the member from Weyburn has had responsibilities in a previous capacity by which he knows that 
what Is say is true. Royalty and taxation is not going to replace the profits made directly from the potash 
industry by the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s the fact of the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – I want to come back to this really incompetent show that we’ve been going through and that 
we’re going to go through in the next few weeks. I told you, Mr. Speaker, about this performance by the 
minister responsible where he said in this House in effect that right now we want to pass this Bill. We really 
don’t have any firm future plans. We haven’t thought through any of the things that you guys are talking 
about. We haven’t decided what diversification. should take place. 
 
We haven’t decided how many shares to put out. We haven’t decided what price they should be put out at. 
We haven’t decided what options to give to the officers. We haven’t decided what to do with the proceeds. 
And all these things have to be decided, Mr. Speaker, in very, very short order. 
 
And one of the things that this government, that this minister has said hasn’t been decided is what kind of a 
propaganda campaign this province is going to be subjected to over the next several weeks. I mean we’ve had 
debate in this legislature cut off. The government has just said, we’ve heard enough; we can’t take this any 
more; we’re not going to listen to it any more; we’re getting out of here. So they’ve closed off debate. 
 



But they’re going to reopen the debate, Mr. Speaker, next week or the week after on the television sets in this 
province and in the newspapers and radios in this province. They’re going to open that debate with an ad 
campaign. I just think there is no question about that. 
 
Now we tried and tried in vain to get from this minister any information at all about what kinds of plans he 
had for that advertising campaign. We asked them all the questions you’d expect us to ask. Particularly we 
wanted to know from him what’s his budget; how much money is he going to spend on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we fear is that in the next few weeks leading up tot he share issue in late September or 
early October the people of this province are going to subjected to an expensive, slick saturation advertising 
campaign which will try and persuade them that the privatization of the potash corporation has been a good 
thing, and that they will profit from it and that they should jump on the gravy train and buy into this thing. 
And the cost of that whole program will be borne by the taxpayers of this province. 
 
That’s information that we ought to have been able to get in this House. That is an item on which the minister 
has a responsibility to come clean. That is an item the minister ought to have been able to table – here is my 
budget for next week and the week after and the month after – so that we would know what we’re getting 
into. 
 
Now we’re going to end debate in this House in about two minutes and that will be it as far as this legislature 
is concerned. But the government using the taxpayers’ own money is going to carry on that debate and try and 
sell their side of the story in the weeks and the months to come. And that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker, it is totally 
wrong. It is bad. It is a shame, as this whole operation has been a shame. 
 
This privatization plan, as I said in my opening remarks, proceeds in the face of overwhelming opposition 
from the people of this province. We know it from our polling, we know it from independent polling, the 
government opposite knows it from their polling. And there is no question about that. They’re here trying to 
save their face, trying to salvage something from the Speech from the Throne, from that famous privatization 
thrust that was to be the Alamo of the NDP, or the Waterloo of the NDP. Some Alamo, Mr. Minister, some 
Alamo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(1000) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: – And now they’re shutting down. They’ve abandoned SGI; they’ve pretty much abandoned 
SaskEnergy. And now they’re shutting down the debate on the potash corporation, and they’re going to use 
taxpayers’ dollars to take this fight out into the streets in the newspapers and the television stations in this 
province to try and somehow sell the people, to propagandize them into accepting this absurd Bill. 
 
It’s to the government’s shame ad not to its credit that it is selling out this resource company; that it is selling 
out our position in the world market; that it is selling out our opportunity to participate fully in that industry 
and receive from that industry all of the profits and all of the benefits that will flow not only to use and to our 
family, but to our children and grandchildren, and countless generations t come over the next hundreds of 
years, Mr. Speaker, literally thousands of years. 
 
This government throws away the opportunity and says these assets should not be owned by the people. These 
assets should be owned by a few people who are wealthy enough to purchase the shares in that corporation. 
 
Well we will never support, we will never support that kind of idea, Mr. Speaker. We will not support it in the 
case of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, or the SGI, nor in the case of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. We will oppose this Bill right to the end. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rant from 10:03 a.m. to 10:21 a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 



 
Yeas – 35 

 
Devine 
Muller 
McLeod 
Andrew 
Berntson 
Lane 
Taylor 
Smith 
Swan 
Muirhead 
Maxwell 
Schmidt 
Hodgins 
Gerich 
Hepworth 
Hardy 
Klein 
Meiklejohn 
Martin 
Toth 
Sauder 
Johnson 
McLaren 
Hopfner 
Petersen 
Swenson 
Martens 
Baker 
Wolfe 
Gleim 
Neudorf 
Gardner 
Kopelchuk 
Saxinger 
Britton 
 

Nays – 25 
 
Romanow 
Prebble 
Rolfes 
Shillington 
Lingenfelter 
Tchorzewski 
Koskie 
Thompson 
Brockelbank 
Mitchell 
Upshall 
Simard 
Kowalsky 
Atkinson 
Anguish 
Goulet 
Hagel 



Pringle 
Lyons 
Calvert 
Lautermilch 
Trew 
Smart 
Van Mulligen 
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Reappointment of Pauline Duncan to Public and Private Rights Board 
 

Mr. Andrew: – Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this motion for an address to Her Honour The 
Lieutenant Governor. What this motion deals with is the appointment of one Pauline Duncan, a Regina 
lawyer, to be reappointed as a member of the Public and Private Rights Board pursuant to section 6 of The 
Expropriation Procedure Act, being chapter E-16 of the revised statutes of Saskatchewan, 1978. 
 
Now this particular individual was appointed to her first term some five years ago in this Assembly, and as 
the Act requires, the matter must be approved by this Assembly. If you go back five years, this individual, 
when first appointed, received the unanimous approval of this House. The individual has been the first woman 
to serve in this capacity. I would ask all members of the Assembly to reappoint one Pauline Duncan to this 
position for a further five-year term. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Deputy Premier: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor recommending that 
Pauline Anne Duncan of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan be reappointed member of the 
Public and Private Rights Board pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure Act, being 
chapter E-16 of the revised statutes of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

Mr. Chairman: – Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me is Mr. Art Wakabayaski, deputy minister of Finance; 
Mr. Keith Laxdal, associate deputy minister, treasury board division; Mr. Jim Marshall, director of tax and 
economic policy. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the interim supply is one-twelfth, a straight one-twelfth, and first motion is: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account certain expenses to 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum of $336,074,000 be granted out 
of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, is it precisely one-twelfth for all the departments or 
are there any exceptions to that? 
 
(1030) 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes, it is except for legislation which was approved at the last interim supply and then 
subsequently goes through the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – So all the others then are exactly one-twelfth. Is that what the minister’s saying? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a series of questions with respect to the lottery tax, and then 
we’ll follow up starting off with some questions on the ticket sales themselves, and then proceed later on to 
stuff with respect to casinos. I’m going to talk first of all about some numbers and ask you some questions on 
some numbers, then I will proceed to give you some testimony, Mr. Minister, from people across the 
province. 
 
I must state at the outset that the response that we’ve been getting from people across the province since this 
tax has been implemented, has been quite consistent and the message is quite consistent, and the message 
goes – succinctly I suppose I could put it in a couple of sentences – that is that people feel that they are being 
taxed, taxed, and over-taxed. They even mention things on letters and petitions and notes that they hand to us, 
that they see you doing things like selling off the potash corporation, which seems to work for those that are 
involved in large corporation and those that live outside the province and those that are the best off in the 
province, and in turn continuing to tax the people of Saskatchewan more and more, and now with this 
particular one, with the lottery tax. And I notice now that the numbers are in verify this, this perception of the 
people of Saskatchewan, verified and substantiated because they substantiating their words with their actions 
as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, we now know that the numbers for the lottery sales projected for July were 10.6 million. and 
they actually have come in at close to 7.9 million. that’s a loss of – little bit of subtraction there – if you do 
the subtraction, it’s a loss of $2.7 million of loss in sales. And that’s a lost that’s directly, I would say, 90 to 
95 per cent of it is a result of the implementation of the tax. If you take the 2.7 million and multiply it over a 
period of 10 months, that’s more than be equivalent to what you expected to gain in taxes. So it tells me that 
the revenues from lottery sales will be greater than what you will have collected in taxes. 
 
There may be some argument, although I think it would be very weak, that the lottery overhead will go down. 
I don’t think it will, very substantially, if anything. You still have to keep the same number of kiosks going. 
You still have to have the same number of people on staff. Certainly you didn’t project that. As a matter of 
fact what it’s doing is it’s costing business people an increase in cost. 
 
So under these circumstances, under what’s happen, we’re going to see a continued problem here, Mr. 
Minister. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you would confirm those numbers, and if you will, comment on how you . 
. . just how much more evidence you need before you’re going to take very seriously the words of the people 
of Saskatchewan, which I think are even quite well reflected in statements made by the Minister of Culture, 
and where the Minister of Culture indicates in the Star-Phoenix of Thursday, quoted. He says: “We have to be 
willing to listen.” 
 
I think that’s been one of the good signs out of this whole thing. At least somebody’s indicating should they 
be willing to listen, and minister’s also indicated in one place. He says: 
 

My opinion is yup (and that sounds all right too), if we go through the month of September and the 
sales as far down as they appear to be right now, I think our concerns would have to be translated into 
some kind of heavy discussion. 

 
I would suggest, Mr. Minister, the time for heavy discussions is now; I would suggest it’s probably overdue. 
Right as of now we’ve got a loss of 2.7 million for one month. I’m not talking about the months previous to 
that yet. Wait till September. That’ll be two more months. That’ll already be $6 million loss, and you 
expected to collect only 10 million. You’ll never collect the 10 million in taxes. Will you confirm those 
numbers, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well no, I can’t confirm the numbers. As I have indicated on numerous occasions, we will 
get the numbers by about the third week of August. 



 
One thing the hon. member should be are of, we’re advised that in the other western provinces, okay, there 
has also been a reduction in lottery sales, and of course that cannot be attributable to the tax . . . Should also 
be aware that prior to the implementation of the tax, there was reduction in sales. 
 
Now to what one attributes, and let’s just look at the other provinces, if I may, that reduction –state of the 
economy – could be that the games themselves some of them at least, are dropping off in popularity. And I 
think and I have debated in this Assembly before that these games do have a cycle to them, of public interest, 
and that new games are constantly being looked at. 
 
So I can’t confirm the specific numbers. I will freely acknowledge that the numbers are down; I’m not 
debating that. We expected that to happen in that there is a change, but we also think it’s far too soon to tell as 
to whether that would be permanent. 
 
And secondly, given the rather surprising information and indications from the others – and again we don’t 
have the precise numbers that they’re down in the other jurisdiction – I think it can be fairly stated that 
certainly the tax would have some implications. But I think we also have to find out with the other provinces 
as to why they’re down in the other provinces. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order, I’d like to bring it to the members attention that the member’s talking about 
revenue and not the appropriation of funds, and the question should be related to expenditures. It’s not really 
related to the Appropriation Bill. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Chairman, It’s a point of order, I guess. Mr. Chairman, we have always, that I have 
been involved in this, discussed not just expenditures but also the money which is available to make those 
expenditures, which is revenue. We have long discussed revenue as well as expenditures, and I think both are 
relevant, Mr. Chairman. This is not something new that we’re doing this morning. We’ve always done this. 
And I suggest, Mr. Chairman, that these comments are in order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – I find the point of order not well taken. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Mr. Chairman, I will reword my questions in this fashion. There is a budgetary item in the 
Department of Health that states that there’s $26.7 million of moneys to be put to the expenditures for this 
year – ‘88-89. I want to spend some time talking about this money, about the source of this money. I want to 
make sure that that money actually gets into that fund. I have concern that there may not be the money to get 
into that, and I would like to put the question to the minister. 
 
We had talked about this in a previous . . . we started the debate in a previous interim supply. The minister 
was forthright enough to admit that this was an issue at this time that needs discussing, and if I word it in that 
fashion, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that you would allow me to proceed. 
 
Mr. Minister, in reply to your comments regarding that the sales are down in other jurisdictions, I would not 
concur with your opinion that they’re down to the extent that they are in Saskatchewan. My information is 
that they are down in Manitoba at 94 per cent of projected cost; that in Alberta they’re at 96 per cent of 
projected cost; in Saskatchewan they’re at 85 of projected cost. 
 
I would also indicate that I’ve been advised by people that are involved with the collection of these sales that 
Saskatchewan is usually right up there with the rest of them as to revenues, if not leading, revenues are at 
least up there with the rest of them, so that there is certainly a significant difference there that needs to be look 
at. 
 
You also indicated, Mr. Minister, that you needed more time for some evidence. And I’ve been getting a great 
deal of evidence, Mr. Minister, which I think I would like to share with you at this time. I’ve got loads of 
them over last week and I’d say even mail, Mr. Speaker, that I haven’t opened this week. But it all seems to 
have very much of a pattern, and I’m going to give you some information from it, some of the comments. 
And this is comments from kiosk operators, and these comments come from places like Cando and Weyburn, 



Regina, Macklin, Whitewood, Radville, Saskatoon, Oxbow, Glentworth. I could go on and on and mention all 
of the names here. I don’t want to do it for purposes of time constraint, but I do want to mention that this is 
sort of a voluntary survey that people have given their comments because of their concern and the advice that 
hey want to yield to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Here’s one comment. Should the tax be dropped? And the person says yes, 75 per cent of the customers 
express concerns about this tax – I’m unable to read some of this – and they sure hope they take the taxes off, 
he says. Here’s another comment. It says, yes, the tax should be dropped. Saskatchewan is the only province 
with the tax and we’re steadily hearing negative comments. People think the government is steadily trying to 
get more money. Another comment: the whole concept is ridiculous. If there was a general house-cleaning 
from the ground up, we’d all be rich. These are small-business people. 
 
Here’s a comment from a small town in north-western Saskatchewan and he has a suggestion along with the 
comment: it would have been much simpler if the tax had been applied at 7 per cent, at least the same as the 
E&H tax (education and health) and then the vendor would not have to do two different tax calculation. It 
brings in another point altogether which I’ll be dealing with later. 
 
Then here’s another kiosk operator. He said most customers had quit buying on account of the tax. Another 
comment: everyone feels this tax is unjustified; the consumer continually pays for the mismanagement of 
government. 
 
What are the customers saying? Oh here’s another one about the kiosk operator; the tax is choking a valuable 
resource of revenue for all concerned. He says there must be a better way. Person who wrote a letter and 
attached it says, I would like to see the 10 per cent tax dropped as the public is very upset as it is a high tax 
plus a nuisance to collect. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Minister, that kind of information is coming in very, very consistently – it’s not random, it’s consistent. I 
believe it needs to be listened to. 
 
I want to also give you a sampling of information that people, that business people give with respect to the 
tax, but perhaps before I do that I should just ask you one more thing, Mr. Minister. It’s my understanding 
that the market share in Saskatchewan is down to 17.1 per cent from a projected 19.4 per cent. It used to be 
19.4 per cent. That was the Saskatchewan market share of the lotteries in western Canada. Now it’s down to 
17.1 per cent, which is a very, very significant drop. 
 
And I couple that with the remarks that I made earlier about Manitoba sales being at 94 percent projection, 
Alberta at 96, on either side; Saskatchewan, 85. Will you not concede that that is a significant difference? 
That is the evidence, the market share coupled with the projected share . . . the shares that were received with 
respect to projected shares. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well again, I haven’t denied that they’re down. I said that in my opening remarks so . . . 
But I find it interesting that the lottery revenues are down in our neighbouring provinces, and I think we have 
to take a look at that. I think that figure surprises most. So certainly I have indicated that they’re down. And I 
know the hon. member will table the copies of the letters from which he’s referring. But having said that, I 
have freely acknowledged that they’re down. I do say it’s too soon to tell. 
 
Thirdly, I have also indicted that if the revenues are down in all of the provinces, then perhaps and in all 
likelihood, there are other reasons. And the lottery officials have been, as I indicated to you very early, sir, 
that they are looking at other games. Whether it be a daily lottery, whatever it may be, those games are being 
looked at. 
 
I mean, I’m not sitting here debating you as to whether or not they’re down. I freely acknowledge that they’re 
down. What I am saying is that in fairness, you have to bring into your debate that they are down in the other 
provinces. Not as much, I acknowledge that, but I think that there is perhaps a trend or a problem with games. 
And that’s simply a trend or a problem with games. And that’s simply what I have indicated to you. And 
again, I know you’ll table copies of the letters you referred to. 



 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Well I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, if the other provinces will be delighted with your looking 
at what their problems are. I think they would more than likely, and the people of Saskatchewan would be 
quite delighted if we were able to just handle our own problems here right now, that basic 10 per cent, and 
there’s a pretty easy solution to it. 
 
I have additional testimonies which I want to share with you, Mr. Minister, and this is how its’ affecting the 
business people themselves. The first group that I gave you was getting the business people’s advice, but 
some of these comments I want you to hear because it’s been a bit of a difficulty for several of the people who 
are right in business. 
 
One person says: 
 

Seeing as we only 1 per cent for collecting the tax, we can’t afford to collect this much longer as we 
need at least 10 per cent to cover wage cost involved. 

 
So they’re collecting it primarily because they feel it’s an obligation, and of course because it’s illegal not to 
collect, but certainly not because there is any kind of remuneration there for them. 
 
Here’s one from a small town close to Saskatoon who said, I sent all my tickets in and gave up as a vendor 
when it was initiated, and the reason was because there was just too much inconvenience and too much 
hassle. Another person comments: our cashiers took a great deal of hassle from customers when this tax was 
introduced. 
 
Another small vendor in a small town in Saskatchewan: are your customers expressing concerns about the 
lottery tax? She says, they don’t like it, it’s a nuisance. 
 
A person who wrote a letter, and she says: 
 

I’ve had people throw – and I mean throw – their 20 cents at me. Some have refused to buy the ticket 
when they realized they’ve had to pay a tax on it. And some have even told me . . . 

 
And she’s got something in quotations, which is very unparliamentary. I think I won’t quote that there. But if 
you want me to write you a note, Mr. Minister, I can pass it over. 
 
Now a comment from a person in Yorkton. 
 

Collecting the sales tax is a terrible hindrance to me and the public. The tax must be figured out 
manually. Mistakes are often made. I’ve had many shortages. It takes me a couple of hours more work 
than previously to deal with this tax. It is of course affecting my family life. I run the kiosk on my 
own, as do most kiosk operators. 
 
We have a tough time handling two extra hours of work per day, as we must do it single-handedly. 

 
Mr. Minister, the comments of this type are made by people who are small-business people. Let me just bring 
a contrast in here. The small-business person in Saskatchewan, who we know that employ the bulk of the 
people of Saskatchewan, has the biggest potential for growth. They feel through taxation measure s of the 
government like this, that it’s hurting their business, and at the same time they see money going to some of 
the big outfits. And they see, as we saw today, the potash corporation going away, which was going out of 
Saskatchewan – we see it slipping from their fingers. We see money going to Cargill. And this has just been 
sort of one extra thing that’s hurt them. 
 
I’ve asked you this question before, Mr. Minister, and that is, is there some way that you can – I hate to ask it 
in this way, but – is there some way that you can help these people out? You see, some of them, I guess if it 
wasn’t for the hassle and if they really felt that this money was being collected with the positive response of 
the people, they probably wouldn’t mind it so much. But I guess about the best advice that they can do is 
repeat the same . . . I can give you is, they can repeat the same claim, and that is that you’ve got to drop the 
tax. 



 
Here’s one customer comments who put a petition on her desk and she told me in a note that this was taken in 
two days of customers, she said, that came to our store: 
 

Our total population for our town, small town in Saskatchewan, is 800. I would say about three-
quarters of our adult population signed the petition. 

 
So what’s happening is if people across the province are doing this completely voluntarily, on their own, if 
the kiosk operator takes the initiative and does something like put a petition, people will sign it. And I will be 
presenting petitions to the House this week. You’ll have a chance to look at them, Mr. Minister, all in the 
hope that slowly you can use this as evidence to go back and undo what the people of Saskatchewan feel is an 
unjustified taxation. 
 
One more comment from a kiosk operator, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Lane has no business going on the radio and telling the people that sales tax hasn’t hurt our 
business, that it was already down when they put it on. We always have a slow month from the end of 
June and July simply because they are so many other things going on and people are away. My sales 
in July were down over half. We need more staff with the extra work, and my income for July was not 
sufficient to pay staff and my mortgage payment. 
 
Let Mr. lane come and interview people at the lottery kiosk, and the customers, and he will find out 
that he’s 100 per cent wrong. Or maybe he should spend a day selling tickets, and I can guarantee you 
this would be his last. 
 
I am sending petitions in and will continue to keep them up. 

 
And I don’t think the people are writing these remarks, Mr. Minister, as a personal affront. I think they’re 
genuinely giving an opinion that this tax ought to go, that you’ve got to be prepared to be more flexible and 
be flexible sooner. 
 
Now I’ve given you the testimony, Mr. Minister, and I’ve got a question that I want to ask with respect to the 
money that you’re going to put in. It is in the budget, $26.7 million. I think you’re expecting $10 million this 
year, this was your projection. According to what money’s coming in right now, you’d be at approximately 
half of that is what you’ll get in taxation. 
 
What are you going to do, Mr. Minister, with respect to the money that’s been dedicated to health, or you say 
has been dedicated to health, when the money is not going to be available from these lottery sales because 
we’re behind already? There’s no way, even if they came back tomorrow, right up to the projected amount, 
you'’ be behind. What are you going to do? Are you going to help . . . tell those people in Saskatoon or . . . 
where are the other places they’re going to use the hospital money? Some in Regina, some in Weyburn, I 
think Are you going to tell them, well sorry, people didn’t buy tickets so we’re going to stop construction? 
What are you going to do to meet that budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well we’ve indicated that we believe that more of the gambling moneys in this province 
should go to health care. Our position’s quite clear on that. You have disagreed with that. And certainly if 
sales don’t come up, we’re going to have to sit down with the hospital people and say, look we’ll have to 
reassess the priorities within that allocation of the expenditures, and talk to them as to which may or may not 
proceed. So I think that’s not surprising. 
 
The hospital people are very, very interested in the proposals to have more of the gambling moneys go to 
health care. Certainly we’ll have to sit down and talk to them. If the moneys don’t’ come in, then we’ll have 
to deal with it. I have said, and I’ve now said on numerous occasions that they’re down in the other provinces, 
and I note even one of the letters, that sales are way off in July, so perhaps more than usual. 
 
But take a look at some other things that are off. Fair attendance was down this year. Is that the lotteries tax? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Saskatoon was up. 



 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Saskatoon was up; Regina was down. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes, well that’s Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The hon. members says oh that’s Regina. But the economy may have some affect. I think 
they have to take a look at that. All that I have said is that they are down. They’re down in all the provinces. 
The extent of any drop, it’s far too soon to tell. 
 
Now if for example, they’re down 6 per cent in Manitoba and 15 in Regina, so we’re off 9 per cent. You 
know, I don’t think that will continue, but if it does, you’ve really got, in effect, a 9 per cent reduction, not the 
75 per cent that you were talking about earlier and not the higher figures. 
 
Again, I’m simply saying to you that it is far too soon to tell. And secondly, I’m not here to say that it’s not 
with some difficulties for some of the operators. Some of the operators that collect sales tax for other items, 
it’s not as big a problem. Others have to make some adjustment. Certainly there was ample notice. Some 
adjusted to it; some did not. 
 
(1100) 
 
But we have the same commission structure, I believe, same as the sales tax, or E&H tax, and that seems to 
have worked fairly for most of the small-business community. Maybe that of itself is not adequate. I’d be 
inclined, certainly, to take a look alter on in the year if the commission structure is ultimately the only 
problem. I would be more than pleased to take a look at that. But again, that’s too soon to tell. If it’s not going 
to correct the problem, then one can argue against making a change. 
 
So again, I’m repeating the arguments that I’ve given to you earlier. It’s simply too soon to tell. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 


