


















































April 3, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 3, 1989 
 

469 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I finish my 
introductory remarks and get into the main text of the things I 
want to say, I would just like to recap briefly some of the items 
that we discussed prior to the supper break. 
 
We discussed the question of taxation, how the government has 
broken promise after promise after promise on taxation; how 
they have, instead of refining or reforming the taxation system 
so that it’s fair to all involved, they have in fact developed a 
system in this province that is unfair to working and poor 
people of this province — so unfair, Mr. Speaker, that I would 
like to remind you that in 1986, in this province of 
Saskatchewan, there were over 200 people who earned more 
than $100,000 and who paid not a cent in income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t seem fair to me, and it doesn’t seem 
fair to the people of this province, to have to endure a tax 
regime and a tax system where more than 200 Saskatchewan 
taxpayers earning more than $100,000 don’t pay a cent in 
income tax — not a dime, not a nickel. But that’s the kind of 
taxation regime and that’s the kind of economic system that the 
government and the members opposite support, a system which 
is unfair because it taxes the poor, it taxes the working people 
of the province — not for the benefit of the working people, not 
for the benefit of the poor, but for the benefit of the rich, the 
benefit of the powerful, the benefit of their own corporate elite 
and business friends. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it replicates, it mirrors a situation which has 
developed in this country because of governments of 
Progressive Conservative and Liberal stripe which have 
developed an economic system and a taxation system which 
leaves most of the country, most of the wealth of the country, in 
the hands of a small elite. 
 
And I want to refer you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something I 
would refer all members of the Assembly to, is to a new 
publication called Social Inequality in Canada: Patterns, 
Problems and Policies. It was produced this year and is based 
on the latest research from Statistics Canada, and it deals with 
things like questions of occupational mobility, of getting 
around, jobs in the labour market, the pros and cons of income 
redistribution, and the nature of poverty in Canada, as well as 
the whole question of the distribution of wealth and riches. And 
on page 94 of this publication, Mr. Speaker, we have a table 
based on the estimated wealth per Canadian adult. And again I 
remind you that these statistics come not from our party, but 
from Statistics Canada, and the Royal Bank of Canada and the 

Bank of Canada itself. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, in referring to this particular 
table, that what you hear here applies, and applies even more so 
in Saskatchewan when it comes to distribution of wealth and 
riches in this society. According to this book and according to 
this table, Mr. Speaker, the top 1 per cent of Canadians, that’s 
165,000 Canadians, had total net worth — that is the net worth, 
that is assets over liabilities — of $146.361 billion. That’s 
165,000 people have $146.361 billion of wealth, or as a share of 
the national wealth of this country, the top 1 per cent of 
Canadians control 18.8 per cent of the total wealth, for an 
average of $887,040 per individual. The top 1 per cent controls 
almost 19 per cent of the wealth of this country. 
 
The next 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 661,000 individuals, have a 
total net worth of $187.623 billion, or 24.1 per cent of the share 
of the wealth of this country. The next 5 per cent, that is 
826,000 individuals, have a net worth of 110.549 billion or 14.2 
per cent of the wealth of this country. And when you add those 
numbers together — that’s the top 10 per cent of the individuals 
in Canada ranked according to wealth — you have 1.653 
million individuals controlling $444.534 billion or 57.1 per cent 
of the total wealth of this province. That is, the top 10 per cent 
of Canadians control over 50 per cent of the wealth. The top 10 
per cent of Canadians control 57.1 per cent of the wealth. 
 
The next top 10 per cent, to bring you to a total of 3.306 million 
Canadians, control $570.654 billion worth of assets. That’s their 
net worth. Mr. Speaker, that’s their net worth. The top 20 per 
cent of Canadians controlled 73.3 per cent of the wealth. That’s 
called social inequality, Mr. Speaker. That’s called a 
distribution of wealth in a system which is totally topsy-turvy, 
where you have the top 10 per cent of Canadians controlling 
over 50 per cent of the wealth; the top 20 per cent controlling 
almost 75 or three-quarters. Three-quarters of all wealth in 
Canada are controlled by the top 20 per cent. 
 
And when you look at the bottom of the pile, the reverse is true. 
The reverse is true, Mr. Speaker. The bottom 40 per cent of 
Canadians, the bottom 40 per cent of Canadians, do they control 
40 per cent of the wealth? No. Do they control 20 per cent of 
the wealth? No, they don’t. Would they control 10 per cent of 
the wealth? No, again. The bottom 40 per cent of Canadians 
control 0.8, 0.8 per cent of the wealth. The bottom 40 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker, control 0.8 per cent of the wealth, whereas the top 
. . . The average wealth controlled by the top 10 per cent of 
Canadians averages out to $268,925 per adult. The bottom 40 
per cent — and I’m sure that that’s where the majority, the great 
majority of the members opposite, the members on this side of 
the House fit in, to the bottom 40 per cent — control $30,377. 
Pardon me, $1,002. One thousand and two dollars, which is the 
assets, the real assets, because that’s what we are talking about 
in wealth, assets clear of all debt. So we have the top 10 per 
cent, the top 10 per cent controlling $268,000 each, clear of all 
debt; the bottom 40 per cent having $1,002. 
 
People wonder why there’s poverty in this country. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

470 
 

People wonder why that we have poor people in this country. 
People wonder why, what is it and why do we have the kind of 
situation that we find in Saskatchewan where we have food 
banks. We’re here in the bread-basket of Canada. We have the 
second highest rate of poverty. The answer, very simple, is 
because the top 10 per cent of the population controls over 50 
per cent of the wealth; the top 20 per cent controls over 70 per 
cent of the wealth. Very simple. Not too hard to understand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because the bottom 40 per cent of the population, I would 
submit to you, are not lazy. The bottom 40 per cent of the 
population work. The bottom 40 per cent of the population 
represent the heart and soul of this country that creates real 
wealth in this country, because those are the people who do the 
work. Those are the people who turn the wheels of industry. 
Those are the people who make the tractors that the farmers in 
Saskatchewan drag across the land to produce crops. It’s those 
people, that 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker, who, I submit to you, 
aren’t lazy, don’t fit into the kind of categories that the member 
from Melville would like to put poor people into. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this budget, and the 
acid test of this budget is: does the taxation regime put into 
place by this budget go to decrease that social inequality that we 
find in this country and in this province, or does it go to 
increase the social inequality? 
 
And I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that based on the 
types of taxes that were introduced in this budget, that it goes to 
further erode the real wealth enjoyed by the great majority of 
people in Saskatchewan and goes to enhance the wealth owned 
by that top 10 per cent which controls over 50 per cent of the 
wealth. 
 
Because if you look, Mr. Speaker, at who that top 10 per cent 
are, you will see names like Thomson. Now Mr. Thomson, and 
I’ve . . . Mr. Thomson, for example, Mr. Thomson owns 
Thomson newspapers. And Mr. Thomson represents that . . . 
finds himself in that top 10 per cent of all Canadians who 
control 57 per cent of the wealth. That same Mr. Thomson, Mr. 
Speaker, also owns the Hudson’s Bay Company, and he also 
owns Simpsons, and he also owns Zellers, and he also owns 
Scottish & York insurance, McCallum Transport, Fields Store, 
International Thomson, Woodbridge, and 119 other businesses 
in this country — and 119 other businesses in this country, 
right? 
 
Do you think Mr. Thomson and his businesses were affected by 
the tax regime introduced by this budget? Do you think Mr. 
Thomson’s businesses were affected? Not a chance, Mr. 
Speaker, not a chance. Not a chance. 
 
Or how about the Weston family, who find themselves, I 
believe it’s the third richest, the third richest family in Britain? I 
noticed in today’s newspaper that after the Queen and after the 
Duke of Westminster, we find Mr. Weston and his family the 
third richest family in Britain. They also happen to be 
Canadians. They own B.C. Packers, and Loblaws, Weston 
Bakeries, Bowes, Nielsen, Supervalu, Superstore, OK 
Economy, Nabob, Eddy Paper, Donlands Dairy, and 166 . . . 
hundred other firms. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, was Mr. Weston’s family, was it affected by 
the taxes introduced in this budget? Was it? Not a bit, Mr. 
Speaker, not one bit, not one bit. Your family and my family 
and the families of the people in the constituency I represent, 
Mr. Speaker, they were affected and they were affected 
adversely. And it didn’t matter whether they were white-collar 
workers or blue-collar workers or small-business people, they 
all got dinged by this budget. But did the Ken Thomsons, did 
the Conrad Blacks, did the Paul Desmarais, did those people 
who own the businesses, the big businesses that operate in this 
province — did they get dinged? Fat chance! Not on your life 
they didn’t get dinged. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South 
can laugh all he wants. Right? He thinks it’s very funny that 
ordinary people in this province — working people, white 
collar people, blue collar people and small business get . . . pay 
through the nose in his tax regime where his big-business buddy 
gets off. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina and the 
people of this province will speak as to the performance of this 
government and what this budget does. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
clear, it is clear that when you have a system of taxation in 
Saskatchewan that lets more than 200 people earn more than 
$100,000 a year get off scot-free without paying one cent in 
income tax, you know that the people of this province won’t 
stand for that and that they will take the kind of retribution that 
is coming to this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We said it’s a cruel budget. It’s cruel when it comes to taxation 
because it doesn’t deal with social inequality in this province in 
any way. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also talked about cheap land. We also talked 
about the cheap land policy, the cheap land policy of this 
government, and how because year after year after year we have 
seen 1,000 farm families a year, three farm families a day, get 
driven off the land. The Premier finally came clean in Moose 
Jaw the other week and said it’s part of his economic strategy of 
cheap land and cheap labour. And we made it clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that those of us on this side of the House say to the 
Premier and say to the Progressive Conservative Party, we will 
not stand by and allow Saskatchewan farm land to go and be 
sold and put into bondage at the hands of foreign investors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We have said no, Mr. Speaker, we have said no 
to cheap land, to that policy of cheap land. We say no to that 
policy. We say yes to Saskatchewan farm families; we say yes 
to Saskatchewan farm land held by Saskatchewan farm 
families. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may, to those farmers who are 
facing foreclosure at the hands of the Minister of Agriculture, 
the Premier of the province, I want to say to them tonight: hold 
on, hold on and keep the faith, and keep the faith with 
Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, for those farm families, 
as there is for the rest of Saskatchewan, there is a new day 
coming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — There is a new horizon, Mr. Speaker, there 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

471 
 

is a new sun coming over that horizon, and that new day will 
allow those farm families who want to farm in Saskatchewan to 
have their farm land and to be able to work with others in their 
communities to rebuild along with our new-day government, to 
work together, to bring forth a rebuilt rural Saskatchewan. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re opposed to the cheap land 
policy that’s supported by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along the other side of the equation of cheap land, 
the Premier has as his economic strategy cheap labour. Now 
cheap labour, Mr. Speaker, says to the working people of this 
province, we want you to work for less wages. We want you to 
work for less than you’re making now in both real terms and in 
absolute terms. We are going to institute an economic policy — 
this according to the Premier of the province — that will drive 
down your living standards. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the working people of Saskatchewan 
believe that the Premier is on that track. They have suffered for 
eight long years, for eight long years under that kind of 
economic policy. They have seen the changes to The Trade 
Union Act, they have seen the changes proposed under the 
employee benefits Act and changes to The Labour Standards 
Act. They have seen employers take the government-imposed 
wage and price guide-lines . . . I shouldn’t say wage and price 
guide-lines because that’s incorrect. They have seen the wage 
guide-lines imposed by this government directly and indirectly 
on the public service and on the private sector. They have seen 
and felt and known the kind of cruelty that is contained in that 
kind of economic policy. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, they’re saying, we don’t agree 
with a policy of cheap labour because we, the working people 
of this province, will not be made slaves for a PC government. 
We will not be exploited by the employers who have bought 
and paid for each and every member of the PC Party sitting in 
this legislature opposite. They are saying, Mr. Speaker, they are 
saying that we’re not going to put up with it. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re not only saying it, they’re taking action against it, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, if I may, the 
headline in today’s Leader-Post. It says, “Economic exiles 
fleeing province.” 
 
Fleeing, Mr. Speaker, “Economic exiles fleeing province.” I’ll 
just read this for a minute. Date-line, Saskatoon: 
 

When salesman Jim Walden received an offer to transfer 
to Calgary from Saskatoon late last year, he and his wife 
Valerie jumped at the chance. 
 
There just weren’t the opportunities any more for a senior 
salesman like myself in Saskatoon, said Walden, who 
works for an electrical manufacturing firm. 
 

And it keeps going on. 
 

If the farmer is not making a buck, he’s not going to invest. 
Then I can’t sell electrical products to an engineering firm 
or contractor because they haven’t got any work. And if the 
potash industry 

can’t sell fertilizer, then I can’t sell products to the potash 
mines. I couldn’t see any change in the next year or year 
and a half. 
 

Then, Mr. Speaker, it goes on. 
 

The Waldens are not alone — almost 33,000 
Saskatchewan residents opted to leave last year in pursuit 
of better job, schooling and retirement opportunities in 
other provinces, according to preliminary figures compiled 
by the statistics bureau in . . . 
 

Saskatchewan? No, not Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, compiled 
by “. . . British Columbia.” 
 
The British Columbia Bureau of Statistics notes, and notes with 
some interest the number of economic exiles fleeing from this 
province. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, it’s very plain, whether it’s the 
construction worker going to Ontario to look for a construction 
job or whether it’s the young person going to look . . . going to 
British Columbia where they know there’s going to be a NDP 
government very soon . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . to take advantage of the natural resources 
and the natural competitive position of British Columbia. Those 
young people are going there by the droves, because they figure 
they can get a better deal in British Columbia than they can 
with their own government right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Whether it is a single person, Mr. Speaker, who is out . . . the 
single family head that can’t take any more of the kind of 
economic injustice imposed on him by this government, or 
whether it is the salesman, the senior salesman or the 
small-business person, like the small-business person who runs 
the trucking company, who lives in the constituency of Regina 
Rosemont, and who told me on Saturday night that he’s going 
to put his trucking company up to sale because the gas tax 
makes it impossible to operate competitively in this province; 
that he’s going to leave this province. This, Mr. Speaker, from 
somebody who in 1982 — 1982 — voted for the Conservative 
government; in 1986 voted for the Conservative government; 
and in 1989 is leaving the province because of the Conservative 
government. 
 
And the member from Regina South laughs. Driving 
small-business people from this province is a joke for that 
member, Mr. Speaker. Driving 33,000 people from the province 
last year is a joke from that person. No wonder he couldn’t even 
get, Mr. Speaker, no wonder he couldn’t even get good Gordon 
Dirks, his front boy, elected as mayor of Regina. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know. The 
working people of this province know what the record, the real 
record of that government is. And they’re voting already, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re voting with their feet. I want to say to 
those working people, Mr. Speaker, hold on; just hold on and 
keep the faith because there’s a new day coming for working 
people in this province. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

472 
 

Because . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, when the New Democratic Party 
forms the next government in this province under the direction 
of the member from Riversdale, the leader of our party, the 
person who will put Saskatchewan workers back to work at 
decent jobs, at decent salary levels, and in a decent working 
situation; when that new day arises, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to need people to rebuild urban Saskatchewan the same way 
that the farm families will come back to our province to help 
our government rebuild rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So I say to those people, Mr. Speaker, keep the 
faith. Hold on; keep the faith; because there’s a new day 
coming, and there’s a new day coming, and it’s going to be a lot 
quicker than most people imagine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the budget address presented by the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance, was 
astounding. It was astounding in its omission of jobs. We have a 
situation in the province, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, where 
we have 43,000 people unemployed; where we have an 
unemployment rate of 17 per cent among young people; where 
for the first time since statistics were kept in this country, 
Saskatchewan is above average, above the national average, for 
unemployment. 
 
It is absolutely mind-boggling, to say the least, to see the 
Minister of Finance introduce no new job creation programs, to 
introduce no long-term job development strategies, to introduce 
nothing in that budget which will provide a future for the young 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely astounding, 
it’s absolutely astounding. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, today we found out why. The member 
from Melville, the minister of unemployment, of human 
exploitation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Home Hardware salesman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — My friend, the member from Regina Victoria, 
refers to him as the Home Hardware salesman. Well it’s hard 
living in a home where he has control over so much of our 
province’s natural resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member from Melville outlined the government’s 
economic strategy for job creation, Mr. Speaker, and it’s one 
that I am sure Noah, when Noah built the ark, would 
understand. Maybe that’s the only job it would create. Maybe 
that’s what that member is saying. He’s saying, Mr. Speaker, 
you got to pray for rain if you want jobs. That’s it, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what the member from Melville said is the government’s 
economic strategy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody in the province 
believes that a minister of the Crown could actually really 
believe that. But when he was questioned again, he repeated it 
again. How are we going to create jobs in this 

province? That was the question that the member from Moose 
Jaw North asked. What was the response from the member from 
Melville? Hope it rains. Hope it rains. We’ll have jobs when it 
rains. 
 
Well, the problem is, Mr. Speaker, the big drip strategy from 
the big dripper — if I may refer to the member in such a way — 
won’t work. Everybody in this province knows that it won’t 
work. It may create arks. 
 
The problem is for most working people, however, Mr. 
Speaker, all punning aside, is that it has been raining on the 
people of this province long enough. It has been raining the 
kind of economic cruelty that we have seen in this budget, has 
been inundating the people of Saskatchewan for long enough. 
They want to pull up the umbrellas, and they’re going to, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re going to put up the umbrellas, and they’ll be 
sending the member from Melville and all those other members 
away on their own little political ark, leaving them high and dry 
on a Mount Ararat somewhere far away. Because, Mr. Speaker, 
we know, as do the people of Saskatchewan, as does everybody 
that watches the proceedings of this Assembly, that that is a 
dead government over on the other side. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was an aspect of the budget outlined 
by my friend and colleague, the member from Regina Centre, 
and he referred to the budget as a government of corruption, as 
a budget of corruption. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go 
into the point-by-point way in which the Minister of Finance 
has once again cooked the books, once again gotten into a 
political operation so as to make things appear as they are not 
and make things appear not as they are — in other words to 
engage in a kind of political flimflammery with the books of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Crown Corporations Committee, not two weeks ago, 
outlined by the deputy minister of Finance that the government 
knows from a day-to-day basis, on a month-to-month basis, 
what the actual situation of the finances of the provinces are, 
and was able to, through his testimony, tell the people of the 
province that what we on this side of the House have been 
saying was true all along; that the government plays with the 
books of the province for its own political purposes. And such 
is the case with this budget. It is a political document; it is a 
corrupt document because it’s a not true document. It has 
nothing to do with reality — the reality of the finances of the 
province, or the reality of where we stand as a government, or 
where you stand as your government. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about another kind of 
corruption. I want to talk about the kind of corruption that, in 
the minds of most people of this province, leaves them with the 
impression that this is probably the most corrupt government in 
the history of this province. And I say corrupt, Mr. Speaker, in 
the sense as it’s outlined in the dictionary: able to take bribes, 
able to be bought and sold, that kind of corruption. And the 
other side of that kind of corruption, Mr. Speaker, is venality, 
that is, the ability to be obtained for money, and be prepared to 
take bribes. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

473 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not talking here strictly of patronage. All 
governments, Mr. Speaker, engage in patronage. I don’t think 
anybody would argue that. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, that 
patronage is for very good reasons. On the one hand you reward 
loyal workers — workers who have been loyal to the cause — 
and it’s a method of rewarding people. The other one is that 
people are put into sensitive political position in order to give a 
certain political direction to the civil service, or to those who 
are engaged in the Crown corporations. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that this government . . . And I think 
the people of this province think that this government has 
exceeded any in the history of this province, or any in the 
history of this country, when it comes to the kind of patronage 
that has been practised. 
 
We’re not just talking about people like George Hill, former 
president of the PC Party; or Dave Tkachuk, who seems to 
move in and out of government like a car moves in and out of a 
garage; or people like Paul Schoenhals, or Myles Morin, or the 
dozens of others, you know, who have been placed in politically 
sensitive positions. 
 
It’s been common practice, Mr. Speaker, in this province, that 
when those who are appointed politically are, if you’ll pardon 
the pun, disappointed politically . . . Those who live by the 
sword die by the sword. And there’s always been a place in the 
history and tradition of politics in this province where you 
appoint some people to politically sensitive places, and when 
and if, or if and when, as is always is the case, the tide goes out 
for that political party, the debris goes out along with it. 
 
And that’s what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, after the next 
election. The debris will be gone. There will be no George Hill 
as president of the power corporation. That’s one thing that’s 
for certain — right? Yes, that’s what my friends, my colleague, 
the member from Prince Albert calls it: two-bill Hill. And there 
won’t be room for two-bill Hill in a New Democratic Party 
government. Mr. Hill knows that. We know that. And there’s no 
use trying to hide and say that anything different would happen. 
 
The same thing can be said of people like Mr. Morin or Mr. 
Schoenhals or Mr. Dirks or Mr. Gerrard, or any of the other of 
those who have been appointed into politically sensitive 
positions. Mr. Schoenhals will no longer be head of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And those people 
will lose their jobs. And that’s the way it goes, and that’s the 
way it’s always gone. 
 
But there’s been a new aspect added to political patronage in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and that’s been the politicization of 
the civil service, and that’s been the politicization of the Crown 
corporations. You know, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
injected politicization into the civil service and into the Crown 
corporations the same way that the Mazda Optimist Track Club 
injected steroids into sports in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and the 
same remedy will need to be applied. There will need to be a 
judicial review or a review of some type into the politicization 
of the civil service, into the politicization of the Crown 
corporations. And, Mr. Speaker, I refer here specifically to the 
activities of those who — prior to the 

coming to power of the Progressive Conservative government 
— those who occupy positions which were seen as politically 
neutral but administratively sensitive. 
 
And I look now, Mr. Speaker, and I see the activities of certain 
people in the administration — in the Crown corporations or in 
the civil service — people like George Hood, General Manager 
of the Souris Basin Development Authority, who has taken it 
upon himself to be a political champion of this government. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the George Hood’s of the 
world will, along with their bosses, George Hill, be gone after 
the next election. And there will be no tears shed by those of us 
on this side of the House. Those who want to engage in political 
activities in a partisan political nature, directly and openly while 
on the job, while doing their jobs supposedly as neutral civil 
servants, will be treated accordingly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one kind of political corruption that we’ve 
seen with this government. 
 
There’s another kind of moral political corruption well known 
by people like the member from Wascana who takes part in it in 
a indirect way. It’s a kind of political and individual moral 
corruption practised . . . It seems to be a trade mark of the 
Progressive Conservative Party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite sure the member from Wascana 
wants to get engaged in the debate. I seem to have touched a 
nerve with that particular member when it comes to talking 
about individual moral corruption. And all I say to that member, 
Mr. Speaker, if he’s guilty of individual moral corruption, if the 
shoe fits . . . Perhaps it’s pinching a little bit. Because it’s that 
kind of individual moral corruption, Mr. Speaker, which 
becomes the trade mark of the Progressive Conservative Party, 
provincially and federally. 
 
Let’s take a look at the Colin Thatchers, Mr. Speaker, let’s take 
a look at the Colin Thatchers, the activities of the PC member, 
the former PC member from Thunder Creek. Let’s take a look 
at the activities of Geoff Wilson, Mr. Speaker, member of 
parliament for the west part of the province. Let’s take a look at 
that kind of moral corruption. Right? Mr. Wilson was involved 
in offering bribes, offering bribes to someone who went to jail 
for taking the same bribe. 
 
Or how about Jim Garner, Mr. Speaker? How about Jim Garner, 
the former minister of Highways in this particular government? 
Right? Now Mr. Garner, he had . . . At least, Mr. Speaker, he 
had the decency to resign; he had the courtesy and the decency 
to resign when he was found out to be not telling the truth in 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could talk about the moral corruption of a 
Sinclair Stevens, or a Michel Gravel, or an Edouard Desrosiers, 
or a Roch Lasalle, or the list that goes on and on and on and on. 
As my colleague from Regina Victoria has pointed out, we 
could even talk about the kind of moral corruption of the former 
PC MLA from Manitoba . . . who was convicted of selling 
illegal drugs to children. And all these righteous folks on the 
other side like to talk 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

474 
 

about the PCs and how they’re committed to the family. Well 
we know that particular PC was committed to that family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of moral corruption pales, it pales when 
we see the kind of corrupt use of government for political and 
personal ends exhibited by present members who sit and occupy 
the benches opposite. I’m talking about the kind of moral 
corruption, Mr. Speaker, which would lead the Minister of the 
Environment, the Deputy Premier, and the Premier of this 
province to engage in an activity which many legal people in 
this province now think is illegal — now think is illegal. That 
is, Mr. Speaker, they’ve engaged in a conspiracy to suppress, 
they’ve engaged in a conspiracy to cover up, and they’ve 
engaged in a conspiracy to hide certain information which by 
law must have been made public. And I’m referring to the 
Rafferty-Alameda environmental impact statement, Mr. 
Speaker, when I refer to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Environment, the Deputy 
Premier, and the Premier knew of features of this project prior 
to the development of the environmental impact statement. 
They knew of those features, for example, the pumping of 
ground water out of the aquifers in the area into various water 
retention systems, into various dams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have introduced documentary evidence into 
the legislature to produce . . . to show this to be the case. And 
that Minister of the Environment, Mr. Speaker, knew about this, 
suppressed it, covered it up on orders from the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, section 111 of the Criminal Code of 
Canada, under which that minister is presently being 
investigated, is presently being investigated, talks about public 
trust and the need for elected officials to carry out their 
responsibility as laid out in law. It was the responsibility of that 
Minister of the Environment to make public all information 
pertaining to the Rafferty-Alameda environmental board of 
inquiry. That minister suppressed the information, Mr. Speaker. 
That minister broke the law, Mr. Speaker. That minister, Mr. 
Speaker, with the knowledge, and I would suspect with the 
complicity and encouragement of the Premier of the province, 
entered into that conspiracy to circumvent those things which 
he is legally and legislatively responsible. 
 
That minister, Mr. Speaker, has used his office when it came to 
looking after the environmental interests of the people of this 
province, used his office, not to protect the interests of the 
people, but used his office to protect the narrow partisan 
interests of the government. And he did so, Mr. Speaker, in a 
manner which broke, I would submit, and other lawyers in this 
province submit, broke section 111 of the Criminal Code of 
Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I predict that within eight months or six 
months that minister won’t be sitting there as the Minister of the 
Environment, and part of the reason he won’t be sitting there as 
the Minister of the Environment is because the government darn 
well knows that they are part of a conspiracy to deny the people 
of this province their right as enacted in legislation. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the most deadly form of moral 

corruption. That, Mr. Speaker, is a dereliction of duty. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is the kind of abuse of power that reflects poorly on 
each and every member of the legislature whether on that side 
of the House and this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
kind of moral corruption which put all politicians, including 
yourself, into disrepute. And that’s the kind of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would appreciate if the hon. member in his 
remarks would not involve the Chair. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly didn’t intend any 
negative reflection on the character of the person occupying the 
Chair in any way whatsoever. I do however, Mr. Speaker, in the 
line of the remarks that I was previously making, say to you, 
and say to all members of the House, you’re going to pay for it. 
You on the other side are going to pay for it. 
 
The problem is, is we all pay for it in the end because when you 
subvert a process which is legislated, when you subvert a 
process which was democratically introduced and which was 
democratically decided upon, you’re subverting the very 
institutions, and you are guilty of the kind of moral corruption 
and complicity that leads to your own demise. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker . . . Now some people may say that’s just an 
isolated incident. We know that the Rafferty-Alameda project is 
about buying votes in Estevan, and we know it’s about buying 
votes in Souris-Cannington, the constituencies occupied by the 
Premier and the Deputy Premier, respectively. 
 
(1945) 
 
And we know it’s about building up a political project down in 
that part of the country. Everybody in Saskatchewan knows that 
fact to be true, Mr. Speaker. And we also know that it’s going 
to cost each and every person — man, woman, and child — in 
this province, $1,400 by the time this thing is completed. And 
we also know, Mr. Speaker, that the economics of it are such 
that the friends and the big-business friends of the PC 
government opposite are the ones who are going to . . . They’re 
the ones who are going to benefit at it, not the rest of us. 
 
I noticed, Mr. Speaker, in the paper, Mr. Oscar Hanson and Mr. 
Bob Rempel, both from SaskPower, predicted that we would 
have a need in the next 10 years of only a 3 per cent growth in 
electrical and power consumption. Mr. Speaker, we don’t need 
a power plant at Shand, we don’t need a nuclear power plant to 
provide that kind of thing. I look here, Mr. Speaker, and I see 
that there are things like energy-efficient light bulbs, produced 
by people like Philips, well-known and respected people in the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Is that an exhibit? What does the 
member have there? Does he have an exhibit of some sort? Is 
that a light bulb that he is holding? What does he have there? 
What does he have? I’m just asking the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m reading from a box, Mr. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

475 
 

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. Order, order. All members know, and I 
know that you know, there’s ways of trying to evade rules 
sometimes. I’m not suggesting that at all. I’m just bringing to 
his attention that exhibits should not be permitted and I hope he 
treats it as such, whatever he has. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take out the exhibit, which is 
this light bulb — it’s the energy-efficient light bulb — and if 
it’s okay, I will read the box. Okay. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this light bulb produced by Philips, a 
renowned electrical engineering firm, known throughout the 
world, a good company, produces good products, has now 
produced and has been producing for the last 10 years, 
energy-efficient light bulbs. And according to the information I 
have, and on their box in which the light bulb comes, Mr. 
Speaker, one of these light bulbs lasts 10 times longer than 
ordinary bulbs, energy savings of between 70 and 80 per cent, 
fits existing ordinary light bulb sockets, produces a warm 
pleasant light similar to the standard light bulb. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I consulted with some electrical engineers, one of 
whom is employed by SaskPower, and the use of those kind of 
energy efficient light bulbs in this province, Mr. Speaker, and it 
depends on the number that were introduced, would produce 
between 150 and 300 megawatts — 150 and 300 megawatts of 
savings in energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now every new megawatt . . . every new watt, excuse me, Mr. 
Speaker, of energy in this province costs $3 to produce. We can 
save between 150 and 300 megawatts — that is 150 to 300,000 
watts of power . . . pardon me, million watts of power, Mr. 
Speaker. That is, those energy efficient light bulbs can save 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation close to $900 million directed 
towards new capacity. 
 
One little innovation like the introduction of energy efficient 
light bulbs. They start thinking, Mr. Speaker. You put them into 
the legislature; then you put them into the SaskTel building; 
then you put them into the SaskPower building; then you put 
them into the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
building; you put them in the STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) building. And you start introducing 
them around the province, Mr. Speaker. You know all of a 
sudden that 3 per cent demand in electrical increase doesn’t 
appear. In fact, what we get is a decrease in electrical demand 
which makes Shand redundant — which makes the Shand 
power plant redundant. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, those who are proponents of the 
Shand power plant and the Rafferty-Alameda dam — people 
like Jack Muirhead and all those people down in that part of the 
country who think this is such a great project — I’m proposing, 
Mr. Speaker, for them, that we will entertain one privatization 
of SaskPower, and that that one privatization of SaskPower be 
the Shand power plant; and that Mr. Muirhead and all those 
people from the Souris Basin, good water boys, they put their 
money where their mouth is and they buy that power plant. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, people like Mr. Muirhead and 
some of these other people who think that only they 

have the right to speak about the Rafferty-Alameda project and 
the Shand project, because that’s in their part of the country, 
what I want to say to them, Mr. Speaker, is this: all the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan are going to pay $1,400 for every 
man, woman, and child to build these projects. And if they 
don’t want us and the rest of Saskatchewan speaking about that 
project, perhaps they should put their money up. And perhaps 
the good folks of Estevan who are members of the Souris Basin 
Good Water Association, maybe those are the ones who should 
be putting up the money. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, that’s what 
will happen, is that we will shift the cost of this project on to 
those members down there so that they can pay through it 
through their own taxes, and those of us in the rest of the 
province who know what kind of political boondoggle this is 
won’t be burdened with this extra $1,400 each. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You know, that may be the answer, Mr. 
Speaker. Let those that want it pay for it. 
 
Now I’m not a great proponent of user-pay, but I’m not . . . I 
can tell you this: I’m certainly not a proponent when only those 
who are going to benefit make the rest of us pay. And so 
perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that’s one way we can find ourselves out 
of this dilemma. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I conclude . . . Before I conclude, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to return back to the Rafferty-Alameda project 
— not the project itself, but the manner in which the 
environmental impact statement was conducted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Canada, because now it’s received media 
attention in the Globe and Mail day after day, and the Winnipeg 
Free Press day after day, on the Canadian Press wire services 
all throughout Canada, know that the Rafferty-Alameda 
environmental impact statement was a cooked statement and it 
was cooked with the connivance of the Deputy Premier and the 
Premier and the Minister of the Environment. 
 
But what I say, Mr. Speaker, is that if they go to those lengths 
to cook something like the Rafferty-Alameda, two little dams in 
south-eastern Saskatchewan, what lengths will they go to to 
cook the environmental impact statement of the nuclear power 
plant that they’re pushing around this province — the nuclear 
power plant supported by the Premier of this province, who is 
going around this province trying to act as a proponent for that 
particular project. We’ve seen what they’ve done with 
Rafferty-Alameda, Mr. Speaker. What are they going to do with 
a nuclear power plant? What kind of cooking of the books are 
they going to do to try to make the nuclear power plant saleable 
to the people of this province? I don’t think they can, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Quite frankly, I don’t think there’s anything they can say about 
that nuclear power plant that will make it palatable to the people 
of the province. But I know after seeing what they did with 
Rafferty-Alameda, and the people of Saskatchewan know after 
seeing what they’ve done with Rafferty-Alameda, that they will 
go to any lengths at all to put forward this politically motivated 
project, to bail out 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

476 
 

their friends at Atomic Energy of Canada Limited. 
 
And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that when the books of the 
province are revealed, what we’ll find is that the deal which 
sold SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), 
the uranium mines and the gold mines, and merged it with 
Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy Corporation), that what you 
will see that was part of that deal as a codicil is the agreement 
by the province of Saskatchewan to at least attempt to buy a 
Candu 3 nuclear reactor. So I think that’s part of the deal, Mr. 
Speaker, judging from the way that the people who operate on 
that side of the House operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our opposition and the opposition of the leader of 
our party to this particular nuclear power plant is well known. 
We, in this side of the House, on this side of the House, say 
clearly and unequivocally we don’t need that nuclear power 
plant. And that, Mr. Speaker, is not just the opinion of our 
caucus here in Saskatchewan. The Minister of the Environment, 
the Tory Minister of the Environment in Alberta says there is no 
need anywhere in western Canada for a nuclear power plant. 
That’s the Tory Minister of the Environment in Alberta said 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an all party committee of the House of Commons 
reported last year to the Parliament of Canada that there should 
be a moratorium placed on the construction of nuclear power 
plants because they don’t know what to do with the waste. They 
know the technology isn’t safe, and they know what kind of 
things can happen, Mr. Speaker, with a nuclear power plant. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s an element of racism attached, 
however, to this whole issue of the power plant. What we find 
are members from the opposite side saying, well maybe we’ll 
take a look at the nuclear power plant provided it’s not in my 
constituency. Right? I want to know, Mr. Speaker, of the 
members who are sitting there tonight, how many people want a 
power plant, a nuclear power plant, in your constituency? Put 
your hands up, folks. Put your hands up. Put your hands up. 
Those who want a nuclear power plant in your constituency, put 
your hands up. Look, Mr. Speaker, not one, not one of those 
members put their hands up and said they want a nuclear power 
plant in their constituency. So I’ll ask: you, the member from 
Rosthern, do you want a nuclear power plant in your 
constituency, and will the people of Rosthern constituency 
support having a nuclear power plant? 
 
How about Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker? How about 
the new member from Gravelbourg constituency, 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg? Do you want a nuclear power power 
plant in your constituency? No? No, he says no. 
 
How about the member for Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker? Does he 
want a nuclear power plant? Yes, how about downtown 
Esterhazy? No, sir, look at him fidget, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t 
want a nuclear power plant in his constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have one member. The member from Redberry 
has said in this House, so let the record show that the member 
from Redberry wants a nuclear power 

plant in his constituency. Right? He’s shaking his head up and 
down; he says that he wants it, despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that the nuclear industry in this country and in North America is 
well-known as a bunch of liars when it comes to the question of 
safety with nuclear power. 
 
And I refer, Mr. Speaker, to this cover story which appeared 
October 31, 1988 on the cover of, now was it anti-nuc news, or 
was it Environmental News? No, Mr. Speaker, on the cover of 
Time magazine. What was the headline? Here we have the 
Charles Zinsers family, believes their son’s cancers may have 
been caused by radiation from the Fernald facility. Fernald is a 
nuclear weapons facility which uses Saskatchewan uranium to 
enrich weapons in the weapons cycle, which have had a major 
leak, which has been closed by the United States government, 
along with every other nuclear weapons facility in the United 
States as well as one-third of all nuclear power plants in the 
United States because of safety reasons. 
 
And what’s the title of this cover story? What’s the headline 
say? Mr. Speaker, it says, “They lied to us.” Because the 
nuclear industry in this country, Mr. Speaker, and in North 
America, will go to any lengths to try to peddle a nuclear power 
plant. I mean, you look at the headlines in the newspaper and 
you see why. The president of Atomic Energy Canada Limited 
is going to lose his job. They’re going to tear apart AECL for 
one reason and one reason only, is that it hasn’t sold a nuclear 
reactor in 10 years. 
 
Because while the nuclear industry can put all their splashy ads 
on TV, and while there are those who, like the Premier of this 
province, go around trying to float the trial balloons, and to go 
and try to float the idea of a nuclear power plant, and try to push 
this idea even if it’s in the back door because they don’t have 
the guts to promote it up front as a program of their party and a 
program of their government — despite the fact that they’re 
supplying funds to promote that nuclear power plant — because 
they don’t have those guts, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to bring 
it in the back door. But the people of Saskatchewan, the people 
of Canada, and the people of North America are awake as to 
what is happening with the nuclear industry. 
 
They know that the nuclear industry is not safe, Mr. Speaker. 
They have seen what has happened after Three Mile Island; 
they saw what happened after Chernobyl. They know what’s 
happening with all the nuclear weapons plants and these kids 
next door to the facilities getting cancer. They know what kind 
of destruction and misery a nuclear accident will bring to all the 
people of this province. And you know, Mr. Speaker, not only 
do the people of Saskatchewan know, all those other members 
know. Because with the exception of one, not one of them 
wants a nuclear power plant in their constituency. Not one, Mr. 
Speaker, not even one. 
 
(2000) 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province will 
realize and are realize and have realized the kind of political 
and economic boondoggles that this government, and the length 
to which they are prepared to 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

477 
 

go to cover up, and to keep from public knowledge, those things 
which the public ought to have the right to know. 
 
And it saddens me, Mr. Speaker, more than it angers me when I 
see somebody like the Minister of the Environment having to 
go to such length to suppress and cover up those things which 
he knew had to go into the environmental impact statement. 
 
We don’t trust this government when it comes to environmental 
issues. The people of the province don’t trust these people; they 
won’t trust them on a nuclear power plant. They’re now raising 
questions as to the efficiency of the environmental review done 
with the heavy oil upgrader in Regina. We have seen one after 
another after another accidents with the potential, Mr. Speaker, 
I submit to you, of causing mass death and destruction in the 
north end of Regina. 
 
We have a facility constructed in this city in the north end, close 
to schools, close to residences, that contains hydrogen sulphide, 
a deadly gas that forms sulphuric acid in your lungs when it’s 
mixed with the right proportion of water. Has that been raised 
as a public issue by the Minister of the Environment? Were 
those kind of concerns raised? No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up. There is lots and lots 
of things that I would like to talk about. However, Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s now time for other members of the House to take 
part in the debate. But in closing, Mr. Speaker, I issue this 
challenge to the members on the other side. If you’re in favour 
of a nuclear power plant in your constituency, have the guts to 
stand up and tell the people of the province what your position 
is. If you’re in favour of having a tax on gambling and the 
promotion and expansion of gambling in this province, stand up 
and tell the people of this province what you think. Have the 
courage to let the people of the province know where you stand 
on issues. 
 
If you’re in favour of a policy of cheap land, and a policy of 
cheap labour, stand up and let the people of the province know 
where you stand on the issue. I’m quite prepared, Mr. Speaker, 
and as I said at the opening of my remarks, I am grateful for the 
support that the people of Regina Rosemont have given me 
since I’ve been elected as a member of the legislature. I am 
grateful of the kind of open and honest debate I’ve had with 
those who may or may not agree with me on this or that issue. 
But the people of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, know this and 
they know it clearly, that when it comes to issues they know 
where I stand. When it comes to issues they know I won’t 
equivocate. When it comes to issues I tell them straight on. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is something that I can’t say about the 
members, whether it’s the front bench or the back bench of the 
government opposite, because, Mr. Speaker, the duplicity and 
corruption of that government are now well known. The 
duplicity and corruption of that government will be the thing 
which hastens the sounds of the shovels as it digs the political 
grave and pushes their long-outmoded political corpses into 
oblivion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
pleasure to rise before this Assembly to address this year’s 
budget. First of all, I would like to offer my congratulations to 
the member from Regina, Qu’Appelle for his excellent delivery 
of this very important budget, a budget which I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, will prove this government’s economic and financial 
plan is working and will continue to work for the good of the 
people of this province — a budget, Mr. Speaker, that 
reinforces the government’s commitment to health, education, 
agriculture, and the environment. 
 
This budget ensures that Saskatchewan’s programs in areas 
such as health and education, for example, remain Canada’s 
finest, and I believe over the next period of years will continue 
to be Canada’s finest; that Saskatchewan will continue to offer 
health care which is next to none, not only in Canada but 
around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I say that, it brings to mind a conversation I 
had with a couple of young doctors recently who have just 
moved into our community, who have come from South Africa. 
They have indicated that the coverage and the programs we 
have in this province just are unequalled anywhere in the world, 
and they are amazed at the service that is provided through our 
health care to the residents, to the people of this province. 
 
I want to emphasize that I said these programs will and continue 
to remain the finest programs that we have anywhere in the 
world. We have in place right now many important programs, 
programs that I feel compelled to outline to this Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget builds on what we now have in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me speak about health care. Health care is a 
good place to start. And I know members opposite would just as 
soon not have us speak about health care or how we are 
improving the health care of our province. But I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government and this budget reinforce the 
importance of health care and reinforce the fact that it is the 
number one priority of this government and will continue to be 
so. 
 
This budget sees our level of spending for health care at nearly 
$1.4 billion. That is an increase of over $130 million from the 
previous budget, which adds up to an 11 per cent increase over 
the last year. When it’s all added up, Mr. Speaker, this budget, 
the budget of health, and the overall budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan, eats up one-third of the total budget of the 
province. The level of spending in health, Mr. Speaker, remains 
unmatched. Mr. Speaker, our health budget has increased 91 per 
cent since 1981-82. That’s an increase of $678 million. I 
believe our government stands on its record in health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1982 we have added 746 new 
nursing department positions across this province, and a large 
majority of those positions were allocated to help alleviate the 
waiting list problems in Saskatoon, many of those waiting lists 
which we inherited from the opposition when they were in 
power. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been reminded on many 
occasions of what the member from Saskatoon South has said 
when he was Health minister of the province; he is quoted as 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

478 
 

saying that waiting lists were the sign of an efficient system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are continuing . . . will continue to work at 
cleaning up the mistakes made when the members opposite 
were sitting on this side of the House. We are also aware of the 
moratorium that was placed on home care and hospital . . . care 
home and hospital construction in this province. It might take us 
a while, Mr. Speaker, but we are continually working and 
dealing with these problems. 
 
Let me draw an example from March 30, our budget speech. 
The budget brought down by the member from Qu’Appelle 
includes $646 million for nurse and health care support salaries 
— $646 million, Mr. Speaker — including, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, funding for 370 additional nursing positions. And if 
you go back to 1982, the positions added total over 1,000 — 
over 1,000 — statistics that are factual. And yet the member 
from Regina Centre has the audacity to say that we haven’t 
created any jobs in this budget. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 370 
new nursing positions is nothing to be ignored, nothing to be 
sneezed at. 
 
This year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sees our government 
providing over $64 million for the construction and renovation 
of hospitals and special care facilities across Saskatchewan. 
This year we are placing an additional 4.3 million to the $8 
million we provide annually to hospitals for equipment 
purchases. This 4.3 million was added to enable hospitals to 
upgrade their equipment and to purchase high-tech equipment 
to keep astride the latest advances in medical care. This 
government has always ensured that Saskatchewan keeps in 
pace with the increased specialization of medical care 
world-wide. 
 
Look at our centres of excellence. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we can 
point to the six CAT scans that were introduced into this 
province, none of which were here prior to 1982. These centres 
of excellence were built by this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget saw the introduction of a 
number of taxes which will go toward the support of health care 
initiatives. The 1 cent per cigarette increase in the tobacco tax 
— and as the minister was announcing that 1 cent per cigarette 
increase, one of the members on the opposite side of the House 
mentioned that he would probably have to quit smoking. We all 
know that increased taxes are necessary to meet the budget 
demands, but also, Mr. Speaker, as people decrease the use of 
alcohol and cigarette smoking, that increases our health and 
alleviates the distress on our health system. 
 
We also have an increase in the tax on alcoholic beverages, and 
the new hospitals tax which will apply to lotteries, casinos, and 
bingos. However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these taxes, along with 
the 3 cent per litre increase in the rebatable fuel tax only raised 
79 per cent of this year’s health care allocation, $130 million 
increase in our health care budget — only 79 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to share a little bit about education. This 
budget has also increased funding to education. This 

year the allotted sum totals $841 million, an increase of $52 
million from the ’87-88 budget. This amount is necessary to 
ensure that the people of Saskatchewan have access to top 
quality schooling and education. 
 
As a rural member of this Legislative Assembly, I am 
particularly proud of the progress that this Progressive 
Conservative government has made in the area of education. 
 
A specific example comes to mind, Mr. Speaker: distance 
education, a very important program for rural Saskatchewan. 
And I’m reminded of a conversation I had with a couple in the 
Whitewood area prior to the 1986 election, where a lady who 
was teaching in Wapella — and I believe she continues to teach 
there — was asking what the possibilities were of bringing 
post-secondary education closer to the local level, versus 
continually being transported into the urban centres to our large 
technical and universities. 
 
Through this program, regional colleges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will offer more institute and university programming accessible 
to all. We are making education accessible to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. We are offering to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan what has, in the past, only been offered or been 
available to people in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we have made education more 
accessible, we provided an economic option for rural students. 
Rural students can now keep the jobs in their communities or 
keep on working on the family farm. They can live at home 
while taking and attending university, or taking technical 
institute classes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government recognizes that we must 
prepare our youth for the future. This year 14.5 million is 
allotted for special program improvements, programs such as 
computer technology. This government is expanding access to 
education in the province through technology and more 
specifically through SCAN, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network. 
 
Through this program, students in remote regions will be able to 
achieve and receive educational broadcasts by cable television 
and satellite and therefore upgrade themselves in their 
education. The proposed start-up date for this project, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is some time in 1990. In the very near future, 
Mr. Speaker, SCAN will expand educational opportunities for a 
broad range of students. For example, women and single 
parents who find it difficult to leave the home will have the 
opportunity to expand their education. It will help all students 
who for some reason cannot leave home base. SCAN will 
ensure these students have access to our educational systems far 
beyond the public school system. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, nearly 31 million is dedicated in this 
year’s budget for the construction and the renovation of 
schools. In my own constituency of Moosomin we have 
received almost $4 million in total government contributions to 
projects such as these — over $4 million 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

479 
 

since 1982. And that total does not account for renovations and 
construction that occurred after 1987. Over $1 million from that 
total went toward the construction of a new school in Maryfield, 
a much needed facility, I might add. A $1.3 million school and 
this government contributed $1 million towards its construction. 
I believe that points to the . . . and shows how important 
education is to this government of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I couldn’t hope to cover in this speech 
every important detail out of this budget, but I would like to 
mention just one more in the area of education. To assist 
welfare recipients to obtain job skills training this year, the New 
Careers Corporation will invest $5.6 million in training projects 
all across this province. That is an increase of over 50 per cent, 
an increase of over 50 per cent towards funds for a very 
important corporation indeed. 
 
I was in a home this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where a 
couple have three handicapped adults in their care. They have 
also a number up there, people around them who are on welfare, 
and as they heard of the programs, Mr. Speaker, they were 
saying to me, that is the right thing. We need to give people the 
opportunity to get out and perform for themselves. And I find 
most people want to be on their own. There are not too many 
people who really want to be on social assistance and welfare 
rolls. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe we as a government 
will continue to work towards that, to help people find jobs by 
giving them better skills and better education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in agriculture as well, this government continues 
to keep agriculture at the forefront; it continues to be a priority 
of this government. The budget presented by the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, provides over $147 
million for the Department of Agriculture and food. The 
priorities within this department include a number of areas; for 
example, the strengthening of the family farm and rural 
communities through diversification. Mr. Speaker, as we look 
ahead into the future, I believe we will see little manufacturing 
communities all throughout this province, and we’ll begin to 
manufacture a raw product that now we send to market, instead 
in the future we’ll be sending it ready for the consumer to use. 
These are new measures that would be directed to help the farm 
debt problem, the adoption of new farm technology and the list 
goes on. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is continuing to pursue 
long-term solutions for the problem of farm debt. We realize 
that short-term, ad hoc programs, as much as they have been 
helpful, are not the answer. We will continue to work towards 
long-term solutions to this problem. And I believe every farmer, 
and every person in the farming community, even from the 
small-business man in our small rural communities, will 
appreciate these endeavours. 
 
The unprecedented level of interest rates, combined with the 
inflationary period of the 1970’s and 1980’s, created a debt 
situation which, Mr. Deputy Speaker, threatened a number of 
our farm families. And when we look back over the past six 
years, we see a government which has reacted to the situation 
by implementing a number of 

programs and initiatives. Let me list a few. The Farm Land 
Security Act provided a moratorium on farm foreclosures. It 
provided producers with the opportunity of a fair review of their 
financial status. We also provided guarantees for debt 
consolidation and operating loans for viable producers through 
the counselling and assistance for farmers. And I talked to a 
gentleman just recently who has been involved in this 
counselling and assistance program, and he was mentioning 
how difficult it is out there, but what a pleasure it is to work 
together with the farming community and the lending 
institutions in helping to arrive at agreeable solutions. It is 
working, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We negotiated the $2.1 billion federal government special 
Canadian grains program. And once again the list goes on. I 
could mention the farm purchase program, the production loan 
program, and many, many more programs which exemplify 
how our government is dealing with the problem of farm debts. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many more of my 
colleagues to speak yet, and I’ll leave some of them the 
opportunity to get into the meat of some of these programs that 
we have in place and will be bringing into place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year the mandate of the agriculture 
credit corporation will be extended to include a number of 
initiatives. These include debt refinancing to cover viable farm 
operations, financing for the home quarter, and necessary 
farm-related facilities. In fact, since the throne speech and the 
budget speech presented recently, I’ve had a number of phone 
calls already of farmers inquiring as to how these programs are 
going to work, and I look forward to sending the information 
out as soon as we have all the dots . . . everything covered 
within the program so that they know what the information is 
and how they would apply for the programs. 
 
It will also include long-term financing to cover the first year’s 
start-up costs. The current restrictions of the agriculture credit 
corporation and off-farm income will be removed. This will 
eliminate any disadvantage to those farmers with off-farm 
income. 
 
And over the period of years since I’ve been elected as a 
member of this Legislative Assembly, I have been approached 
by many men and women in the situation where they had 
agreed with agriculture credit to take out a loan and within five 
years become fully viable in the farming operation, that their 
off-farm income — they would get out of their off-farm job and 
allow someone else to have that job. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are aware of the hardships within 
the agricultural sector. We are aware that many farmers, if they 
had to leave that off-farm income, just wouldn’t make it 
possible right now for them to continue farming. And so I 
believe this is going to be a very good program, will be an 
advantage to many producers in helping them to set up their 
farming operations, so that indeed down the road they can be 
full-time, aggressive, young farmers. 
 
In this budget, 29 million was provided from the 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

480 
 

agriculture development fund. This includes 22 million for 
agricultural research and development, as well as 7.7 million for 
irrigation grants to farmers, agricultural biotechnology, and 
food processing and commercialization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we were able to stand here and list all the 
programs, it’s very easy to just get a little excited, and realizing 
that we are attempting to meet the needs of the young farmer, 
the middle-aged farmer, and not only the farm families but the 
men and women of our small communities, because everyone in 
this province still relates a lot to agriculture. 
 
I’ve only touched a few subjects in the agricultural sector, and 
again, Mr. Speaker, I go on to another area that really I enjoy 
talking about and that’s seniors. Let me speak for a moment 
about one important group within our society; that important 
group is our seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our government has increased funding for special care homes 
by 67.7 per cent since 1982-83, and this is directly relevant to 
our seniors. It is relevant because out of the 10,000 long-care 
home beds we have in Saskatchewan, 9,200 of them are 
occupied by seniors — 92 per cent of those beds. And the 
majority of those seniors are over 80 years old. 
 
In fact, relating, in a conversation I had this morning with some 
constituents, and also mindful of the number of congratulatory 
messages I have sent out, it amazes me at the number of seniors 
we have who are 80 years, 90 years, and in fact I have a number 
of seniors within my constituency who are going to be 
celebrating their 100th birthday this year, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that speaks well of our care, not only in health, but through help 
in the home and through help through our care homes. 
 
It was interesting talking to a gentleman this morning who had 
been into the care home and talking to a 92-year-old individual 
in the care home. And as he said, as they were talking, this 
gentleman said to him, remember that shot I made when we 
were curling 30-some years ago? I reminded the constituent I 
was talking to, I bet you don’t remember the shot you made 
yesterday, and they were talking about shots made 30 years ago. 
 
In my own constituency I have seen our government contribute 
directly to our seniors. In fact, recently the community of 
Maryfield was a recipient of an innovative housing project 
through Sask Housing. And next week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
will be opening a seniors’ enriched housing project in Kennedy. 
 
There again, and I can’t help but get back to another 
conversation I had this morning about a 92-year-old gentleman 
who moved out of the house he was born in — 92 years he 
lived in the same house. He was born in that house, he lived 
there for 92 years, he is now moving into this enriched seniors’ 
housing project in Kennedy, looking forward to it, 92 years 
young. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think if we feel all that spry at 92 
years, we’ll be all doing very well. 
 
I’m proud of these projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They help 
people remain close to home, and that’s what I’m 

finding for most people, from our seniors, from our families; 
they want to keep their families closer to home, and I’m proud 
that we as a government can offer them that opportunity. 
 
I’ve also enjoyed working with the people of Kennedy and 
Maryfield in helping them put together their proposals and 
indeed get the projects finalized for their communities. The 
total cost of the project in Maryfield, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
$750 million. And would you believe that of the 750 million, 
400 million — pardon me, 750,000 — that would build a lot of 
homes, wouldn’t it. That $750,000, and of that 750,000, 
400,000 was contributed by our government. You know where 
the other $300,000 came from? It’s coming from the 
community through community involvement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are people out in rural Saskatchewan 
who are willing to not only beg and ask and seek government 
for help, but they’re willing to do a little bit to help themselves. 
And it’s just been a pleasure working with people like Sybil 
McGarva in Maryfield, in helping her put this project together, 
a dream that she had a number of years ago and now she’s 
seeing it coming to fruition. That money ensures that a number 
of the seniors are able to live, to live independently in 
Maryfield. And I can tell you I appreciate this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I know that the people in the constituency of 
Moosomin appreciate it as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, allow me to speak about a group I have a 
tender heart for, and that group of people are the handicapped. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government recognizes the potential 
of, and the contributions, handicapped individuals make in our 
communities. Again, centres located in my constituency reflect 
our government’s commitment to handicapped individuals. And 
I’m referring specifically to the Pipestone Kin-Ability Centre, 
incorporated in Moosomin, and the Kipling and District 
Association for Handicapped Adults, incorporated in Kipling. 
The Pipestone Kin-Ability Centre just recently made a move 
into a brand-new facility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1982 the PC Party of Saskatchewan 
was elected government of this province. In 1983 the people of 
Moosomin, who have been working for a long time to get an 
activity centre involved and brought to fruition in their 
community, finally received it. And how did they receive it? 
They had acquired an old liquor board store in Moosomin, and 
they’ve been there up until, I believe it was September of 1988, 
when they moved into their new facility. And they were able to 
acquire this old store by the help of this government, through 
the help of this government, the Kinsmen Foundation, and the 
people of that community. 
 
In 1988, Mr. Speaker, this government facilitated their move 
out of that old liquor store into the brand-new facility that I 
mentioned just seconds ago, by providing them with $110,000 
in capital funding. And not only that, we provided them with 
$9,500 in operating costs, and I’m happy to announce that the 
budget presented by the Finance minister also proposed an 
allotment from this government of an operating budget for the 
Pipestone Kin-Ability Centre of $75,000. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

481 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is a commitment to the handicapped. This is 
commitment to people who are less fortunate than we are — 
individuals who, through no fault of their own, just aren’t able 
to obtain the same purposes in life that you and I have. Mr. 
Speaker, $75,000 is nothing to be sneezed at, and I know the 
people of Moosomin are more than happy and are very happy to 
have the Kinsmen to be involved in providing that service to 
their community. I am proud of what this government is doing 
for my constituency. 
 
(2030) 
 
And then there’s a project in Kipling, and let me just go into 
this a little bit. The proposed funding for the Kipling and 
district association for ’89-90 is $53,730. This facility 
commenced operations this year, Mr. Speaker. It is a brand-new 
facility. For the first two months it was opened this year, our 
government provided them with $8,600 in operating money to 
cover February and March 1988. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was involved quite heavily in working 
towards a handicapped centre in the community of Kipling. 
And whenever you come to government it takes a while to get 
everything in place. You have to . . . You help the people put 
their proposal together and realize that many communities 
around this province are looking for the same type of facility. 
But what really amazed me and really pleased me about the 
group in Kipling was their willingness to go the extra mile. And 
they believed so much in those less fortunate in their 
community that back in June of this year a building came 
available, they formed a committee after they had approached 
Social Services, and I had mentioned to them, well maybe we 
should start by looking at a SARCAN depot. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, working with Social Services, working with SARC 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres), we were 
able to obtain the funding to put in place a SARCAN depot. 
That was the start of the handicapped centre in Kipling. 
 
And now today we have a handicapped centre that is going to 
house 14 adults — 17 adults all told, young adults. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the commitment of that community was 
$65,000 in which I believe we had 10 individuals write notes to 
take out the funding to purchase a building to start the facility. 
And just the other day I noticed on the front page of the Kipling 
Citizen, the Kin-Ability foundation and a group from 
Broadview presented a cheque for $5,000. That was the last of 
the money needed to pay for that $65,000 loan taken to buy the 
building. And you know who paid for the rest? It was the R.M.s 
and the communities and individuals right around the area who 
really believed in their handicapped adults. And you know it’s 
really, indeed, pleasing to go into a facility such as this. 
 
I walked into the depot one day, these two young fellows, Lloyd 
and Darcy, just beaming as they’re throwing these cans in this 
crusher. They’re just as happy as can be. And Lloyd comes over 
to me and he says, you know, Mr. Toth, he said, the belt broke 
here and no one was around to fix it and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The members aren’t to use 
members names. 

Mr. Toth: — Sorry. I apologize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 
don’t know how else you address yourself. But anyway, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this young gentleman came to me and he said, 
you know it was . . . He was just beaming from ear to ear as he 
was telling me how he fixed this belt, and when I walked in 
there and Darcy was just so proud, it’s just a pleasure to see 
these individuals feeling at home, whereas before they were off 
by themselves on the farm or in a corner where no one had a 
chance to associate with them. I am more than proud to have 
two facilities such as this in my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me address another program, the home 
program, a program initiated by this government, a program 
which created over 300 jobs for my constituency alone. That, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the home program. Through that 
program 3,909 grants have been approved just in the 
constituency of Moosomin alone. These grants total $3,462,080. 
And also we have the 6 per cent 10-year loans. And in my 
constituency we have 648 loans that have been approved to 
date, which total $4,458,714. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at my constituency, those 
would be staggering amounts. You think, well that’s a lot of 
money — a lot of economic development. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where did that money go? It went directly to the people of my 
constituency. 
 
And it’s indeed interesting talking to small contractors, talking 
to the lumber yards, talking to the professionals, talking to the 
business trades in my constituency. And there isn’t a one of 
them will not indicate and will not tell me that the activity 
they’ve seen in the last two and a half years was far beyond 
their expectations. With the drought, with the slow-down in the 
farming economy, with the lack of economic activity in the 
agricultural sector, they were expecting to have some lean 
years. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this home program has 
certainly given them something to be happy about, and they are 
more than thankful that this government was willing to put in 
place a program that would help people, indeed help themselves 
and reach out and help others. 
 
People in this province also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
concerned about interest rates, but they know that here they are 
protected. They know that the Premier of this province, the 
member from Estevan, and this government will continue to 
speak out on interest rates. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we not 
only speak out, but we act. We are willing to put the treasure of 
this province behind the residents of this province in protecting 
them against high interest rates. 
 
My constituents, along with the rest of the people in this 
province, are protected by the home improvement loan which 
gives 6 per cent money. And we all are aware of the home 
mortgage loan. They know that their mortgage interest rates 
will never go above nine and three-quarter per cent. Where else 
do you get a better interest rate in buying a new home? Our 
government has ensured that this will never happen — nine and 
three-quarter per cent interest rates. I am proud that our 
government is protecting the people of this province. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

482 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one other area that we know raises a lot of 
concerns in people’s minds, and the member from Regina 
Rosemont mentioned it a few minutes earlier, is the 
environment. And everyone of us has been glued to our TVs, or 
been watching the news, or have noticed in the media the 
problems that have been created by the Exxon Valdez running 
aground just off Alaska. And we’ve seen, we’ve been reminded 
of the problems that danger and the pollution in our 
environment can cause. 
 
And I’m glad to say that this government has announced that 
we will work towards protection of the environment. The 
protection of our environment remains an important priority for 
our government; it remains an important priority, not only for 
us today, but for our children, and our children’s children of 
tomorrow. 
 
This year over $22 million is allotted to fund initiatives that will 
preserve and enhance the environment. They spanned from 
hazardous waste management to pest eradication. Protecting 
water quality for our people, to the preservation and 
enhancement of the natural environment are covered through 
this budget, and through the throne speech that we presented 
earlier on this year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is our government’s intention to ensure 
that the past mistakes and omissions of previous Saskatchewan 
governments are not repeated. We will continue to take positive 
action to preserve Saskatchewan’s natural environment for the 
benefit and enjoyment of our current and future generations. 
 
And talking . . . and speaking about families, and speaking 
about future generations, let me remind you as well that 
families do matter, that families matter to this government; 
families matter in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are allocating in this budget $60 
million under the first year of our comprehensive child care 
development plan, including $3 million in new funding for 
child care. The plan will double the number of child care spaces 
in this province to almost 12,000 by 1995. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the requirements of rural parents will not be forgotten; 
they will be recognized as well, as 2,000 of these spaces will be 
located in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a total of 680,000 in new funding has been 
provided to open two family support centres. These 
multi-service facilities will include family treatment and 
counselling. They will provide parent education and child 
development training. They will also include accommodation 
for victims of families, family violence, as well as outreach and 
crisis intervention. Extremely necessary services, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of my colleagues have yet to rise to 
address this budget. And I am confident that the areas that I was 
unable to cover will be dealt with very adequately by my 
colleagues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget reflects our government’s 
commitment to health, agriculture, education, the environment, 
and the family. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am happy to inform 
you that I will be 

supporting this budget, and I urge all members of this Assembly 
to do so as well. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Before I begin my remarks on the budget 
speech, I want to congratulate the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who was recently elected in the 
by-election prior to Christmas. In particular, I want to 
congratulate him because I know that the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, particularly the people in his home 
town, are waiting with a great deal of anticipation for this 
member to deliver on an number of commitments that were 
made in that riding. 
 
I know that the people in Rockglen are looking forward to a 
recreation centre, a new nursing home, and economic 
development. And of course they’re expecting a new highway 
between the town of Assiniboia and Rockglen. I also know that 
the people in Gravelbourg are waiting for an integrated facility, 
and I wish him great luck in living up to the tremendous 
expectations that he has cultivated. I’ll be interested in seeing 
whether or not the provincial government in its budget will live 
up to those commitments that were made during that 
by-election. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wasn’t able to participate in the 
throne speech debate, but I did listen to the throne speech 
debate, and again to the budget debate. I listened for some 
indication that the Government of Saskatchewan would come to 
grips with the problems and difficulties facing our province. I 
listened for some indication that the government would come 
forward with some positive solutions, meaningful solutions that 
would lift the feeling of hopelessness and pessimism that seems 
to be engulfing the minds and hearts of our fellow citizens. 
 
Sadly, this government has offered no specific policy initiatives 
and no real commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
have listened to the members on that side of the House 
articulate their vision of the throne speech and what they think 
the budget speech means to them, and it made me feel as though 
I was listening to a bunch of bureaucrats. They trotted out 
numbers; they trotted out figures; they didn’t say it with any 
passion; they didn’t say it with any kind of emotion; they really 
didn’t articulate their vision of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the throne speech, this government talked about 
opportunities, they talked about public participation, they talked 
about diversifying our economy, but they also came up with 
some new buzz-words. And it’s interesting that they tried to 
soften the jargon a bit this year. They talked about the future on 
12 occasions in the throne speech; they talked about 
co-operation and acting co-operatively on 14 occasions; they 
talked about protecting us on 11 occasions; then they used some 
words like “excellence,” “new era,” “new state of the art,” 
“innovations,” and “long-term.” Now these people are good at 
the buzz-words, they’re good at the jargon, but they really 
aren’t good at articulating a vision that has some compassion 
and some care. These people aren’t good at that at all. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

483 
 

Now I’m pleased to be able to enter into this budget speech. I’m 
pleased because I’m able to be here because the people of my 
constituency have given me the privilege and the responsibility 
to be their spokesperson on the important issues confronting 
them as taxpayers and confronting our province. 
 
Since first becoming an MLA in 1986, I have been given many 
opportunities in this legislature to voice the concerns of the 
people back home in Saskatoon Nutana. I’ve enjoyed speaking 
out on issues in the legislature, and it’s been a wonderful 
experience for me personally being able to articulate some of 
the concerns. 
 
(2045) 
 
But for me the most important and enjoyable part of my job as a 
member of the legislature is the kinds of things I do back at 
home in my constituency. I know that there are many MLAs in 
this Assembly that have helped senior citizens fill out their 
heritage grant forms, or they’ve gone to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board appeal on behalf of constituents, or 
they’ve done Social Services appeals, they’ve phoned the 
hospitals and the cancer clinics to find out where their 
constituents were on the waiting lists. I know that they’ve 
attended community meetings helping community groups lobby 
for particular projects in their particular constituency. 
 
But recently, Mr. Minister, I’ve had the opportunity to become 
involved in the farm crisis. And I think many people in this 
legislature know that I have a rural background, but I do 
represent an urban riding. 
 
Now it’s interesting that I have literally had dozens of farm 
families, young farm families in my constituency office, talking 
to me about the prospect of facing bankruptcy and foreclosures. 
They’ve come to see me because, I suspect, that they’ve been 
unwilling to talk to their own members of the legislature. And 
as you know, most rural constituencies are represented by Tory 
MLAs. They’ve been afraid to talk to their members of the 
legislature, and I suspect it’s because they’ve been a bit 
embarrassed and they really, in many respects, blame 
themselves for their pending foreclosure or bankruptcy. I have 
shared a great many tears with men and women who are facing 
the prospect of losing their family farm, and in some ways I’ve 
shared a great deal of joy. 
 
Now this government talks about protecting the people, and 
they talk about protecting farm families and all of us. They say 
they’re going to co-operate with the people of Saskatchewan. 
Well, at this stage in our history, no one believes you. You can 
talk in all the bureaucracies that you want, you can talk about 
compassion and care, but at this stage no one believes you. 
 
They don’t believe that you protect them; they think you 
destroy them. They don’t believe that you are co-operators; they 
think you’re privatizers. They don’t think you’re interested in 
their future because you use the same old Conservative schemes 
from the past. You’re still into laissez-faire capitalism, the free 
market place, unbridled capitalism. You people are the 
trickle-down folks. You feed your friends at the front end, and 
maybe the people at the back end will get some crumbs. 

Well, my friends, unbridled capitalism has never worked, it’s 
not working now, and I think you should soon come to terms 
with that. Now during the Ronald Reagan era, which you 
people like to talk about, 650,000 farm families in the United 
States gave up farming; 55,000 farm implement workers lost 
their jobs; farm gate prices fell by 50 per cent; retail food 
prices, on the other hand, went up by 36 per cent. The 
multinationals and the grain traders recorded massive profits, 
yet farmers and workers are worse off. And with this record the 
Tory government has just tied the Canadian people to the 
Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. 
 
Now why is it that the farmers’ economic position has been 
eroding during the 1980s? Why is it that the quality of life in 
rural communities has deteriorated? Why is it that the quality of 
food offered in grocery stores has deteriorated, as has the 
quality of water, air, and soil? This, my friends, has happened 
because of the free market policies of Conservative 
governments, both in Canada and the United States, the pursuit 
of profit at the expense of people; and that’s the free market 
system, and that’s the system that you people have tied yourself 
to. 
 
The U.S., which you have just tied yourselves to in the free 
trade agreement, has consistently used food as a weapon, and 
it’s particularly evident in the current round of international 
trade negotiations and in the Canada-U.S. trade agreement. The 
American government policy of expanding exports by driving 
down the grain prices benefits multinational corporations like 
Cargill, but it sure hurts farmers in our country and in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The U.S. government’s objective is to break the European 
Economic Community, and in the process, members of the 
legislature, Saskatchewan farmers are being eliminated. 
Conservative governments support free market farm policy. 
Farmers don’t need any more trial runs with the free market 
system. We’ve seen the pinnacle of the free market economics 
in the 1930s when prices were so low it cost more to ship your 
grain than it was worth. Simply increasing exports doesn’t 
guarantee prosperity for Canadian farmers and Saskatchewan 
farmers. Entering into a free trade agreement with the 
Americans won’t guarantee the survival of the family farm. 
 
Now what farmers need is a predictable rate of return. And New 
Democrats in the last federal election put forward our policy 
position, that ad hoc deficiency payments and drought 
payments at election time aren’t good enough — they’re simply 
not good enough any more. 
 
We have suggested that farmers should be guaranteed the U.S. 
target price of $5.28 a bushel on the first 8,000 bushels of 
wheat. And I use wheat as an example, but all crops are 
included. Above the 8,000 bushel level there’s a predictable 
stabilization program with price being guaranteed at a 
long-term average. The program would put some stability and 
predictability back in agriculture. That’s our policy on farm 
income, and I ask my friends opposite: that’s our policy; what’s 
yours? We haven’t seen it here in the legislature. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

484 
 

Now New Democrats also believe that the Farm Credit 
Corporation should become the farmers’ bank. Right now 
farmers can’t service their debt, and they’re going down the 
tubes, literally, in droves. We think the first $125,000 of farm 
debt should have a long-term interest rate of below 8 per cent. 
The next $125,000 should be set aside with no interest debt 
accumulated. This policy initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, gives 
farmers some hope of eventually working their way to 
becoming a viable farming operation. Now that’s our solution 
to farm debt, but what’s yours? 
 
Equity financing, friends, won’t help those who need the most 
help, but a farmers’ bank will. Added to these policies is an 
agricultural position that would protect farm income from 
disasters. Built into our income stability program is a provision 
that would deal with disasters. If a farmer traditionally 
produced up to 8,000 bushels of wheat, for example, and in a 
year of drought or grasshoppers or floods or other disasters the 
crop was lost, that farmer would be guaranteed that 8,000 
bushels at the U.S. target price of $5.28 a bushel. Now that’s 
our farm policy. What’s yours? 
 
Now once again we would have predictability and stability in 
the system. And ad hoc political expedience at election time 
would be gone, and gone for ever. Quite frankly, my friends 
opposite, people are sick and tired of you playing games with 
them at election time. They want stability and they want 
predictability. They don’t want you people playing politics with 
their future and their survival. 
 
Now I speak about rural Saskatchewan because I’ve had the 
opportunity to spend a great deal of time in rural Saskatchewan 
in the last few months. Rural people are facing a disaster. This 
government in this budget has recognized that disaster by taking 
into consideration enrolment declines of school students. Rural 
schools are facing serious decreases in enrolment. And what 
sort of an impact does that have on the people that are 
remaining in that community? It means that fewer and fewer 
people are left to pick up where those people who have moved 
out have left off. Those people are expected to pay their taxes to 
pay for those schools. Those people are expected to pay the 
taxes to pay for all of the important infrastructure in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you people talk a good line about being friends of the 
family farmer, but quite frankly people don’t believe you any 
more. They don’t believe you. They think that you’ve sold them 
out for your big business friends. Now there’s no question that 
prior to 1982 and afterwards you people have been friends to 
people in rural Saskatchewan. You’ve tried to, I suppose in 
some ways, do what you could with your philosophies, but 
unbridled capitalism doesn’t work, and I think you people know 
that. 
 
And I wish that you’d get your heads out of the sand and come 
up with a proper rural development strategy that would ensure 
the Saskatchewan farm families will still be in rural 
Saskatchewan, because it’s the young people that are going 
down the tubes. And you people can pay lip service to that; you 
people can talk about farm families, 

but the people out in rural Saskatchewan know what’s going on, 
and people are leaving rural Saskatchewan because of the crisis 
in agriculture. 
 
Now this Progressive Conservative government has now put 
itself in its eighth year. When any government is elected, people 
put their hopes and dreams on the line. They really believe that 
that government’s going to do something for them. They look 
for all kinds of things in government, but mostly they want 
fairness and competence, and they want some hope. 
 
In 1982 the people of Saskatchewan gave the men and women 
opposite an overwhelming mandate to govern our province. 
They wanted positive, progressive progress, and over the long 
years the Government of Saskatchewan has gone from being a 
positive group of men and women to a group of negative, 
regressive people. People regularly tell me that you people are 
literally destroying Saskatchewan. 
 
They tell me that you’re the wrecking crew, that there’s going 
to be nothing left when we get to government. And I want to 
assure the people of Saskatchewan who are listening tonight, 
that when Tommy Douglas came to office in 1944 we had a 
serious debt in this province, but CCF governments and New 
Democrat governments got rid of that debt, and we put our 
people to work, and we had balanced budgets, and we gave 
people hope in Saskatchewan — and New Democrat 
governments will do that again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Today the province’s combined funds have 
total assets of $7.9 billion and total liabilities of $10.9 billion. If 
everything in this province, every public asset in this province, 
was sold and all of the debt paid off and all of the taxes up to 
date, we’d still be flat broke and we’d owe $3 billion. That’s 
how much we’d owe. 
 
This year the government projects that we will receive the 
largest ever equalization payment from the federal government. 
The estimate is $440 million. Equalization payments have 
traditionally gone to provinces that are have-not provinces. 
Saskatchewan people have taken a great deal of pride in the fact 
that we haven’t been a have-not province. But we can’t take 
pride in that any more. The PC government’s incompetence has 
put us on hand-outs from Ottawa. That’s what you guys have 
put us on — we’re getting hand-outs from Ottawa. 
 
In fact, next to personal income tax of $869 million, sales tax of 
$502.6 million, this federal hand-out is the third largest revenue 
item in this year’s budget of four billion eighty-three thousand 
dollars in the revenues that our province will collect. The 
equalization payment from Ottawa is embarrassing. This once 
proud, rich province is now on hand-outs. Can you believe that? 
And that has occurred under the great leadership of the 
members opposite. 
 
These people who think they’re business people, these people 
who think they’re business people couldn’t even run a popcorn 
stand and keep the books balanced. And Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the PCs have once 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

485 
 

again imposed unfair taxes . . . tax increases on Saskatchewan 
people while they’ve actually reduced the tax load on big 
business. In 1988 Canadian big business had a 59 per cent 
increase in corporate profits, yet the Saskatchewan PC 
government reduced corporate income taxes by 2 per cent. No 
such reduction happened for individual taxpayers. No such 
reduction happened for the working people and the small 
merchants and the farmers of our province. 
 
With this budget, for every one dollar bill individuals pay, 
corporate Canada, corporate Saskatchewan, will pay only 17 
cents. And if you people think that’s fair, you have another 
think coming. People want fairness in government and you 
people aren’t giving it to them. 
 
Now since the men and women opposite took office, corporate 
taxes have increased by $136 million, but taxes on individuals 
have increased by more than $560 million. And I should point 
out that the Finance minister is famous for overestimating 
corporate income tax when it comes to the budget estimates. In 
fact, in 1986-87 he estimated that the province would collect 
$162 million in corporate income taxes, but when the Public 
Accounts were tabled, his government had only collected 
$118.8 million — another booboo by the Minister of Finance. 
 
(2100) 
 
Now in 1985-86 this government estimated that corporate taxes 
would account for about $145.2 million worth of revenue, but 
once again they had another booboo — they only collected 
129.4 million. And I somehow find it odd and strange and in 
many ways amusing how this government doesn’t have any 
trouble being right on the money when it comes to individual 
income taxes — they seem to be able to estimate that okay, but 
when it comes to corporate income tax, they always 
overestimate the amount of revenue that they will collect from 
corporate income taxes. They’re right on the money when it 
comes to people like us who pay individual taxes, but when it 
comes to corporate corporations and what they’ll pay, they 
always overestimate. 
 
Now the latest gas tax increase will hurt Saskatchewan drivers, 
and in particular those drivers with older vehicles. And who do 
those drivers tend to be? Well those people are people who 
aren’t in the financial position to buy a new car. Those are the 
people that have to drive old cars because they can’t afford 
anything newer. So once again this government is shifting the 
burden of taxation off of large corporations that have had 
massive profits and putting it on to the backs of low and middle 
income earners. 
 
Now the gas tax will also hurt small business, school boards, 
municipalities, cab drivers, and small locally-owned trucking 
companies. This latest gas tax increase is a betrayal of 
Saskatchewan people. The conservative government in 1982 
promised the people of our province that they would totally 
eliminate the gas tax, and the people opposite have broken that 
promise, and they have betrayed the people of Saskatchewan. 
They have made a promise and they have broken that promise. 

Now for those taxpayers who have a dependant spouse at home 
and two children and a gross income of $40,000, Saskatchewan 
now has the honour of having the third-highest level of 
provincial income tax in Canada. And all of this comes from a 
government that in 1982 promised to reduce personal income 
taxes by 10 per cent. And instead, Mr. Speaker, each year under 
their leadership and management of our province, they have 
increased personal income taxes, and in fact they imposed the 2 
per cent unfair flat tax on Saskatchewan individuals and 
families. 
 
I find it somewhat sad and in fact surprising that this 
government, at a time when there is a major job crisis in 
Saskatchewan, had nothing to say about job creation programs 
and new job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they cut the student employment program, 
Opportunities ’89 by 22 per cent, or some 1,000 jobs. I would 
encourage the members opposite, if you have any compassion, 
any heart left, to reinstitute the program criteria so that 
non-government organizations and local municipalities could, 
in fact, apply to hire young people this summer. 
 
I know that the non-government organizations in my own 
constituency like crisis intervention, Big Sisters, the Tamarack 
Foundation, and many, many others, the Broadway Merchants’ 
Association, would welcome the opportunity to be able to apply 
for funds available under that program. They would welcome 
the opportunity to give young people a meaningful job this 
summer. They’d welcome the opportunity to give young people 
the job experience that will be necessary when they leave 
university and technical school and get out there on their own. 
 
Now these are hard times for Saskatchewan young people — 
they are hard times. Over 17 per cent of our young people are 
unemployed. And the unemployment rate will get even higher 
this summer as students leave university and technical schools. 
In my opinion, the young people of Saskatchewan deserved a 
whole lot more from you people in this budget. 
 
I’d also like to turn to another critical issue facing 
Saskatchewan, and that’s in the area of educational spending. 
The headlines in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix read on last 
Friday, “Education spending up 6.6 per cent to $841 million”, 
and those are pretty heady headlines. But I want to examine 
what has really happened to educational spending in our 
province. 
 
This budget has only increased educational spending in our 
province by 2.37 per cent, and not the 6.6 per cent the Tories 
have indicated. If you include the supplementary spending 
estimates from last year and you take out the additional 
payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, which has nothing to do with educational spending 
in Saskatchewan, you discover that educational spending has 
only increased by 2.37 per cent. And that, members opposite, is 
a cut in spending, because when you take into consideration an 
inflation rate in excess of 4 per cent, the school boards across 
Saskatchewan have, in fact, along with universities and 
post-secondary institutions, received a cut in spending. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

486 
 

Now grants to school boards from the provincial government as 
a percentage of total school board revenue has fallen 
significantly under the Tory administration. In 1982 the 
province’s share amounted to about 54.6 per cent of total 
spending on education. In 1982 total board expenditures was 
about $572 million. And the boards, the school boards in 
Saskatchewan received in total about $312 million from the 
province. 
 
In 1987, the last year that I have figures available, total school 
board expenditures were $786.6 million, and the provinces paid 
boards about $392.4 million. The province’s percentage share 
has dropped to less than 50 per cent. And in response to that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what have school boards had to do? 
They’ve had to pass on that revenue shortfall to individual 
property owners. They’ve had to dip into their reserves. 
They’ve had to increase student-teacher ratios, and in some 
cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, school boards have had to cut 
teachers and cut programs. 
 
There’s another thing that the members opposite should be 
mindful of. Since you have come to government in 1982, a lot 
of responsibilities have shifted to school boards and teachers. 
They are now expected to take on roles that have not 
traditionally been the roles that they’ve served in Saskatchewan. 
Because of the economic crisis in our province, and because of 
family stress, schools have taken on the jobs of food banks, 
social work, family counselling, and pre-school intervention 
programs, to name a few. Yet your government hasn’t increased 
funding for these additional roles. 
 
You will argue, no doubt, the Minister of Education will argue 
that the provincial grants have kept pace with inflation. But 
there have been added costs for school boards in their attempt to 
provide education to Saskatchewan students. There have been 
real cost increases above inflation, but your government has 
failed to recognize those increased costs, and I would urge you 
to do so. 
 
Another thing that I’d like to talk about in terms of education — 
prior to becoming a member of the legislature, I had the 
opportunity to be the principal of a school in Saskatoon called 
Radius Tutoring project. And it was a school that allowed 
young people who couldn’t fit into the regular school system to 
continue their education, to try and get their grade 12. Under the 
provincial government, and it’s quite interesting, a study has 
just shown that under this provincial government, since 
1980-81, the Saskatchewan grade eight to 12 drop-out rate has 
increased from about 31 per cent in 1986-87, the last year for 
these kinds of figures to be available, to 45 per cent. Now that’s 
a substantial increase. 
 
In 1980-81, for every 100 students in our grades 8 to 12, 69 of 
those students were expected to receive their grade 12. That 
means that 31 per cent were dropping out. In 1986-87, under 
your government, 45 per cent of those students are expected to 
leave school early. That means, members opposite, that only 54 
per cent of students between grade 8 and 12 will actually 
complete their grade 12 education, that 45 per cent of all grade 
8 to 12 students in our province will drop out. That, members 

opposite, is a tragedy. 
 
Under your government the school drop-out rate has increased 
by 50 per cent. Under your government we have gone from a 
drop-out rate of 31 per cent to 45 per cent. Now what do we do 
about it. 
 
The Minister of Education will probably deny those figures. He 
will say, well those are native children, or he will say that 
they’re drug and alcohol addicted young people. The point is, it 
doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter if those young people are drug 
and alcohol addicted, native people, rural people, city people, 
black people, white people, green people, red people, it doesn’t 
matter. The point is that those young people are dropping out of 
school, and we have to figure out what we’re going to do about 
it. Obviously those young people are feeling frustrated and 
alienated from their present school situation. Obviously some of 
these young people believe that they don’t have any future. 
What we need to do is move immediately to introduce 
preventive programs that will keep young people in school. 
 
Now under your government leadership we have seen hungry 
children in Saskatchewan. We have seen kids that don’t have 
enough to eat, and you people will say, well their parents are 
out at the bingo parlours, or their parents are drinking, or their 
parents are doing this or that, but it doesn’t matter. Because if 
we don’t begin to do something about it now, we certainly are 
going to have to pay for it in the future. Those young people are 
not going to have the skills necessary, as the Minister of 
Education says, to beat the requirements of the 21st century. 
Those young people are going to be the future people in our 
jails, the future people on our social assistance rolls, the future 
people that have no hope, and so we have to figure out what are 
we going to do. 
 
Now you people talk about welfare reform, cutting back on 
welfare, that somehow this is going to make people responsible, 
that they’re going to get out there and find a job. But reality 
tells us that there aren’t very many jobs in Saskatchewan, and if 
you’re a single woman with a couple of children, a minimum 
wage job, if you’re unskilled, is all you’re going to get, and it’s 
not going to be enough to meet the requirements of your family. 
 
When you people . . . every time you make a cut in some sort of 
social service, you’re affecting young people in this province. 
You’re affecting families. There are reasons why the drop-out 
rate has increased by over 50 per cent under your leadership, 
under your government, and I think it’s time you came to terms 
with some of those reasons. It’s time that you realized that 
when people don’t have enough to eat, and they don’t have a 
decent place to live, and they don’t have decent clothing, 
they’re not necessarily going to go to school. If people don’t 
have enough rest and good nutrition, they’re not going to have 
the kinds of things necessary to make them good students. 
 
You people continue to blame the victims, the victims of our 
economic system. But those victims, my friends, are the people 
that we’re all going to have to pay for down the road unless you 
start to do something about it now. We need to move 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

487 
 

immediately to reinstate some of the social programs that you 
have cut. We need to move immediately to ensure that the 
people of our province have enough to eat. And that may mean 
that somewhere along the line you people are going to have to 
increase the welfare rates. 
 
We need a major research project in this province to find out 
why it is that young people are leaving Saskatchewan early or 
leaving school early. We need to know, what do we have to do 
to reintegrate those that have left the school system. We need to 
know what kind of ramifications the core curriculum will have 
in terms of students completing grade 12, because you talk 
about compulsory subjects and you talk about back to the 
basics. We need to know whether smaller class-room sizes 
would allow more individual attention to ensure that young 
people are staying in school. And maybe we need some more 
alternative programs where we can change the atmosphere of 
school. Not all kids fit into the regular school system; some kids 
need a flexible school environment. Schools may have to 
become more flexible in order to keep young people in school. 
 
I want to turn to another issue and that’s the issue of teen 
pregnancy. It has recently come to the attention of 
Saskatchewan citizens that once again Saskatchewan leads the 
nation when it comes to the rate of teen pregnancy in our 
province. 
 
(2115) 
 
Well this government has done a good job of moralizing and 
telling people that they should be not engaged in any kind of 
activity that would lead to teen pregnancy. They’ve ensured that 
there’s no birth control information available in any of the 
public health offices. They’ve ensured that the drug plan has 
been cut to such an extent that it now costs a person 12 to $13 a 
month, I believe, to obtain any kind of birth control, and yet our 
teen pregnancy rate is going up. 
 
We have 11- and 12-year-olds in Saskatchewan that are getting 
pregnant. Before I came into this legislature, I worked with teen 
mothers, young girls who were pregnant. When I was working 
with those young women in 1984-85 there were 13- and 
14-year-olds getting pregnant, and I thought that was terrible. 
When I ran for election in 1982 I did so because I felt it was 
important that we have programs to ensure that those teen 
mothers were staying in school, ensuring that those teen 
mothers were getting their education so that they would not be 
put onto the rolls of the welfare system. 
 
And I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that my own government, prior 
to 1982, could have done a better job of dealing with the teen 
pregnancy rate in Saskatchewan, but we didn’t. I remember, for 
instance, in Alberta they had a program called TERRA (The 
Association For Assistance To Unwed Mothers) for teen 
mothers and their children. They were able to go to school; the 
day care was at that school; they were able to complete their 
education. But under this government you’ve seen all kinds of 
cuts in services to young people. We have to come to grips with 
this. It’s a tragedy when 11- and 12-year-olds are having babies 
in Saskatchewan. It’s a situation that can’t be allowed to 
continue. 

Now what are we going to do about it? We can bury our heads 
in the sand and say it doesn’t happen — that this doesn’t 
happen in our province. But it does — it does. And it’s going to 
continue to happen until such time as people and young people 
have access to quality information, information that’s based on 
fact. It’s going to continue until they have factual information. 
 
Now I know that this government has been struggling with a 
sex education or family life education program for some time. 
And I know it’s a difficult struggle. I know that there are 
parents around Saskatchewan and school board people and 
trustees and directors and teachers that aren’t comfortable with 
the prospect of having this kind of information taught to our 
children in schools. 
 
But I think we have to provide some leadership. It means that 
we have to be honest and factual with the people of 
Saskatchewan. We have to say to Saskatchewan people, 
11-year-olds and 12-year-olds are getting pregnant. We have to 
say to people that we have the highest teen-age pregnancy rate 
in the country, and we’ve got to come to grips with that 
problem. It means that we have to educate ourselves to ensure 
that we have the information so that our young people can have 
the information. It’s not acceptable that young people are 
getting their sexuality information from their peers because 
their peers aren’t necessarily . . . they don’t necessarily have all 
the facts on the subject. 
 
I think it’s incumbent upon the Minister of Education, all 
members of the legislature, to work with our communities to 
ensure that our schools and our young people have access to 
that factual information to lower the teen pregnancy rate in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve got to do that, and we’ve got to do it very 
soon. 
 
Because the teen mothers are the ones, along with a whole host 
of other kids, that are dropping out of school early. They’re 
dropping out of school early. They are part of that 50 per cent 
increase in the dropout rate in Saskatchewan. We can stick our 
heads in the sand, or we can do something about it. And I would 
welcome the opportunity, and I know my colleague, the critic 
for health, would welcome the opportunity to work with the 
Minister of Education and work with the Minister of Health to 
ensure that our young people in Saskatchewan have access to 
factual information so that we can prevent teen pregnancy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The next think I want to talk about is about 
this recent study on AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome). We have a study that was recently commissioned 
and done by the Queen’s University at Kingston on Canada 
Youth and AIDS Study Saskatchewan Report. What this report 
tells us, Mr. Speaker, is that 53 per cent of grade 11 students in 
our province are sexually active — 53 per cent. In fact, we’re 
above the national average. I find that disturbing. 
 
This report also talks about where these young people get their 
information on AIDS. As we all know, AIDS kills, AIDS kills 
people. And yet if you look at this report, the young people who 
have been surveyed indicate that they 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

488 
 

are behaving in such a manner that they are the prime 
candidates for something like AIDS. And where did they get 
their information? They get it from their peers, they get it from 
the streets, but they’re not getting it from schools. 
 
I think this is tied into the whole thing of teen pregnancy, sexual 
activity, and AIDS. But once again, it’s no longer . . . We’re not 
being responsible if we don’t ensure that our young people have 
access to this kind of information. And once again, I know my 
colleague, the critic of Health, and myself, the Education critic, 
would welcome the opportunity to work with the Minister of 
Health and work with the Education minister to ensure that our 
young people in our schools have access to factual information 
on AIDS. I would welcome that opportunity because if we 
don’t, once again, if we continue to stick our heads in the sand, 
we’re putting our young people in a position where they will 
continue their behaviour and they, in fact, are at a great deal of 
risk. 
 
The final thing I want to talk about in this budget speech is the 
whole area of privatization. Now in March of 1988, the minister 
of privatization, Graham Taylor, published what he called the 
“objectives and guide-lines of the PC privatization strategy”. 
And he stated that the privatization strategy or policy of the 
government would have the objective of ensuring that 
Saskatchewan people receive three things: they’d receive full 
benefit from the use of public assets to increase employment 
and create economic and investment opportunity; second thing, 
increased opportunities for personal employee ownership; and 
three, the minister of privatization said that there would be a 
more effective and efficient public service, a good value for 
their money. 
 
I want to talk about what’s happened in Saskatchewan. I 
regularly hear these people say that they don’t want 
governments to own things. These people are the free 
enterprisers, they don’t want to be involved in government 
ownership, and we on this side of the House are the government 
ownership types. 
 
I want to remind all members of the legislature that 
governments own absolutely nothing. You own nothing. The 
people of this province own the highways; they own the 
provincial government buildings; they own the liquor stores; 
they own the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; they own 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation; they own Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance; they own hospitals; they own schools; 
they own SaskTel. You people own nothing. Governments own 
nothing. It’s not yours; it’s all of ours. 
 
Your job is to act as a shepherd of the public assets, sort of like 
the shepherds who are looking after the sheep. Make sure that 
the wolves keep away from the sheep. But what do you guys 
do? What do guys do? You guys are asleep on the job. That’s 
what you people do. You guys are letting the wolves at the 
sheep, and the sheep are the public assets of Saskatchewan. You 
people deserve to be fired because you’re letting the wolves at 
the sheep, and the people of Saskatchewan don’t want to put up 
with it any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Atkinson: — It’s not yours to tamper with, folks. You had 
nothing to do with building it. You had nothing to do with it 
whatsoever, and it’s not yours to sell; it’s not yours to destroy; 
it’s not yours to wreck. It belongs to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and as soon as you get that through your thick 
skulls, the better off we’ll all be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — You had no mandate to sell $40 million 
worth of government highway equipment. You had no mandate 
to fire 400 government workers. You had no mandate to sell off 
the dental equipment and fire 400 dental therapists. You had no 
mandate to sell off SED Systems in Saskatoon and 70 people 
are fired. You had no mandate sell Saskoil and 25 per cent of 
the work-force became unemployed. You have no mandate, 
none whatsoever. You don’t own a thing — remember that. 
You own nothing; the people of Saskatchewan do. You people 
aren’t builders; you’re destroyers, you’re the wrecking crew. 
 
Now what are you doing? You’re firing people all over 
Saskatchewan and people are leaving this province in droves. 
Sixty-three hundred people left Saskatchewan this past month, 
and it was a short month — 6,300 people. Now I remember in 
1982 you people said, bring the kids home, and the kids were 
all going to flood home. Well the kids are leaving this province 
in droves because you offer them no hope and no future. 
 
And I want to talk about some of the privatizations that you 
folks have been involved in, and it’s not a very pretty sight, not 
a pretty sight at all. What have they done for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, natural gas division? Let’s talk about 
SaskPower Corporation. This is the government that said they 
weren’t going to privatize our Crown utilities. No, they weren’t 
going to do that, but what have they done? 
 
Now since this government came to office in 1982, they’ve 
more than doubled the long-term debt of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and they now claim it’s a problem. They doubled 
the debt, they now claim it’s a problem and they’ve got to sell 
everything off. It’s kind of like the Devine deficit they created 
with their string of deficit budgets. Their mismanagement 
creates the problem, then they announce that they have a 
problem — they realize they have a problem — and now they 
propose to further complicate that problem by going further in 
debt with the $1 billion boondoggle at Rafferty-Alameda. 
 
Now every year in the last 10 years the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation’s gas operations have made a profit, and that’s 
enabled the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to moderate the 
effective losses on the electrical side which has suffered losses 
in five of the last six years under the PC government. 
 
In other words, the integrated effect of the gas and the 
electricity side of SPC have been beneficial for Saskatchewan 
consumers. But what did these guys do last year? In April of 
1988 this government suddenly announces that it has privatized 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s natural gas reserves. 
They’ve sold 510 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

489 
 

billion cubic feet of gas to Saskoil, which was once a Crown 
corporation. Now that’s a huge amount of natural gas. That’s 
almost six times its total annual sales volume of gas. They have 
privatized an amount of natural gas equivalent to 15 years 
consumption by 232,000 residential consumers in 
Saskatchewan. That’s what these guys have done. 
 
Now the sale made Saskoil a private company. Seventy-five per 
cent of the shares owned by people in Saskoil are owned by 
people outside of the province — 75 per cent. Now these are the 
guys that say that they want to keep economic control in our 
province, but 75 per cent of the shares in Saskoil are owned by 
people outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this government says that they don’t want to privatize our 
utilities. They privatized the natural gas reserves — 510 billion 
cubic feet of natural gas — they privatized that. They privatized 
the drag-line. They privatized the Poplar River Coal Mine. And 
these guys say they don’t want to privatize the utilities, but no 
one believes them. 
 
Last year you people split up the natural gas division of SPC 
into what’s now called SaskEnergy. And at that time the Deputy 
Premier of our province, who . . . You know you’d like to think 
that the Deputy Premier will be honest with you in this 
legislature, that he will tell you the truth. You’d like to think 
that the Deputy Premier has some integrity, that he isn’t afraid 
to say, I made a mistake. Or he’s not afraid to say, that’s the 
truth. 
 
The Deputy Premier in our province said that the Saskatchewan 
energy, the natural gas side of SaskPower, wasn’t about to be 
sold, that the natural gas side was a utility. It would never be 
sold, in fact, he said. That’s what the Deputy Premier said. 
 
And what do we learn in January? We learn that the PC 
members opposite are about to sell off the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. That’s what we find out from these honourable 
members opposite who never tell an untruth. They never 
misspeak any kind of words. They’re always honest. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No fibs. 
 
(2130) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — No fibs. They don’t lie. These people said 
that they were going to sell off Saskatchewan Energy. Now I 
somehow find this unbelievable. Here’s a government that said 
in 1986, we’re not going to sell the Crown corporations that 
provide utilities to our province; we’ll never do that. The 
Minister of Finance said that, the Premier said that, the 
Deputy-Premier said that, and now they’re selling off the 
natural gas side of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And it’s 
the profitable side of the corporation. 
 
And what are the rest of us going to be left with? Well we’re 
going to be left with a user-pay kind of philosophy. We’re 
going to have a private monopoly socking it to us on the natural 
gas side, and we’re going to have a public monopoly socking it 
to us on the electrical side, because 

they’re not going to have those revenues, the profitable parts of 
SaskPower, to offset the electrical rates. That’s what these 
people do. You can’t trust them, not at all. 
 
Let’s talk about Sask Minerals. Sask Minerals was a good little 
company set up in the late 1940s. It was a sodium sulphate plant 
at Chaplin and Fox Valley, and they had a peat moss operation 
in Carrot River. And this was part of the New Democrats’ 
diversification. 
 
We thought it was important that there was business in rural 
Saskatchewan, that people in rural Saskatchewan would have 
access to jobs. So who in the world would have ever dreamed 
that there would be a peat moss plant up in Carrot River, and 
we’d have a sodium sulphate plant down in Fox Valley and 
Chaplin? Not many people could imagine that. But we were 
able to do that by using the public’s money, the taxpayers’ 
money to ensure that there were jobs in those centres. 
 
Now these little companies made a great deal of money for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They made a great deal of money. The 
government sells off the sodium sulphate plant for $12.5 
million. They sell off the Carrot River operation for $3.4 
million. So the sale was about $15.9 million. That is less than 
Saskatchewan Minerals profits in the last years prior to 
privatization. That’s less than what that little company got in 
terms of profits. Taxpayers’ money wasn’t being used in that 
little operation. It was able to sustain itself. It had profits, it 
provided jobs, it provided grants in lieu of taxes to those 
communities. It was good for business in the area; it has a bit of 
a tax base to ensure that not all of the infrastructure in those 
rural communities were paid for by the individuals that lived 
there. 
 
There was public ownership in that community. And what did 
they get? You know what did we get? This government got 
$12.9 million, which amounts to about 10 days interest on the 
public debt. Nothing. Nothing. And now we hear, now we hear 
that Dickenson Mines of Ontario — I mean these guys didn’t 
sell it to the workers, they didn’t sell it to anybody inside 
Saskatchewan, they sold it to people down east in Ontario and 
Quebec. That’s what these people did. And now what do we 
hear? We hear that Dickenson Mines of Ontario is about to sell 
it. To whom we don’t know — don’t know who. We don’t 
know for how much. We don’t know if the workers will have 
their jobs. We don’t know anything. No guarantees in this 
privatization. No guarantees that these privatized operations 
will continue to exist in Saskatchewan. But there are guarantees 
when the public owns it, there are guarantees, because the 
public will ensure that those operations continue to exist. 
 
And then we have Premier Cdn Enterprises up at Carrot River. 
You know, here’s a Quebec company that said that they were 
going to come in and build a new plant. Well it’s now a year 
past the privatization, we still don’t have a new plant at Carrot 
River, we don’t know whether the new plant will come about. 
We hear that in order for that new plant to come about, the 
government has to build 24 kilometers of pavement in order for 
this new plant to be built. We hear that the rural municipality 
has to forgive about $50,000 in taxes that they used to collect 
from Sask Minerals in order for this plant to be built. So who 
are the 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

490 
 

winners in this little operation? 
 
The people in Carrot River don’t have a new plant. The people 
of the province may have to build 24 kilometers of new 
highway, similar to the Weyerhaeuser deal — don’t get any 
money, but we have to build 35 kilometers of road every year 
— and the rural municipalities may have to give up that 
$50,000 a year tax base that they had and transfer those taxes on 
to the local people. 
 
Now this is an example of PC privatization. There was no 
public tendering — not anything — no public tendering 
whatsoever; there was no advanced consultation with the 
communities affected, and the assets were sold in a sweetheart 
deal to two out-of-province corporations — hardly what I call a 
good deal. 
 
I want to talk about the PC privatization of SED Systems in 
Saskatoon. Now SED Systems was originally established as a 
private company by the University of Saskatchewan in 1972. It 
emerged from the university’s high-tech research and 
development work, and it grew out of the space engineering 
division of the university’s Institute of Space and Atmospheric 
Studies. And in 1987 SED was owned by the university, by the 
province, by the government, and by some of SED’s 
employees. And there were also some private shareholders. And 
this company employed about 350 people in the city of 
Saskatoon, the city I represent. 
 
Now in January of 1987 the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
Conservative government, allowed SED Systems to be taken 
over by an Ontario company called Fleet Aerospace. Now the 
PC minister of Economic Development, the member from 
Kindersley at the time, defended the deal. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he say? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — He claimed that it was going to preserve the 
350 jobs in Saskatoon, and it would keep the management of 
the company in Saskatchewan, in Saskatoon. The province sold 
about $2 million shares in SED Systems to Fleet in exchange 
for Fleet shares worth about $1.3 million at the time. That was 
$11.75 per share in January 1987. 
 
Now what happens in early January 1988? The deal has totally 
failed. Fleet has forced SED Systems to lay off 70 workers, it’s 
threatened to fire more staff or even pull SED out of 
Saskatchewan unless the provincial government gives in to the 
demands of Fleet Aerospace. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Blackmail. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Blackmail, Mr. Speaker, that’s what happens. 
Blackmail from an Ontario-based company, blackmail. Not fair. 
Now in late 1988 or late February 1988, Fleet’s chairman in 
Ontario tells us . . . He threatens us bluntly and publicly. The 
message to the government is, we better get some financial help 
and some help quick. I’m quoting the chairman. If we don’t 
have help, we’ll cut it right back again, and again, and we may 
even have to move. That’s what the chairman says, George 
Dragone, February 24, 1988, Star-Phoenix interview. 

Now in March of 1988, what does SED do? They’re forced to 
do this by this Ontario company. They have to lay off more 
workers, and they replace SED’s Saskatchewan managers, 
people born and raised in Saskatchewan, with an officer of Fleet 
Aerospace from Ontario. 
 
Now in late March the PC government gave in to Fleet’s latest 
demands for financial help; the PC government agreed that 
Sedco would purchase SED’s new building for $10 million in 
order to give SED and Fleet some operating cash. And Sedco 
leased back the building . . . would lease the building to SED 
Systems for about 20 years. And the terms of the lease have 
never been disclosed to this date. 
 
Now from the onset I’d say that the PC managers opposite have 
mismanaged this situation badly. They’ve mismanaged the 
privatization of SED Systems in Saskatchewan. This used to be 
a proud and successful Saskatchewan high-tech company. This 
company is the company that has allowed Saskatchewan to go 
ahead with high technology in our province. This is the 
company that has developed the expertise in our province. 
 
Many of the people who now have high-tech companies 
originally come out of SED Systems. That’s where they come 
from. This used to be a proud and successful high-tech 
Saskatchewan company. It was developed by Saskatchewan 
people to give Saskatchewan a chance to participate in 
high-tech opportunities, but this PC privatization has produced 
the following results: 70 workers fired, not to work again in 
Saskatoon. 
 
The province’s $2 million investment in Fleet, if it were sold 
today on the Toronto Stock Exchange, is only worth $600,000. 
You people really are good business men and women — good 
business men and women — $2 million worth of Fleet. We 
have about $3 million worth of a share in SED Systems. You 
buy it or you exchange it for $2 million of shares, and those 
shares are only worth $600,000. Great mathematicians over 
there. Great business people. So these mismanagers, these 
people that couldn’t run a popcorn stand — and no disrespect to 
all the popcorn stand owners in Saskatchewan. 
 
The ownership and control of this Saskatchewan company has 
now been given over to an Ontario company that uses public 
threats to get more money from Saskatchewan people, to get 
more financial assistance from Saskatchewan people. And the 
minister, the member from Kindersley, what does he say? He 
says that this is a good deal for Saskatchewan; this is going to 
keep this company in Saskatchewan; it’s going to keep 
Saskatchewan workers in Saskatchewan. And we all know that 
this is the minister who was responsible for the Pioneer fiasco 
in 1985. Some minister. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now I want to talk about the highway 
privatization. In April of 1983, the PC Highways minister Jim 
Garner — who my colleague earlier referred to tonight, he was 
the minister that lied to the House and had the good 
graciousness to resign his seat because he lied 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

491 
 

 — he fired 157 Saskatchewan highway workers because he 
was privatizing the road-building function of our province. 
 
And he said — and I remember these words with a lot of 
interest because I know a lot of those highways people that 
were laid off — these lay-offs are a move from socialism to 
freedom for the employees who will now have the opportunity 
to work for the private sector. That’s what the minister said. 
 
And then this minister, this same minister, began some further 
privatization of the highways, and that led to a further firing of 
some 237 workers. And he said again, it’s freedom of choice. 
I’m giving them the opportunity to transfer to the private sector. 
So we’ve got over 400 highway workers that have lost their 
jobs. 
 
I want to talk about the state of our highways. Has anybody 
been driving on the highways lately in Saskatchewan? Well, 
Mr. Minister of Highways, I think it’s time you took a little trip. 
I know you guys like to fly in the airplanes. I noticed the other 
day that my colleagues, when we went up to the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation convention, we rented a van and drove the 
Saskatchewan highways. I noticed that the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs, and the Minister of Education, the Minister 
of Health, they took an airplane. And maybe if the cabinet 
minister got off the government aircraft and got into some cars 
and drove down the highways, you would understand that the 
privatization of 400 highways workers has led to a serious 
deterioration of the highways in our province, and it’s time that 
you people put your feet on the ground and got down with the 
little people and . . . (inaudible) . . . what was going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — These high flyers. It’s time they got down to 
earth. Because the privatization of the highways equipment, the 
privatization of those jobs has meant over 400 people have lost 
their jobs in Saskatchewan at a time when we can’t afford to 
have any jobs lost. Four hundred pieces of highways equipment 
worth about $40 million was only sold for 6 million — 6 
million — and many of the people who purchased that 
equipment were from outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
So privatization of highways has meant lost jobs, lost assets to 
people in the United States and Alberta and who knows where, 
and a significant deterioration of our highways in 
Saskatchewan. That’s what privatization has meant for our 
highways. 
 
And I want to turn for a moment to Saskoil, and I referred to it 
earlier when I talked about the privatization of SPC. Now the 
PC government privatized Saskoil in 1986, and from the time 
the PC government took office in 1982, Saskoil made a profit 
every year until its first year as a privatized corporation. In 
1982 public ownership of Saskoil meant $1.5 million in profits. 
In 1983 there was $30.9 million in profits. In 1984 there was 
$44 million in profits. In 1985, $40.6 million in profits; and 
when it was privatized, there was a $1.3 million loss in 1986; 
and in 1987 they had a profit of 22.6 million. 

(2145) 
 
Now in the privatization process, preferred shares were sold to 
private investors and those preferred shareholders have received 
dividends, even in 1986 when the corporation lost 1.3 million. 
The only shares that the Government of Saskatchewan has on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan — because, as I said, 
governments own nothing; the people do — the government 
shares or the people’s shares are common shares, and those 
shares don’t pay a cent in dividends. Even in 1987 when this 
company, this privatized company, made $22.6 million, the 
people of this province didn’t receive one single share from that 
privatized Saskoil. 
 
Now in 1984, before privatization, Saskoil made a profit of $44 
million, and all of that money was kept in Saskatchewan on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. In 1986 when that 
company lost $1.3 million, it paid nothing to the people of 
Saskatchewan, but it did pay dividends of some $5 million to 
the private shareholders of preferred shares. 
 
Now, within six months of Saskoil, which was a publicly 
owned company, within six months of it being privatized, 25 
per cent of the labour force was laid off — 25 per cent were laid 
off by these privatizers. And within one year of privatization 
. . . Now here’s the government that wants to keep, they say 
they want to keep ownership and control in Saskatchewan, but 
that’s not what actually happens. We’ve seen ownership and 
control leave Saskatchewan on SED Systems, on Sask 
Minerals, and we’ve seen the ownership and control leave 
Saskatchewan on Saskoil, because over 75 per cent of the 
shares held by people are held by people outside of 
Saskatchewan — they’re not held by Saskatchewan citizens. 
And every time the Saskoil pays a dividend, 75 per cent of 
those dividends go to other provinces. That’s where they go. 
They don’t stay here for us to tax the individual shareholders — 
Saskatchewan shareholders. That money doesn’t stay in 
Saskatchewan. Yet when it was publicly owned, that money 
stayed here. It was put to work here on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Now people wonder why our highways are deteriorating, why 
our school systems are deteriorating, why our health care 
system is deteriorating. It’s because these people don’t know 
how to collect revenues. They’re selling things off. They’re 
selling off the assets that used to provide revenues to pay for 
important public programs. That’s why. That’s why. 
 
And you know, I looked at the Saskoil annual report in 1987. 
Saskoil only paid about $10 million in corporate taxes, and 
that’s not all money that stayed in Saskatchewan; that’s 
corporate taxes to Ottawa. And we don’t know how much 
money Saskatchewan receives, probably not much. Now that 
. . . In 1985 Saskoil made $40.6 million. That money stayed 
here. It’s now privatized — it’s owned by people outside of 
Saskatchewan. When there’s profits made, they go to people 
outside of Saskatchewan. When income taxes are paid, they go 
to the federal government. And one of the reasons why we had 
public ownership was to ensure that resource rent stayed in our 
province for our people, on behalf of our people, and these 
people are giving it away. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

492 
 

I want to talk about the privatization of Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation. Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation was formed in 1974 as a hard-rock mining 
company. And the purpose of SMDC, as it’s called, was to 
develop hard-rock mining in northern Saskatchewan on behalf 
of all of Saskatchewan’s citizens. It became a fully integrated 
mining company, actively involved in exploration development 
in mining in northern Saskatchewan. And over the past five 
years Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation has 
made a total profit of $126 million for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And its profits in 1987 alone — we haven’t seen 
the 1988 annual report — amounted to $60.3 million. That’s 
what that publicly owned company made on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people. But that represents a 19 per cent return 
on investment. And I know that most people over there don’t 
understand this, but a 19 per cent return on investment is a 
mighty nice profit, mighty nice for a publicly owned company. 
 
Now in late February, 1988, the government — the Mulroney 
and the Devine governments — decided that they were going to 
have a merger. They were going to amalgamate Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation and Eldorado Nuclear, which 
is a federally owned Crown corporation and they were going to 
create a new big uranium and hard-rock mining company. 
 
Now Eldorado Nuclear is a very weak company. It’s not in very 
good shape financially. Its retained earnings deficit in the last 
few years has been about $144 million, and it has a long-term 
debt of some $420 million. Now the PC privatizationed phase 
for this privatization of these two companies is supposed to 
occur in two stages. Bill 56 was introduced in our legislature 
last June and it was the legislation to sell Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation and merge it with Eldorado to form a 
new company which is now owned by the Government of 
Saskatchewan — or the people of Saskatchewan, because I said 
governments own nothing. The people of Saskatchewan own 
about 61.5 per cent, and the Government of Canada owns about 
38.5 per cent of this company. Now the privatization of this 
company is to take about seven years, and the first share 
offering is expected some time in early spring. 
 
Now in our view, that’s a pretty dangerous timetable for selling 
off the shares of this company. You will know that this is not a 
particularly good commercial deal. And it’s not good because 
the price of uranium in particular is down at the moment. 
Market conditions wouldn’t dictate that you’d want to have a 
share offer at this time because the market’s down. 
 
Now the two governments, the federal government and the 
provincial government, have agreed to sell off about 30 per cent 
of their shares in two years, 60 per cent in four years, and 100 
per cent of all shares will be sold in the next seven-year period. 
 
Now there’s absolutely no guarantee that this corporation will 
not be sold at fire-sale prices, and that the Saskatchewan 
government will recover both the long-term debt of the 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, which it 
has underwritten to 

make the share issue possible, as well as something for the 
accumulative investment of the people of this province in the 
government equity in SMDC. 
 
Now once again, the PC members opposite have privatized the 
privatization process. They refuse to release any details of the 
documents. All of these deals have been done in secret. They’re 
secret deals with the federal government. 
 
Now, I might add that we now have the spectre, the possibility 
of the privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
There’s one thing I’ve come to learn about these guys opposite. 
These guys like doing deals. They don’t know how to manage 
Saskatchewan, but they like to do deals. They like to go out to 
The Diplomat, or is it the Ramada Renaissance, and have a nice 
dinner with fancy tablecloths and fancy china and dinner ware, 
and they like to do deals with their buddies, they really like it. 
 
They like flying in government airplanes, they like the 
champagne, they like the wine, they like the good food, they 
really enjoy that. They like putting together deals. But I want to 
remind the people opposite that while you’re putting together 
the deals, you have no mandate to put together the deals. You 
have no mandate whatsoever. You have no mandate to be eating 
out at The Diplomat or the Hotel Saskatchewan or the Ramada 
Renaissance, I think it’s called — I’ve not been there too often 
— you have no mandate to be there. No mandate whatsoever. 
 
You’re sitting at those tables with those fancy tablecloths and 
those fancy knives and forks and those fancy china dishes. 
You’re sitting there with your big business friends and you’ve 
got no mandate to be there. And you’re sitting there on the 
taxpayers’ money, and don’t ever forget that — don’t forget it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now I would hope that when we come to 
government in 1990 that we’ll have some respect for the 
taxpayers, that we’ll have some respect. That maybe we’ll be 
eating hamburgers some place instead of shrimp and filet 
mignon and bouillabaisse and all this kind of crap. I hope that 
we are going to take the taxpayers’ money that they give us to 
use on their behalf, and treat it with some respect, treat it with 
some respect. Because lots of people see you big shots eating 
out and dining out and cooking your deals. They see you do that 
and they don’t like it, they don’t like it. They don’t think you 
have any integrity, none whatsoever. 
 
Now I know, when you guys came to power, I think you had 
lots of good ideas. I think you really thought you were going to 
turn our province right side up. But what have you done? 
You’ve turned it inside out, upside down, sideways, forwards, 
backwards. You’ve wrecked it. You’ve wrecked it. You’ve 
wrecked it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The people . . . As I said earlier, the people 
of Saskatchewan think that you’re destroying us. They think 
you’re destroying us. They see what you’re doing to our 
beautiful, wonderful province. You know if 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

493 
 

you people had any kind of courage, any kind of commitment to 
the people of Saskatchewan, you’d say, look it, we don’t know 
how to manage. We don’t know what we’re doing, we give up 
and call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — People of Saskatchewan, I hear it all the 
time; they hear about little deals that you cook up with your 
friends; they hear it all the time. They hear about your little 
deals with your friends; they build a building, the people of 
Saskatchewan rent it for big rent. They know what you’ve done 
to the Ramada Renaissance. They know that basically the 
Ramada Renaissance in Regina was built on taxpayers’ money, 
that you’ve entered into a long-term lease with the Ramada 
Renaissance, that you put public departments into that building. 
 
And the member . . . the member from Saltcoats shakes his 
head. Well you know, Mr. Member from Saltcoats, I was out in 
your constituency, and there’s lots of scams that you’re engaged 
in out there too, and the people out there know it, the people 
know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And the member claps. The member claps 
because he’s proud of himself. He’s proud of the fact that he 
and his buddies and his cronies are ripping us off. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan will not forgive you. They 
will not forgive you, Mr. Member from Saltcoats, and they will 
never forget you. And I think it’s time that you people know 
that when we come to government, we are going to be looking 
in every nook and cranny in this province for the patronage and 
the corruption and the graft and the rip-off and the sleaze, 
because the people of this province know that you are the 
corrupters, you’re the sleaze, you’re the rip-off artists. We’ll be 
looking, and we will make sure that you people are never, 
never, never elected again because we are going to expose you 
for what you have done. We will expose you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And all of you will be held accountable, 
every single, solitary one of you. The member from Kindersley, 
and the kind of stuff that is going on in his riding. The member 
from Rosetown, and the stuff that is going on in his riding. And 
Melville, and Morse, and Melfort, and Saltcoats, and Redberry, 
and Moosomin, and Regina South, and Shellbrook-Torch River. 
We know what you people are up to; we know what you people 
are up to. And you laugh. Don’t laugh, because it’s going to 
come out; it’s going to come out. Don’t laugh. All of you better 
run for cover. You better run for cover because you will be 
exposed for what you are. You have no right to rip off the 
people of our province, no right whatsoever, and we will expose 
you; we will expose you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to 
present my views on this throne speech. The people of 
Saskatchewan know what this government is up to. They 

know that this government are acting in many respects like a 
bunch of bureaucrats, that they don’t care about the people of 
our province. 
 
And we have some screaming maniac at the back of the hall . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — From Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. And you know what, 
Mr. Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, Minister of Finance, yes, you get up, 
you get up and exit, because you’ll be scrutinized by the people 
of our province. You’ll be scrutinized. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know what this budget’s all about. 
They know that this government has delivered the people’s 
assets to their corporate friends and their political cronies. They 
know that this government’s about patronage, that this 
government’s about rewarding a few people. They know that 
this government believes in the trickle-down theory: you feed 
your friends and maybe the rest of us will get a few crumbs. But 
a new day is dawning. A new day is dawning, members 
opposite. There will be a new Jerusalem in this province. We 
will have a new premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — We will have members of the legislature with 
integrity . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It being 10 o’clock the House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


