





























































Hansard: August 24, 1989


August 24, 1989 
 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 34 - An Act to amend The Parks Act 
 

Mr. Chairman: - I would ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, hon. members. Seated beside me is Ross 
MacLennan, executive director operations; seated immediately behind me is Steven Schiefner, legislative officer 
with the department; and beside Mr. Schiefner is Don MacAuley, director of parks branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have just a few questions I want to ask 
on Bill 34. And first of all, I want to start off with section 4, subsection 15(3), and it looks like now that you are 
going to, by policy rather than legislation, look after the buffer zones that we have around our lakes and rivers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister I wonder if you could explain to me why you would want to do this by policy rather than 
legislation. What would be the reason for the change in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - The existing situation, Mr. Chairman, is that we have . . . I’ll explain this. The lake or the 
water - and this is within parks, this isn’t general across the province; we’re only speaking with provincial parks 
- we have the lake, we have the shore, and then a 10-metre zone beyond the shore. That 10-metre zone currently 
prohibits the building of marinas or boat docks, so that people who want to do that within a provincial park 
legally cannot, because they are infringing on property that is under the purview, in this Act, of the Crown. 
 
What we would like to do is make it possible for developments such as marina harbour to take place. We’ve 
been under pressure from cottage owners’ associations and others to allow marinas to be built on lakes within 
provincial parks. All this legislation would do would enable that to happen. 
 
Mr. Thompson: - So you’re actually taking about a marina, a dredging situation would be built into the buffer 
zone that exists right today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Yes, Mr. Chairman, that could conceivably happen. In the case of Elbow harbour, that is 
certainly the case, and at Sask Landing park as well in Omache Bay. 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I now want to turn to section 6. This . . . (inaudible) 
. . . provides summary process for dealing with individuals who are illegally occupying park land. Mr. Minister, 
I wonder if you could explain this section, illegally occupying park land. Who would this cover? 
 



Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - I’m advised, Mr. Chairman, it doesn’t happen often but it has happened in the past 
whereby someone whose lease has expired, and for whatever reason has not been renewed, continues to occupy 
the land, or in the case of an individual who moves into park land and ostensibly becomes a squatter on park 
land, this would give us the authority to remove them. Currently we don’t have that authority. 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Does this cover individuals who have lived in that park land prior to the park even being 
created? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that this is only in the case of people who are occupying park 
land with no authority to be there. Currently there is no remedy with The Parks Act to require them to remove 
whatever they have erected on park land property, and this would just given the legal authority to ask them to 
leave that property. 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Yes, well you didn’t answer my question though, Mr. Minister. You talk about them being on 
there without any authority, but the question that I asked you is: are we dealing with individuals who were in 
there as a homesteaders or trappers, or whatever it may be, and have been living there for maybe the last 34 
years, and then the park was created, and now you want to relocate them? Is this the individuals who we would 
be talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - I understand the intent of the question now, Mr. Chairman. I’m sorry I didn’t get it the first 
time. No, those people are certainly not affected by this, not at all. 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Finally, I want to turn to section 8 of the Bill, and this is where I think that the Bill should be 
pulled and redrafted. 
 
The minister may appoint: 
 
(a) any employees or categories of employees of the department . . . 
 
as enforcing officers for the purpose of enforcing . . . this Act . . . 
 
Then you go on to explain, Mr. Minister, that the change will provide the minister with the flexibility to appoint 
persons other than employees of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture as enforcement officers. You 
talk about primarily for federal staff of Canadian parks to carry out provincial regulations. And it seems to me, 
Mr. Minister, that this Bill should be pulled, redrafted to make this very clear. As it’s stated here, you can 
appoint any employee or class of employee as enforcement officers. And I think that this is giving powers far 
greater than any minister would even want. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Minister, you would want . . . these type of powers, and it seems to me that it can be . . . it’s just 
open for abuse. I’m not suggesting in any way that you would abuse this clause, but to me, when you put in a 
clause in a Bill that the minister may appoint any employee or any class of employee, then it suggests that 
individuals who are working part time for the department or secretaries or truck drivers, whatever it may be, 
could become enforcement officers. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, I’ve said this before, that I think that that is a bad part of this Bill. And the Bill should 
be withdrawn and redrafted and make it far more clear what you’re doing here on the federal employees 
enforcing provincial Acts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, when this was being drafted, I had the same concerns as the hon. member. 
In fact it was raised through our own committee and through our own caucus. 



 
First of all, the hon. member is quite correct that this is being inserted and is being drafted and put in here to 
cover the grasslands primarily, in fact specifically the grasslands, whereby we would have federal officers 
enforcing provincial rules in our portion of that park. So that’s the intent of it. 
 
What I’m advised by the legal folks is that it had to be drafted in a broad fashion because we’re dealing with 
several different groups. And the wording for this in The Parks Act is similar to The Alcohol Control Act, The 
Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982, Heritage Property Act, and The Fisheries Act, because there will be more 
than one group involved in this particular enforcement section. So it had to be drafted in a broad fashion. Bit is 
doesn’t give me or anybody else licence because the people who would be appointed to enforce The Parks Act 
have to be qualified and trained, and they have to be high calibre officers. 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Well that’s fine, Mr. Minister, with your explanation. Bit I still say that this leaves the Bill 
open because it says that the minister may appoint any employee or class of employees of the department as 
enforcement officers. And I think that that just leave it open because if you’re going to have a Bill like this, why 
not be specific and indicate exactly who you’re dealing with. 
 
And I’m not going to belabour this, but I do indicate to you, and for the record, Mr. Minister, that I think that 
this should be pulled and redrafted and made more specific. Fine, if you insist on going through as it, you know, 
I’m not going to take the time of the House today. But mot certainly we on this side feel that this is a bad clause 
in the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - If I could just briefly respond, Mr. Chairman. I know what the hon. member’s concerned, 
because they have been raised with our own caucus, and the legal people explained to us that this is the way is 
has to be drafted. So although on the surface it may look like very broad and sweeping, when you go through it 
in detail with the lawyers, it really isn’t. And I give every assurance to the hon. member that there’s absolutely 
no intent here to find ourselves appointing people who are not qualified to be doing enforcement work. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
(0815) 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 71 - An Act to amend The Renewable 
Resources, Recreation and Culture Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: - Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Once again, I go to section 4 of this Bill, Mr. Minister, 
and you have the same clause in the, you may: “designate any employee . . .” 
 
And once again, Mr. Minister, I don’t know why you’re using these extraordinary powers. I just feel that, as I 
indicated before, I thought that the other Bill, Bill 34, should have been pulled and redrafted. I also want to 
indicate to you that I think that this is another bill that also should be pulled and redrafted because it’s exactly 
the same. It gives the minister exactly the same powers, and also in this Bill if gives officers who are appointed 
by authority to go in and seize books and documents and take copies and return them, and I just think that this is 



the type of powers that you, as the minister, I’m sure, really should not have. And I don’t believe that you would 
want these types of powers. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to indicate to you again that I think that these are powers that should not 
be in here. I know you indicate that you get this type of information and then you go down the road, I think, 
once you implement it and you find out that you can run into a lot of problems. 
 
I can remember when the decision as made by this department - and we made that decision to harvest a calf 
moose - and there was a lot of debate over that. I was always opposed to that legislation where you would sell 
licence to kill a calf moose every year, and I still maintain that that was a bad policy. And now we see it, as the 
years go on, that it’s become a real detrimental policy to the moose population in our province. 
 
This, I think, is the same thing. You’re going to find our as we go through, you’re going to run into problems 
with this by having that authority to be able to designate anybody to enforce these laws. And with that, Mr. 
Chairman, and I know, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to take the time of the House, I just want to make sure that 
you realize on this side of the House that we are opposed to this clause in the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I note the hon. member’s concerns, and they’re the same as in the previous 
Bill, and the answer I gave previously applied here. Again, the legal folk said it has to very broad because there 
a number of categories of individual who are involved in enforcement, not just resource officers or conservation 
officers, but there are wildlife technicians, superintendents, supervisors, people of that nature. And I was told 
that it had to be phrased in this particular fashion to cover that. 
 
So I note the hon. member’s concerns. Again, I give him the assurance that the intent is not to be appointing 
everybody and their dog and cat to be out doing enforcement, not at all. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Clause 5, an amendment proposed by the minister: 
 
Amend subsection 9.1(1) of the Act, as being enacted by section 5 of the printed Bill, by adding “and that there 
is evidence of the offence to be found at the place or premises or on the vehicle or boat to be searched,” after 
“an offence against this Act or the regulations has occurred.” 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - I’d like to thank the minister and his officials and ask the minister to report the Bill with 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 60 - An Act to amend The Northern 



Municipalities Act 
 

Mr. Chairman: - I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right I have Dave Innes, my deputy minister, and to his 
right I have Gerry Stinson, who is our director from the North from La Ronge. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goulet: - Yes, on one of the sections there was a grandfathering clause in regards to certification. Now I 
wanted to know from the minister: how many of the people do not have proper certification, and what will be 
done in regards to the training of them, and what level of certification are we talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, we really don’t anticipate a problem in this area, and I explained this to all of 
the councils in the North that I meet with regularly. What we’ trying to do is, as time goes by and the clerks 
retire or more along or whatever, that the new clerks that come in, the new administrators, have taken the 
course, and I believe it’s a two-year course. And there are some young people in the North that have qualified 
themselves already for these jobs. But certainly the people that are sitting in the present positions are 
grandfathered; we don’t plan on forcing anybody out of their existing employment, and this is just to protect the 
northern communities in the futures. 
 
I think that all of the communities in the North recognize this, and we don’t have a problem with it. neither do 
they, from my understanding of it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - My other question, a more specific question to you in regards to that was what was the exact level 
of certification required, and how many of the smaller communities still do not have this level of certification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, I understand that all but two presently quality as a level C. And some of the 
hamlets, of course, because of their size, they don’t have that certification, but the administrators and clerks 
there work closely with our northern officials. And all we’re trying to do is upgrade their whole system so that 
we take a little bit of reliance from the department out of their responsibilities, and we’re trying to get them and 
encourage them to work alone. But it will be a level C qualification, and I’ve been advised that all but two of the 
villages have that now. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - How many hamlets would that be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - We have about 14 hamlets now, and four or five are certified and the other are not. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - So there’s approximately 10 then that are not certified. What is being done then in regards to long-
term upgrading of the people there? Is there any specific programming available to them to make sure that 
they’re up to standards as time goes on, and are you working with the Department of Education to get this 
upgrading done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Presently, Mr. Chairman, there is a local government administration course that’s available by 
correspondence from the University of Regina, and that’s the one that they’re taking. It’s a two-year course. And 
Northlands College right now is presently looking at it to see if they should maybe include it and provide for 
that. 
 
You have to recognize that, you know, that’s it’s a limited opportunity, and although we want to upgrade those 
people, it’s not mush sense of 200 people, for instance, getting certified because there’s simply not 200 



administrators needed up there. But presently the University of Regina extension services are filling the needs 
for them. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - What are the requirements to enter this program that at present that exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Presently they are accepting them as a mature student basis and there no academic 
qualifications required for them. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - Okay, then I want to move on to the question of independent school. And I’m just wondering, Mr. 
Minister, to what extent . . . what independent schools are we talking about in northern Saskatchewan in that 
case? 
 
(0830) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Presently there are none, and probably there will not be. And I have explained this again to the 
mayors and council. They’re fully aware that what we’re trying to do is get the northern Act almost identical in 
all respects to the urban Acts so that we can have similar . . . one Act throughout the entire province. So that 
provision is in there because it will be coming in the urban Act, and then the two Acts will be the same almost. 
And that provision has been in there just for that reason; there are no private schools, and to my knowledge 
there are none that will be there. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - Are these the same schools that are referred to in the new education Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Yes, they are the same ones. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - In regards to the next one, section 16, you’ve imposed new conditions on grants, and I wanted to 
know what was the rationale for that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, it’s just a simple housekeeping amendment to get it in line. It refers to The 
Planning and Development Act, and it just brings it into line with it. There is nothing there other than that; it’s a 
cross-reference. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: - Mr. Minister, one quick question on independent schools. The definition, I believe, in The 
Education Act, the new amendments to The Education Act refer to students of compulsory school age. Is that 
the same definition that you are using in your Act, only to student of compulsory school age, or does it extend 
beyond that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Yes, it is the same. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: - I’m given to understand that only compulsory school age. It doesn’t extend beyond the compulsory 
school age. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s correct. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 61 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



Bill No. 26 - An Act to amend The Planning and 
Development Act, 1983 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, during debate on second readings, I made the 
point that I thought that there should be explicit provisions for public input insofar as planning for the northern 
administration district was concerned. What you’re proposing to do in this Bill, in part, is to set into place a 
process by which you will lay down in effect the zoning by-laws for a number of cottage subdivisions in the 
northern administration district. 
 
It’s indicated that the advice that you receive in terms of amending or setting that zoning by-law in the first 
instance or those regulations, or amending that in the future, will come from your officials. But there’s nothing 
explicitly suggested in terms of any public input. There’s no reference, for example, to section 14 of the current 
Act which permits you, as any other council, to set up a municipal planning commission which might provide an 
opportunity to citizen input. And I wonder if you’ve given any thought if you have any comments to make in 
that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, the Bill does allow that provision, and I can establish . . . I, as the minister, or 
the minister can establish a municipal planning commission. It’s not explicitly included in the Bill because the 
people may not want it in any particular area, and we don’t want to make them subject to a provision that they 
may not want. It’s out intention to provide that for them because we want public input, and the minister will 
have the authority to put in that municipal planning commission, but it will only be put in the areas where the 
people would want that privilege and would want to do the work associated with it. 
 
So I think that your concern is addressed, but we would rather not have it explicitly in the event that we couldn’t 
get a commission together in an area, and the people may not want that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - I wonder then, Mr. Minister, if you might briefly outline the provisions that you have now, 
or the steps that you’ll be taking to ensure public input at this point before developing any zoning regulations 
pursuant to this Act, and subsequently in terms of any amendments. What steps are you planning to take to 
ensure that public input? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well I suppose under section 14 of the Act, that’s where the provision for that is, and it’s 
always been our intention to utilize that. It’s not in this Bill, but under section 14 of the Act we have that 
provision. And again, all I can say is that we always do look for input from the public, and early public 
discussion is a vital element of any land use planning matter. 
 
So we would use that and we would put these commissions in under section 14 of the Act rather than in this 
Bill. And it’s our intention that if we run into any kind of a problem that’s exactly what we would do. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Earlier you said that you weren’t sure whether people might want any municipal planning 
commissions subject to section 14. So what you’re saying then is that you will proceed to solicit public input as 
you develop the zoning regulations in the manner prescribed under section 14, but if that’s not satisfactory that 
you’ll find some other way to ensure that there will be public input? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, the member is right. Ideally, we would establish these planning commission. 
There may be the odd isolated case, however, that the department would have to work with, for instance the 
Department of Parks. And it might involve a separate piece of land or something like that that a planning 



commission just wouldn’t work, and you know, the government of the day would have to be able to make a 
decision on it. 
 
So in those few instances that could occur. But generally speaking, what you would like to see happen will 
indeed be happening, and we will be establishing these committees where and when they’re necessary. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 31 inclusive agreed. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - House amendment moved by the Minister of Urban Affairs to amend section 32 of the printed 
Bill. Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 32 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 33 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 87 - An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to briefly, Mr. Minister, deal with the question of resort 
villages and the loophole that’s there now in the legislation. Can you tell me how this loophole came to exist. 
Has it been there for a while, or how long it’s been there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, in 1985 when we amended the urban Act, the ceilings that were in place were 
removed to give the local municipalities more autonomy. Obviously at that time we weren’t anticipating the 
problem that arose now, and as a result we have to do something with it, and we’re doing that in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Mr. Minister, I thank you for your answer. I just wondered, do you have any program in 
place now to get into some substantive discussions with the resort villages as to this whole question? I mean the 
question of Candle Lake, I think it is, where the problem arose with these discounts and doing an end run around 
paying school taxes, might be an isolated example, or maybe there was one other resort village that was doing it 
 
But I think it was very symptomatic of the general frustration that resort villagers, cottage owners in 
Saskatchewan have about what they perceive to be double taxes. And I wonder if this is not because you as a 
government are playing footsie with cottage owners and they’re misinterpreting your signals, that you’re trying 
to give them some impression that you agree that school taxes should be removed from cottage owners, and 
they’re taking the lead now on his and calling your hand. I wonder if you have any clear definitive statement that 
you wish to make in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I think about the only clear definitive statement that I could make is that 
we encourage the formation of PARCS (Provincial Association of Resort Communities of Saskatchewan) which 
is the provincial association of resort communities, because it was obvious, I think, to everybody, the problem 
that was starting to exist on the issue of the education portion of the property taxes in those areas. And PARCS, 



as a little fledgling association, had to get organized if they wanted to get anywhere on this issue, because it was 
very difficult to work in isolated instances where the single individual taxpayer simply complained about the 
level of taxation on the education side. 
 
We attend regularly their annual conferences. I believe their third conference will be coming up this fall and 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) is working with them. They have made provisions for 
a member of the PARCS to sit in on their discussions. So where all this is going to lead to eventually, I don’t 
know. 
 
I know that in my discussions with them, you know, it’s fair to say I ask them the question, what’s in a name? 
You may not very well use the education system in your resort areas, but certainly the demand then would be 
there for other services, such as highways, that the municipalities must bear, and you know, if you simply 
changed the name to some other tax, would that work? So it’s an issue that is really starting to come to light 
now. 
 
You made a suggestion in your remarks in second reading that it may be time to take an issue like this out to the 
public. We don’t have any plans, but along that idea, that’s not a bad idea that you came up with. If you could 
organize some sort of a legitimate forum that would get you somewhere, other than representation by the people 
complaining about the level of taxation, because you know very well, you’re experienced in this area to know 
that if you shifted any of that education tax portion our of the resort communities, you would shift it to the 
balance to the municipalities. 
 
Well then SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) becomes involved, and they’re not too 
pleased with that. So it is a problem, and it is a problem that will have to certainly be addressed as time goes by, 
and that time is rapidly approaching. 
 
If we could come up with some kind of a plan on public process and public meetings where you could get to a 
definitive answer, that would be the ideal situation, of course. Whether we can get there or not, I don’t know. So 
at this time we are simply working with everybody and getting more input, getting people to recognize each 
other’s problems, and hopefully somewhere along the line that issue could then resolve itself somehow. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - My feeling is, or at least my assessment of the situation, Mr. Minister, is that it’s not 
entirely clear where you as a government stand. And I guess it’s important that you clearly enunciate your 
position, and that you need to know whether or not you’re going to bow to the wishes of the resort villagers, the 
cottage owners. You indicated that you encouraged the formation of this provincial association of resort 
communities and, you know, I think legitimately so. But in the context of this issue you’re saying that, you 
know, the value of the associations because they weren’t getting anywhere at the time, or they were not getting 
anywhere on this issue, and therefore an association might help. 
 
I guess my question is: is that a signal then to them that you have flexibility on that issue, that you are prepared 
to change the government’s position on that issue, or do you as a government stand firm on that issue? And 
that’s not entirely clear. And I think that for all concerned that there needs to be a public airing of this matter, 
and it needs to be clearer just where the government stands, because as long as these people have some 
impression that you might bend, they might continue to force your hand on this matter. And that’s simply the 
point that I was making. 
 
I think that a public airing of the whole issue to make it clear where you stand, and if you’re going to show some 
flexibility what that might be, that that’s what’s required in this instance, otherwise we might see more repeats 
of the same situation. 
 



So I don’t have any further questions on this unless the minister wants to comment further on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - The only observation that I could make is that the government, regardless of the 
administration as times goes by, has got a problem here because traditionally the municipalities and school 
boards generate their revenues through the tax base. And the minute that you start excluding some particular 
group, such as the resort village owners, now then as a group you could have the forming community, now then 
as a group you could have the business community, and I think that any government has to proceed very 
cautiously. 
 
The important thing right now is that we have the resort communities established as an association, and at least 
we have a focal point for discussions. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: - Mr. Chairman, I’d like to direct a question to the minister. Mr. Minister, are you familiar 
with the resort village of Mistusinne, which is just south of Elbow on Lake Diefenbaker? The resort village is 
withholding its school tax portion. And I wonder if you could distinguish between that and the Candle Lake 
issue from the department’s point of view, and also distinguish between the people who have cottages in 
regional parks who pay no education tax whatsoever. Could you distinguish between that, as the department 
views it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, in the first issue it appears . . . or there indeed now is a court challenge, and as 
a result, you know, I don’t want to speak too freely on it. But the difference there is that they collected the tax 
and apparently are illegally holding it, and that’s what is causing that one. 
 
In the issue of Candle Lake, of course, we have the one that my critic and I discussed where there was the 
establishment of extremely high discounts to alleviate with the issue. So those are the two differences there. One 
played with the discount, while the other one collected it and is holding the money. 
 
As far as it relates to the leases in the parks, those leases have been increased over the years and probably will 
continue to bring more parity to the situation between the communities that are established outside of park 
boundaries versus those that are within and are paying rent on a leased property. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: - Just, Mr. Chairman, a follow-up on the minister’s comment. 
 
As a minister of the department, what is your understanding of the reason why the resort village of Mistusinne is 
withholding their school tax portion? And when I draw attention to the regional parks that have cottages in them 
that pay no taxes whatsoever, the fact that they’re increasing their fees doesn’t answer the question that I raise 
with you. They pay no school tax, period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well in regard to the issue of the parks, I’ve been informed that where they don’t pay an 
education tax, the children then pay a tuition for the schools because as you’re aware, of course, on Crown land 
no taxes can be collected, so that’s the reason that the leases are in place. But the kinds that to go school then 
pay the tuition. 
 
With regard to your first question, again, the reason why they held it is the reason why they’re going to court, 
and I think we would just have to let the due process of law determine who’s right or wrong on that issue. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: - Mr. Minister, I don’t want you to get into the specifics of the situation because it’s going to 
court, but I want you at least to deal with the generalities of the situation with regard to Mistusinne withholding 
their school tax. 
 



With regard to the regional parks, you say if they don’t have a school tax, they pay tuition. So it follows 
logically that the only ones that pay tuition are those that send students to schools in that school district; 
therefore, consequently, the people that don’t send children to schools that live in the regional parks don’t pay 
school tax. That’s the point I’m making, and what’s the view of the minister on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well, Mr. Chairman, the point that the member makes is correct. And you know, what can I 
say more than that? The leases have been established a long time ago. The same operation continues. It’s not a 
new policy; it was in existence before - still is. Whether that might be one of the things that we could look at as 
this whole issue of education tax unfolds, as I explained to my critic, that could be another point to take into 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: - A final point, Mr. Chairman, with regard to the matter. I think, leaving aside the Candle 
Lake issue, which I regard as a separate issue, and dealing with the question of Mistusinne specifically, and with 
regional parks that have children, people living in them that pay no school tax, the issue appears to be an 
inequity of treatment. And what is the department’s view on that if there is in fact an inequity in the way the 
system is administered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - All I can respond to that, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that the prior administration had an awful 
long time to look at the very same issue and nothing was done. So at this point in time, it’s not a big, major, 
burning issue out there. Perhaps that’s why the prior administration of the NDP didn’t do anything with it. But 
now, as I mentioned earlier and without being repetitive, may very well be the time if we’re going to be looking 
at this whole issue to include that in it. 
 
(0900) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: - With regard to the issue, and you rise and state the obvious, that the previous administration 
didn’t do anything bout it. The issue is coming to a head, Mr. Minister, with regard to the court case and so 
forth, and really what I want to find out is not what the history was, but what’s your position. What are you 
going to do about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe the member is confusing the issue again now as far as the court 
case is concerned. I’ve already said that we’ll have to let the law take its course. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - I might say that we have no problem with the provisions that are intended to close the 
loophole, Mr. Minister, and would support those. 
 
I do want to deal with the other aspect of the Bill, and that’s to do with the question of property tax exemptions 
for independent schools or private schools. In a letter to you, Ted Cholod, the president of the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, SUMA, indicated not only his strong opposition to this proposed measure but 
also pointed out that the loss of local government tax revenue from the exemption to be granted for independent 
school property not previously exempted will amount to some $200,000 a year, for which municipalities will be 
compensated only in the first two years. 
 
Can you explain this? Do you have a plan to compensate municipalities who will have to forgo tax revenues as a 
result of this amendment, and can you tell us why this would be only for a period of two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, the existing system, and there’s several categories, is very inequitable. And I 
suppose that I can start off by saying that there’s not a great deal of money involved throughout the province in 
this total thing, and what we’re trying to do is bring some equity into the system. For example, no other province 
west of Quebec, and we’re not sure about the balance of the country, but probably the balance of the country, no 



other provinces allow property taxation on independent non-profit school facilities now, so we’re just coming 
into line with most of the country. 
 
And when you look at the existing situation, it’s all over the place. For instance, right now four our of nine 
Seventh Day Adventist schools pay taxes; and three out of five are unclassified; three out of nine are privately 
funded high schools. And it’s a real hodgepodge. Some are excluded by local councils, other, as my critic is 
aware, are excluded by private member Bills, and this will just bring some equity into the entire system. And 
that equity and system will be under the control of the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Well I appreciate what you’re trying to do, although I might say that to be different than 
other provinces west of Quebec on this particular issue causes me no great concern. In fact it’s something that I 
would support. 
 
But the question I put to you is: the president of SUMA wrote to you and talked of a compensation program, 
where obviously you had led him to believe that there would be some compensation package for municipalities 
as a result of this change to the Act. Now can you tell me: will there is fact be a compensation package; will it 
be for a period of two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Mr. Chairman, it is a two-year phase-in, with the government providing a couple of years to 
the municipalities to make their needed adjustments. The original numbers that we were looking at, now that the 
final numbers are in, have been cut in half. Throughout the province it’s not a large sum of dollars, and I don’t 
believe that there’s going to be any particular problems with it. I can’t see why, although obviously some 
municipalities will indeed lose some tax revenue by the time the smoke clears. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Well, Mr. Minister, with all due respect, I think you’re trying to cover too many bases here. 
You can’t on the one hand say that this is an issue that is of little or no effect or impact on municipalities across 
the province, then on the other hand have a two-year phase-in program to help municipalities adjust to this new 
situation. Either you have a problem or you don’t have a problem. You can’t take the position that we don’t 
have a problem, and on the other hand say, but we have a phase-in package here, a program to help 
municipalities to adjust because of the problem that we’re creating. 
 
And I guess this thing sort of points out to the underlying concern for municipalities, that as far as they’re 
concerned that, by this Bill, for some municipalities you are exempting certain property from taxation that then 
must be picked up by local property taxpayers without them having had any say in the matter whatsoever - any 
say in the matter whatsoever. And you seem to be saying, well gee, we agree with you and therefore the 
province should compensate. But you’re only going to compensate for two years. 
 
And I guess the question I have is that if you agree with municipalities that this is a burden for them, and it’s a 
result of your initiative, not as a result of any decisions made locally, then why don’t you extend this further? 
Why don’t you do a compensation plan for ever on this particular issue, as long as this amendment lasts? Why 
don’t you do it for ever? Why don’t you recognize that it’s a provincial action and therefore it’s something that 
should required provincial funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well, Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned earlier, what we’re trying to do is bring some equity into 
the system. Right now throughout the province there are 16 that are exempted, while 30 pay taxes, and we’ve 
got to do something about hat because in the case of Regina versus Saskatoon, some of the same schools that are 
paying taxes in Saskatoon are exempted in Regina, and vice versa. 
 
When you consider that the total impact on the city of Saskatoon is going to be less than $20,000 out of a budget 
of a hundred and some million, I think that after a couple of yours of an adjustment period, they’re going to be 



able to straighten that out without too much a problem - at least I would hope so when they’ve got over $100 
million budget. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Well obviously, Mr. Minister, if you have 600-plus municipalities across Saskatchewan 
and you ask each of them in their won situations to determine whether or not they want to exempt any particular 
property from taxes or to abate taxes, you’re not going to have equity and you’re not going to have that kind of 
homogenous situation across that province. And it required provincial law to do that. And if it requires 
provincial law to do that, and if it’s because you feel that it’s necessary, then why don’t you pay for it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well again, Mr. Chairman, it relates to a matter of fairness, and I had my figures inverted, 16 
pay taxes and 30 are exempt now, either by municipalities or by by-laws within those municipalities. So all we 
trying to do is bring some fairness to the entire system. And I don’t see anything wrong with that when you’re 
make it fair. If we were talking a whole big bunch of dollars, it might be something different. But when you’re 
talking the small dollars and when you’re an education budget of $800 million, I don’t believe that the matter of 
some $50,000, or whatever the total would be in terms of overall budgets, are significant enough to put in a 
whole field of bureaucrats to figure out what we have to do with this. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Well it doesn’t require any bureaucrats. Why don’t you simply let it up to local 
municipalities to decide for themselves if they want to give an abatement. And if one municipality wants to give 
an abatement or an exemption to a Seventh Day Adventist school, fine. It another one doesn’t fine. Let them 
make that determination. Let them decide for themselves. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about fairness, and I think in this context, fairness is nothing but a weasel word - a weasel 
word. And let’s not make any mistake about it, the amendment in this Act, the amendment to The Northern 
Municipalities Act, the amendment to The Rural Municipality Act, the amendment to The Education Act, all of 
them are designed in concert to extend property tax exemptions for private schools. And it’s just simply one 
way that you have as a provincial government, as a PC Party, to encourage the growth of private schools, to 
encourage the privatization of our education system. 
 
Let’s not use weasel words about fairness; let’s be clear about the matter. You want to encourage private 
schools to develop in Saskatchewan. You want to do this at the expense of the public school system. You want 
to do this at the expense of the separate school system. Those are the facts of the matter. It’s not a matter of 
fairness. That’s your position. Why don’t you be clear about it because . . . I don’t have any argument with you 
being clear about, but I do have some . . . You’re simply holding things up by using weasel words such as equity 
of fairness because that’s simply not the case here. 
 
You had your pal, Gordon Dirks, recommend to you that you should encourage private schools as they do in 
Alberta, as they do in British Columbia, as they do in the other provinces, want to encourage private schools. 
That’s what this is all about. You favour that; we oppose that. It’s got nothing to do with the fairness and equity. 
It’s how you perceive public school education to take shape in this province. You favour change; we do not. 
Let’s be clear about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the member pretty well covered it. And if so many other 
provinces throughout the country encourage private schools the way the member just indicated, then why 
wouldn’t Saskatchewan do the same thing? Why would Saskatchewan be the only one going in an opposite 
direction? 
 



And if you deal with one particular group, the Seventh Day Adventists, and if you use the member’s analogy, in 
one city you might have them paying taxes; in another you might have them exempt at the whim, if you want to 
call it, of the local municipality, depending on who might be council of the day. And some may exempt them, 
while others may not. This will then say, hey, if it’s the same group, it’s a matter of fairness to the whole system 
and it will apply throughout the province. 
 
And I suppose the best comparison that I can use, Mr. Chairman, is the issue of business tax, which is exactly 
what you described, and it’s all over the lot in this province right now. And look at the horrendous problem. 
Look what’s happening between our two major cities, Regina and Saskatoon, where Saskatoon businesses pay a 
third or less of business tax compared to that of Regina. My home town, my city in Regina has got a heck of a 
problem encouraging new businesses to start in Regina versus Saskatoon because of the inquiry that exists in the 
businesses tax. And you’re proposing exactly the same thing. 
 
What we’re doing here now is nipping it in the bud. There’s not very many of these private schools. They’re 
exempted now by municipalities and by provincial legislation. So why not make the whole system fair? It only 
makes eminent sense. 
 
(0915) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - Mr. Chairman, I simply want to make one more comment. The minister goes on about the 
situation in other provinces and how we want to be like other provinces. And I tell you, Mr. Minister, if, in the 
early 1960s the government of the day had taken the position that we want to be like other provinces, we would 
never had had medicare in this province and we wouldn’t have had it in this country. No further comment. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 6 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - At this time I would like to thank the opposition for basically going along with these three 
Acts that we’ve discussed this morning, and I appreciate the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order. After the Bill is moved to be reported there’s no room for that kind of comment. I’d ask 
the member just to thank his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: - I’ll thank my officials too. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: - If I might, Mr. Chairman, we always appreciate the expert professionalism that the officials 
in Urban Affairs have brought to matters before us. I did want to take this opportunity to say that, yes, are we 
prepared to co-operate but there’s some very strong divisions on some . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order. There’s no room for that comment after the Bill has been moved to report. 
 



Bill No. 38 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation Reorganization Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: - Would the minister introduce her officials? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - On behalf of the Deputy Premier, I would like to introduce the chief executive officer of the 
Crown Management Board, Mr. Bill Gibson. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goulet: - Mr. Chairman, just a comment - this is basically a no-escaping clause, and my own comment on it 
is that, I think, straightforward. It just give us another example of the incompetence and mismanagement of the 
government in the sense that they always introduce these clauses after the fact. 
 
The privatization of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) has been taking place for some 
time, and they saw this clause was missing, you know, from a legal basis, so they’ve introduced it after the fact. 
And that’s my comment. 
 
The other thing is that you would think at this time that they might have changed that royalty Act of last year 
where they gave the corporations another 1 per cent, and that indeed the $700 million worth of production 
would have netted the province approximately $7 million, or whatever. And that indeed, that’s the type of Act 
which should be discussing here at the legislature. Instead, we have another example of housekeeping and 
incompetence after the fact. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Just briefly, Mr. Chairman, I think that as it relates to legislation, there will always be 
amendments coming forth as it relates to technical matters, and the amendment is not more or no less than that. 
 
On the issue of the royalties, that can be discussed, but not within this particular Bill. As the hon. member 
knows, royalties are looked after within Energy and Mines, and that’s where he should pursue it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 86 - An Act respecting Co-operatives 
 

Mr. Chairman: - Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Beside me is Mr. Kessler, deputy minister; behind me is Ron 
Zukowsky from policy and planning; and Mote Curle. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: - Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to look at these two House amendment I just got. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we’re going to support these amendments. They’re necessary 
amendments that are required; they’re not significant. And again I would like to thank the minister for involving 
me or communicating with me along the way on these changes. 



 
I just would like to reiterate a couple of points, and not particularly directed to this minister, but relate to the co-
op and in that sense to the Bill. And that is that the co-operative sector is critically important to the province of 
Saskatchewan, to the people of the province, because we’ve got a proud tradition for co-operative development. 
And the co-ops are a very significant player - some 25 per cent of all our business volume is generated by co-ops 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
But co-ops are important for employment. They generate many, many thousands of jobs, they help stabilize the 
economy, and they have great potential for the future in a mixed economy. 
 
And of course I want to stress that one of the significant things about the co-operative sector is that we’ve been 
able to make decisions in this province, unlike the way big business corporations operate. Saskatchewan co-ops 
are Saskatchewan people and we make local decisions here and the head offices are here, and that’s the reason 
why I get upset when I see the government phase out the department of co-ops, because that serves a signal 
which certainly concerns people in the co-op sector. 
 
And I’d make the point that our mixed economy which has included co-ops, as everyone well knows, has 
included the small-business sector, and public enterprise has served the province well. It’s been a proven 
approach in this province. And these three sectors working in harmony is the approach that will work in the 
future. It’s the only approach that will work in the future; it’s the only viable option for real diversification in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that the government does not understand this point. The PC single-minded approach to privatization 
is clearly failing. The out-migration’s at record numbers. Unemployment, the rate is above the national average 
first time ever, under this government. They’ve lost control. We’ve lost control economically in many sectors 
and we’re selling, giving away our assets, and I think the public is becoming very upset that this government is 
selling away their future. 
 
And as I said on second reading, this is the first time under this government in the history of the province that 
there is no minister of co-operatives, but for the first time there’s a minister of privatization. Now that’s very 
significant because the co-op sector has performed so well. The privatization has performed so poorly and even 
though we’ve had a minister of privatization. 
 
So we’ve had four or five years of privatization. It simply isn’t working. Yet we see a cut of the department of 
co-ops and we see a down-sizing of the budget and a down-sizing of the positions, which in fact, if the 
government was committed to the co-operative sector and co-operative growth, we wouldn’t have see the 
phasing out of some of the program development staff. And so I want to make the point that this is not 
acceptable. 
 
The department of co-ops has got to be re-established. We will re-establish it upon forming government. I’ve 
talked to many co-op people, as I’m sure the minister has, the Minister of Economic Development, as well as 
this minister. I’ve talked to co-op directors and co-op management people and staff and ordinary co-op 
members, and they’re very leery of this government because of the kind of signals they’re getting from the 
government in terms of the lack of importance in the co-op sector in the future. 
 
And the government points to the upgrader as sort of the proof that they’re committed to co-ops. Well that’s an 
important venture, but they can’t live on that one approach alone, the megaproject mentality. I mean, the 
megaprojects have some importance and the upgrade does, but the key thing about the co-op movement has 
been the grass-roots nature of co-ops all over the province providing the needs to people in a variety of ways. 
 



So in closing, Mr. Chairman, I would say to the government, don’t ignore and don’t downgrade the importance 
of co-ops in Saskatchewan. They’ve served us well; they’re community-based; they’ve been successful; they’ve 
been an important part of our history. 
 
(0930) 
 
And importantly, the co-ops are an important part of our mixed economy, the only kind of approach that will be 
successful in the future because privatization, the single approach of privatization has not worked in Montana, 
has not worked in North Dakota, and it will not work here. 
 
So we support the amendments, and again I thank this minister for his communication regarding the 
amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well just a couple of comments, Mr. Chairman, with regard to what the hon. member 
has said. There’s no question about the commitment that this government has to co-operatives in this province. 
And I think that he made some comments which many of the people in the co-operative movement no longer 
would agree with because they see that there have been advantages in moving away from having a separate 
department. 
 
I would point out that when you consider . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you’d just listen for a minute 
now. I listened to you. 
 
When you consider the growth of some of the major co-operatives in this province, whether we talk about 
federated, the wheat pool, Credit Union Central, that they’re some of the largest companies that we’ve got in the 
province. And I think that when you consider co-operatives in general, that many of them have reached a very 
high level of maturity that no longer require a separate department. 
 
Now for you to say that there’s been any denial of services or commitment, we now in fact have two ministers 
that are responsible for co-operatives in that you’re got Economic Development and Tourism and also 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
I would also point out that the upgrader program, or project, in combination with the government - which 
you’ve mentioned - that’s one of the better examples, I think, of a joint venture that we’ve ever seen in this 
province. And I would also like to point out that prior to the changes where we now have co-operatives being 
treated along with other types of businesses, co-operatives couldn’t enjoy some of the other benefits that the 
business community had, so they see that there are definite advantages there. 
 
And you know full well that in the last few years because of the economic situation where you have to start 
looking at areas where you can cut costs, there was a duplication of services that were being provided by both 
department of co-operatives and co-operative development and Consumer and Commercial Affairs. And with 
the combination, those things are all being covered . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I don’t think there are 
gaps. Co-ops are still growing tremendously. We’ve had 46 new co-operatives registered since April 1 of this 
year. 
 
So things are moving ahead very, very quickly and we’re still committed to that. And we just have to consider 
that changes have to be made from time to time. And I appreciate the comments that you’ve made about the 
Bill, and as you’ve indicated, there are pretty well a housekeeping nature. There has been a lot of consultation 
with yourself and also with the co-ops, and so I appreciate your comments. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - The chair is asking for leave to go part by part. 



 
Part 1 agreed to. 
 
Parts 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Part 21 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Two House amendments in part 221 moved by the Minister of Science and Technology to 
amend section 237 of the printed Bill. Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 237 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 238 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - House amendment by the Minister of Science and Technology to section 239 of the printed 
Bill. Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 239 as amended agreed to. 
 
Parts 21 as amended agreed to. 
 
Parts 22 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 287 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 76 - An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 
1985 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I would like to thank the minister for his consultation and 
communication along the way here in developing these amendments; I appreciate that. We will be supporting 
these amendments as they’re really amendments that allow the credit unions to continue doing what they’ve 
been doing for a number of years, and so they’re important to the credit union sector. 
 
The only point I would like to make again is the credit unions are obviously co-ops as well, and I’d like to urge 
the government to re-establish, for Heaven’s sake, the department of co-ops. There may be two ministers that 
are responsible. But the Minister of Economic Development certainly will know that the co-op sector, the credit 
union sector is very concerned about the phasing out of the department of co-ops. And ask any day-care centre, 
any co-op day-care centre if they’re getting the kind of support they need, and they will tell you that they’re not, 
because I’ve talked to many of them around the province. 
 
Now maybe the big players may not need developmental workers and support, but one of the valuable roles that 
the co-op sector, that the co-op department played was that they could provide a support to smaller co-ops, 



which is an important part of the concept of co-ops and an important part of our history. And some of the small 
co-ops don’t have the administrative capacity and would appreciate . . . appreciated the kind of support that they 
have lost since the department of co-ops was phased out. So I think that there are some gaps that do need to be 
looked at, therefore I urge the re-establishment of the department of co-ops, if again I say, if the government is 
serious about the value of co-ops in the province of Saskatchewan and the important role that they can play in 
our mixed economy and in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So the credit unions, as I said in second reading, provide a high quality of service. They have been very 
innovative in adjusting to the new time and the new demands in the financial field. They’re very competitive. 
These amendments will allow them to feel secure about the kind of insurance services that they have been 
providing, and that they’ll be able to do that in the future. 
 
So again I thank the minister for his communication and consultation, and we’ll support the amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, just two comments. I would point out to the member opposite that if he 
is aware of specific concerns that he has with regard to some of these co-operatives where we could be of 
assistance, certainly I would be interested in knowing more about them and see what we can do to help out. 
 
I would thank the member as well, Mr. Chairman, for his co-operation and support with regard to the credit 
union Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: - House amendment to clause 5, moved by the Minister of Science and Technology. Will the 
members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Chairman: - There’s a amendment to section 11 of the printed Bill, moved by the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs. Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 67 - An Act respecting Gaming and the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

 



Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Chairman, the minister may want to introduce a new official that has joined us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, on my left is Dr. Bill McRae, the chairman of the Gaming Commission; 
and on my right is Ron Robinson, executive director of the Gaming Commission. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in our previous discussions of this legislation, both here in the 
House and more private, I’ve identified that there is only one controversial aspect to this legislation, only one 
controversial part, only one part of the legislation that has received any significant opposition across the 
province, and that’s part VII, the part of the legislation that will expand gambling in the province of 
Saskatchewan to include electronic gambling and will move your government into the position of conducting 
and managing that electronic gambling in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have received, I’m aware, letters of opposition from a variety of groups in the province. Mr. 
Minister, this legislation can pass through this committee very, very quickly if you would be prepared at this 
point to simply withdraw this section of the legislation; to simply withdraw this portion of the legislation, this 
part of the legislation that permits the electronic gambling and moves your government into managing and 
conducting gambling in the province. The rest of the legislation is extremely acceptable to this side of the House 
and, I’m sure, to almost everyone in the province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my first question is then: would you be prepared now just to remove that section from the 
Bill? I’m aware that an amendment to that effect would not be acceptable. Would you therefore be willing now 
to remove that section from the Bill that we might then just carry on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - No, Mr. Chairman, we’re not prepared to remove that from the Bill. And where the 
member opposite indicates that there has been a lot of opposition from throughout the province, I would agree 
certainly there was opposition with regard to Las Vegas-style casinos and slot machines, but that certainly has 
never been the intent of this government to get into that area. In so far as other types of electronic gaming, those 
are areas that can still be explored. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Well, Mr. Minister, there are certainly confusing messages in what you’ve said throughout the 
course of the history of this piece of legislation when at one point in time you were talking about slot machines 
and now you’re not talking about a lot machines. Mr. Minister, whether we’re talking about slot machines or 
not, this piece of legislation will expand gambling opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan, whether we’re 
talking about electronic bingo or keno or some other ideas that you may or may not have. 
 
Mr. Minister, then would you please explain to this House and to the people of Saskatchewan why it is that your 
government feels it desirable that we should expand gambling opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan in 
this fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well when you talk about expanding gambling operations within the province, I would 
point out that when we talk about something like electronic bingo, it’s simply a new way of playing an old 
game. We’re not talking about expansion. And we would, of course, have to take a close look at that with a pilot 
project to see whether or not it’s acceptable in the province of Saskatchewan, but again, it’s not an expansion. 
It’s simply a new way of playing an old game. 
 
(0945) 
 



Mr. Calvert: - Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that what you say in the press one week and then what you say in the 
House the next is something quite different. Mr. Minister, back in June you were reported in the Leader-Post as 
having said that, quote: 
 
Meiklejohn says electronic gaming offers exciting prospects for changing the demographics of bingo. 
 
In British Columbia, he says, the high-technology version of the game has meant it isn’t just for old ladies 
anymore. 
 
“They have more people playing the game . . . Like young people and men.” 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what is it that you’re government feels that it’s essential to get young people and men out 
playing bingo? We’re not talking about the same old game. You’re trying to expand gambling. Why is that 
desirable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well, I would certainly point out to the hon. member in the first instance that those were 
not comments that I made to the Leader-post. That may have been what was printed, but I certainly made no 
indication as to old ladies playing bingo. That’s a comment that I find particularly offensive. 
 
They were asking questions as to what other precedents there were in Canada in so far as electronic bingo is 
concerned, and I was simply relating what is happening in the province of British Columbia and the 
demographics there and how they have changed. 
 
And I indicated to them at that time that there are more men certainly playing than women. Also we find that the 
group that’s playing in the electronic bingo is generally a younger age and also in a higher income group. So I 
mean, you like to make mention all the time that bingo is for the poor. Well I’m pointing out to you that bingo is 
played by many people from many different walks of life and from many different levels of income. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, you will not have heard me say that bingo is for the poor, even in this House, or 
anywhere else. Mr. Minister, I have asked a simple question. Why is it that you feel it’s important that we 
expand gambling in this fashion? I’ve not heard an answer yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - There’s always a demand for new ways of doing things, and I have pointed out earlier . . 
. I pointed out earlier, Mr. Chairman, as well, that this is the age of technology. And I think if you had taken the 
time or had visited one of the operations where electronic bingo is being utilized - and you had an example of 
that, I believe, in the city of Moose Jaw a couple of years ago, where a company there had produced an 
electronic bingo board and were experimenting with it. so you have some experience, certainly, in that regard. 
 
But there are advantages and it does create a greater interest. I mean, people are making demands, I think, for 
changes in this regard at all times. So we have to be prepared to move along into the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to refer to the experience of the electronic bingo in Moose Jaw, 
you know, you know that it was not acceptable to the bingo players in Moose Jaw. You know that that 
experiment was a failure in Moose Jaw; for whatever reason, it was a failure. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re saying in the House this morning that you’re doing this because there seems to be a great 
demand across the province for new experiences in bingo and perhaps keno and some other things. Mr. 
Minister, have you any studies to back that claim up? Have you any research that shows that to be true? 
 



Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - I’ve indicated to you in the past that it’s been very successful in British Columbia, and 
that before we got into it in any major way here that we would have to look at setting up a pilot project and 
seeing how acceptable it is here, and we certainly plan on doing that at some point. 
 
But it’s not something that’s going to be set out widespread right throughout the province. Just because it’s 
acceptable in British Columbia wouldn’t necessarily mean that it is here. But it’s something that’s very much 
worth our exploring. You point out about the Moose jaw experience as far as electronic bingo. That’s only one 
type of electronic bingo that was being tried, and it failed for several reasons. And of course one of the reasons 
that it did not continue, I suppose, there was because the hall shut down. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Well, Mr. Minister, we’re not going to involved ourselves in a long discussion about the 
experience in Moose Jaw. 
 
An Hon. Member: - No, I don’t think you want to do that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Well we certainly will if you want to take that time of this House. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question, if you go ahead with this electronic gaming, where will the revenues go? Where will 
the proceeds from the electronic gaming go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - The revenues from any type of electronic gaming ventures would be designated, I would 
assume, probably into the health field, in the same way that Nevada ticket sales with the hoteliers have gone 
over the last five or six years. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is that revenue from electronic gaming in the province of 
Saskatchewan would go to the provincial treasury, to the general revenues of the provincial treasury. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - I said it would be designated for health care. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - But before it gets to health care, Mr. Minister, where does it go? It goes into the general treasury 
of the province of Saskatchewan. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - I would presume that would be the case. That’s the normal process. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Like every other tax dollar, first it goes into the treasury, and then at the discretion of your 
government, whoever happens to be government of the day, that money then is dispensed as the government 
sees fit. Mr. Minister, then what you are doing is entering the gambling field as a government, competing for the 
gambling dollars, that you can take those gambling dollars and put them into your provincial treasury. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well I’d point out to the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, that the only way that any type of 
electronic gaming can be operated in the province is if the government does it. So that’s clearly set down by the 
Criminal Code. That has to happen. But in the other case, as far as the moneys and what they would be used for, 
as I’ve indicated, it would be something that would be designated for health care in the same way that the lottery 
tax is now, or the hospitals tax, and the same way in which sales from break-open tickets have been designated 
from the hoteliers. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - So, Mr. Minister, we may be approaching then more closely the real reason for this change. 
Because I would submit that the real reason for this change is that your government wants to get into gambling 



as a source of revenue; that you see yourself in difficult financial situation, - and that’s obvious to the whole 
province - and that you see in gambling another way to make a little bit of revenue. And so we’re going to have 
the province or Saskatchewan operating electronic bingo casinos or, who knows? Slot machine, in an effort to 
raise money. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what happens to the charities of this province? What happens to the service clubs who 
depend on gaming, primarily on bingo, to provide for their good words in this province if you, as the 
Government of Saskatchewan, are now a competitor in that field, taking money for your purposes? You say it’s 
going to be for health care. Well not many people in Saskatchewan will believe that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well it’s unfortunate that your leader has indicated to you that you have to continue 
making misleading statements when it comes to such things as talking about electronic gaming. It’s been quite 
clear as to where the money is going to be spent. It’s also been made quite clear to you that we’re not talking 
about slot machine - but you continue on raising that. 
 
I would also point out that the province is really into a type of electronic gaming today when you consider the 
6/49 tickets. They’re sold through the use of computers. So this is something that’s not new. 
 
And also you talk about lost revenues. We’ve got to keep in mind that there are many reasons or many 
advantages or benefits from the gaming that takes place in this province. And neither you nor I are in any 
position to dictate to people as to whether or not they should be gambling. That’ sup to them to decide that. 
 
Certainly in so far as any funds that would be raised here, we would designate them, as I say, to health care. I 
don’t necessarily see that there would be any offsetting disadvantage as far as the charitable organizations are 
concerned. 
 
But again I’d point out to the member that we would have to look at setting up a pilot project initially to find out 
whether or not this was going to be working. The only obvious location for electronic bingo would be in the 
cities of Saskatoon or Regina, and we would anticipate that this would probably be what we would do. But 
again, this is a decision that has to be made by cabinet before we move ahead, in any regard. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, is there any assurance in this legislation now before us that, one, slot machines are 
excluded; two, that any revenues raised through electronic gambling in the province of Saskatchewan would be 
used for health care. Are there any assurances in this legislation of either of those two things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well I don’t think that there is in either case, but I would point out, if you’re not 
satisfied with the commitment that I have made and statements I made with regard to slot machines, I would 
certainly be prepared to entertain an amendment with regard to that that slot machines are in fact going to be 
excluded. I would also point out, I don’t think there is anything with regard to moneys going to health, but that 
certainly is the intention. 
 
The other idea I want to put forward as well is that it was the NDP government in the province of Manitoba 
which really got into gambling in a big way, and that they took over the operations of all the major bingo halls 
and also operated the casino there for many years, as you well know. This is not a new concept as far as having 
governments involved, and I certainly see that your party is very supportive of gambling in the province because 
that’s one of the ways in which you raise money for your party. I think we have to take that into consideration as 
well as to where you’re coming from. 
 



Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, you gave our assurance that we’re not looking at slot machines or that type of 
casino in the province. You’ve talked a little bit about electronic bingo. Are you also talking about a keno or any 
form of sports betting that would be a part of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - I’ve indicated to you in the past and to the media that we are talking about electronic 
bingo and possibly keno. That would be another area that we’d look at. 
 
I think another very important point that you have to keep in mind as well, that when you start talking about 
electronic games, whether it’s electronic bingo or keno in fact, that the auditing of these games is very, very 
important, and it’s much easier to be done through computerized games than it is through the traditional bingo 
games that we find today. So it’s very, very important. 
 
I think we are also concerned, we’re concerned about several things when we talk about gaming in the province. 
We’re concerned for one thing that the players are treated in a fair manner, and also we’re very concerned about 
the charities. We know that they are funds through different gaming processes. It’s very important to the 
activities that they do, and we also have to be concerned about those who are engaged in the economic activity 
of operating bingo halls, or whatever. So there are several different areas that have to be considered when we 
talk about gaming, and we want to ensure that it is properly managed and that it is secure and also operated in a 
fair manner for the players. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, just one other question regarding another part of the Bill, and that’s in the naming 
of the chairperson of the gaming commission. As I understand it, it would be done by cabinet. Would there be 
any public input into the selection if at some future point we would need a new chairman for the gaming 
commission? Would there be any public input into that decision, or would it simply be a decision of cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well as you’re aware, I’m sure, the present chairman is an order in council appointment. 
I’m not sure whether there’d be any other way of doing it or whether any type of public participation there 
would be appropriate or not. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, just so I’m clear, so the process will continue that in future, if a new chairperson is 
named, it will simply by an order in council, by cabinet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Same process, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Amendment to clause 3 proposed by the minister: 
 
Amend subsection 3(1) of the printed bill by adding “as a body corporate” after “hereby continued”. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 



Mr. Chairman: - Clause 15 amendment proposed by the minister: 
 
Amend clause 15(1) (b) of the printed bill by striking out “does not exceed $2,000” and substituting: 
 
“does not exceed the lesser of: 
 
(i) $2,000; and 
 
(ii) any lower amount that may be prescribed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council pursuant to the Criminal 
Code (Canada), as amended from time to time, with respect to the lottery scheme for which the licence was 
issued”. 
 
Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 16 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 24 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 25 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
(1000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to thank the officials for their support and co-operation on 
this Bill and also thank the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - I’d like to join with the minister in thanking his officials who have been with us today, and I 
know they’ve been . . . it’s been a tough year, I think, for his officials in this field. There’s been a lot of change, 
and I want to thank them for all the work that they’ve done for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Bill 72 - An Act to raise Revenue for Hospitals by the 
Imposition of Collection of Taxes with respect to 

Participation in and the Operation of Lottery Schemes 
 

Mr. Chairman: - I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left is Mr. Art Wakabayashi, deputy minister of 
Finance; behind him John Wright, executive director of taxation and economic policy division; and behind me, 
Murray Schafer, director of education and health tax, Saskatchewan Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Well, Mr. Chairman, now that since the introduction of this tax this government has found that 
the reception of the tax may not have been quite as friendly as they had anticipated it might have been, in fact 
what we find is the people of Saskatchewan have looked at this tax as one that’s discretionary, and because it’s 
discretionary and because it was a vehicle that they could to show the government their dissatisfaction with the 
level of taxation in the province, have made a rather spontaneous but very demonstrative action by telling the 
government that they do not favour increased, and do not favour new, taxation, by staying away from the lottery 
kiosks in droves. The result has been rather a dramatic decrease in sales. The result has also been a lot of 



publicity and a lot of information going to the government about this tax, many cases asking the government to 
eliminate the tax. 
 
I want to make sure during this committee stage, Mr. Chairman, that the government is actually getting the 
messages from the people. And I want to assure that the government is staying open to the message that the 
people of Saskatchewan are giving it. So I want to question on that. 
 
I know that the government is set on a different task. It’s set on a task of selling off the assets of the province, 
and then the money sort of seems to disappear into thin air, and then they end up taxing the people. It’s 
becoming a “sell and tax” government, being known as a sell and tax government. 
 
In this particular case on this tax is one place where people have had an opportunity to voice their strong 
opposition. So what I want to do is I want to ask the minister whether he’s hearing these messages. I want to ask 
the minister whether he’s taken the time over the last month or over, say, even in the last week - which probably 
would be more relevant - whether he’s taken the time to consult those people that are affected. 
 
And in this case, in addition to the general thrust against . . . that the public is expressing against the level of 
taxation, and particularly new taxation in this province, there are actually some people . . . in addition to that 
there are people and groups that are substantially being affected. Number one, the kiosk operators and ticket 
vendors across the province and their businesses; number two, the cultural, charitable, and sport organizations 
that are funded throughout the province by the lottery scheme, and all of those service clubs who use the 
schemes to fund the various organizations throughout the province. So my first question is, Mr. Minister: have 
you consulted with the kiosk operators and the vendors to find out just what their opinions are about the tax, 
how it’s affecting the; and if you are, what are the results that you’ve gotten? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I point out to the member opposite that I’m sure that there’s a lot 
of feedback coming into the department, and also there’s a fair amount of consultation that’s going on. We are 
aware of the fact that sales are down, o some extent. We certainly don’t deny that. They’re also down in other 
provinces to what their projections had been. And I would also point out that sales were down, to some extent, 
prior to the tax coming in. So although the tax might have had a negative impact, certainly sales were on the 
decline prior to July 1. And when one considers the economic situation in Saskatchewan, I’m sure that we can 
understand why sales would be down. 
 
But you ask with regard to consultations during the last short period of time, and I would point out that we do in 
fact see the sales of lottery tickets are in fact on the increase again. There was a substantial decrease around the 
middle of July, but when one considers the sales that we find here for the week ending August 5, that they have 
come back substantially where they’re not all that far behind what the were prior to July 1. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Mr. Minister, my concern here is not to hear your defence of the system. My concern here is to 
make sure that you have got your ears wide open and that you’re listening, and by your responses you tell me 
that you’re not. 
 
You indicate, for example, you start defensing by saying that the revenue was down prior to the tax coming on. 
And that’s true, and I agree with you. And you got a letter from Lottery Life yourself where they indicated that 
the tax went down, the receipts went down the minute, or the month, rather, that the tax was announced. So 
immediately you were getting a message there. That message has now been in place for about four months, four 
or five months, and my consultations tell me that the August results are no different than July, that there’s really 
no increase. There is in one or two places, but for every one place where they maybe coming back up, there’s 
two or three places that have . . . they’re finding their receipts the same or lower in August than in July. 
 



You indicate, Mr. Minister, that the sales in other provinces are down. That’s exactly the opposite of the 
information I’ve been given by the Gaming Commission - exactly the opposite; that the Alberta sales have 
increased by 5 per cent; that the Manitoba sales have increased by 5 per cent; the unofficial figures, I guess not 
yet published, from B.C. is 11 per cent increase; Saskatchewan lost $2.7 million. 
 
So I don’t think you should be trying to defend it. I think at this stage what you should be doing is taking a real 
close look at what the effect of it is, and the direction it’s going, and the message that you’re getting from the 
people, because you’ll end up really hurting some groups. 
 
I want to further indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that in a survey that I did that I got a response from 
approximately 130 kiosk vendors, that 98 per cent of them indicated that their sales had decreased. Of course 
you’ve confirmed that. The significant thing here is that a40 per cent of them said that their sales decreased by 
more than a half in the month of July. 
 
Ninety-four per cent of them indicated that the collection of taxes causes an inconvenience to the vendors. I’ve 
already talked about that matter with the Minister of Finance. And 97 per cent of them indicated that the 
customers . . . pardon me, they’ve indicated that 90 per cent of their customers - that’s their estimate and my 
average of their estimate - 97 per cent of their customers express a concern. 
 
The kiosk operators have gone further than that. They have placed on their - voluntarily placed a petition, some 
of them have- placed petitions on or near their operations. To date they’ve submitted 7,000 signatures to this 
legislature. I’ve got another couple thousand that will be coming in tomorrow. The people are continuing to sign 
the petitions. There is definitely a message there, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to turn to the next phase of the questions here, Mr. Minister, and that is with respect to consulting with 
organizations that are affected. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you’ve been getting any kind of feedback 
from service organizations that are going to be affected through this, or whether you’re taking any steps to 
consult the service organizations. I’m talking about those people that operate the bingos and sell the Nevada 
tickets and make money for their causes through that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, let me point out to the member opposite, he talks about me being 
defensive of the tax. You asked for information, and that’s what I gave you. So if you consider that to be 
defensive, then that’s rather unfortunate. 
 
We are certainly monitoring the situation very closely and we are listening. And I would suggest that maybe 
you’re not listening too well either, because when I made reference to the sales being down in other province, I 
indicated that they were down in regard to the projections that they had, in the same way that they were for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now let me tell you what has happened then in the province of Saskatchewan with regard to the tax coming on, 
and the effect that it’s had on the sales of lottery tickets. For the week ending July 1, we had $1.8 million in 
sales. That dropped down to the week ending July 15, to 1.3, which was the worst of the whole bunch. That has 
now come up to the week ending of August 5, to over $1.6 million. So we’ve come up substantially then, Mr. 
Chairman, to where we were in the week ending July 15. And this why the Minister of Finance and others on 
this side of the House have indicated from time to time that it’s too early to tell yet to see what the impact of this 
tax is going to be. 
 
You’re running around with your little surveys and giving out some misleading information, and I’ve talked to 
some of the same people that you’ve talked to, and the information that you’ve been giving them hasn’t always 
been accurate. So I think that’s something else that you should take into consideration over there. 



 
With regard to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. Let’s allow the minister to respond. It’s heard to hear what he’s saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - I think we touched a nerve over there. I look forward to questions from some of the 
other members who really want to get into the debate here. 
 
With regard to the consultation with the charitable organizations, Mr. Chairman, there were many meetings held 
prior to this tax being implemented and before the whole thing was set up. We had a series of meetings around 
the province where we met with many, many different charitable organizations to get their input. 
 
(1015) 
 
And I’d point out that the tax doesn’t only apply to lottery tickets, it applies to bingos, where we haven’t really 
seem any impact there. Break-open tickets, I think that the same number of break-open tickets are probably 
being sold - we’re averaging about $7 million a month. So I don’t think that it’s had any major effect there. 
 
But there was, Mr. Chairman, lots of consultation with the groups. They did, for the most part, agree with the 
concept of the money going to health care. The main concern that they had was how the tax was going to be 
implemented, and they were certainly allowed opportunity to have input into the implementation of the tax. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Well there’s a couple of things here that you really ought to be corrected on - and I’ve taken 
upon myself to do so at this time - and that is with respect to projections of the other provinces. You say that the 
projections of Saskatchewan are close to the projections of the other provinces. That is blatantly not true, Mr. 
Minister, and you have the figures as well as I do. And they came up to 98 per cent of their projections - 98 per 
cent. And where is Saskatchewan? is it 98 per cent? Not nearly close to it; it’s in the low ‘80s, low ‘80s. 
 
I disagree strongly with you about the effect on the vendors. Small-business people are not impressed with this 
whatsoever. I tell you, you wouldn’t have any small-business person, people that carry Tory cards in their 
pockets, you would not even begin to have them placing a petition close enough to their business place if they 
weren’t strongly concerned about this. 
 
In many cases they’re considering dropping the selling of tickets. There’s a mall in Saskatoon where the fellow 
has indicated that he’s going to drop his business. He’s accelerating his plans to get out of it because of the tax. 
There’s a couple of other businesses that have written me notes and said that they’ve quit. These are in small 
towns in Saskatchewan. And it’s there, Mr. Minister. It’s hurting their businesses. 
 
But the question that I had asked you was whether you had consulted with any of the service clubs that are 
handling this. And I want to bring to your attention on example of how it’s hurting some of the service clubs. 
And in this case, the example that I want to use is the one of the Royal Canadian Legion, Nutana branch, right 
from your own city of Saskatoon. It has 870 members. They have considered it . . . considered the effect and 
what it’s going to have to their service club and the people that they serve. And they tell me that what they do is 
they make: 
 
. . . contributions to helping institutions and organizations like the 107 Air Cadets, like (the) Veterans’ Homes, 
Senior Citizens Association, Police Soccer Club, (the) Bonnie Blue Bell’s Pipe Band, Legion Track and Field 
program, Senior Citizens Christmas Aid, St. Mary’s Catholic School fund, Blink Skiers Association, Crisis 
Nursery, just to name a few . . . 
 



And they say the contributions that they have given them would amount to well over 20,000, and they get their 
money largely from the Nevada sales. 
 
They write a litter directly to the Minister of parks, Recreation and Culture and in the letter they indicate, and I 
quote: 
 
The Nevada sales income had directly helped small businesses in Saskatoon since is has allowed us to make 
expensive improvements to our grounds and tickets. The new 10% taxis not a tax on those who gamble since 
the cost of a ticket and the value of the prizes remain unchanged. The tax is hurting the ROYAL CANADIAN 
LEGION, the Business Community, and all of those projects that we have hitherto been supporting. We, like 
you, would like to see our hospitals obtain increased financial support, but not at the expense of those 
worthwhile and vital enterprises. 
 
This is signed by the president of the Royal Canadian Legion, Nutana. 
 
He makes two points then, Mr. Minister. First of all that this loss, the loss of revenue and what damage it’s 
going to do to the good causes, in this particular case the Royal Canadian Legion, is supporting. And I would 
challenge you to question any of those projects as being unworthy. And the second point he makes is that the 
Nevada sales and the tax on the Nevada sales is not really a tax on the consumer; this is not a tax on the 
consumer of the tickets, it’s a tax on the charities. And that is the big problem here is that you’re ending up 
taxing charities. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you are familiar with another operation called Legs Unlimited, to make the same 
point. Legs Unlimited is a charitable organization as well. There are two operations, to my knowledge, to date in 
Saskatchewan of Legs Unlimited, and they have ambitions to expand. The one operations is in Saskatoon, and 
it’s operated by a manager, Jack Benolkin. And there’s another operation of Legs Unlimited in Prince Albert, 
and it’s managed by Dale Anderson. 
 
Both of these organizations have, as their source of funding, Nevada tickets. Both of these organizations use the 
funding from Nevada tickets to purchase motorized vehicles for the handicapped, the disabled, and the elderly, 
little motor scooters, little three-wheeled motor scooters that you might have seen around in the malls and in the 
communities of Saskatoon and Prince Albert, and I suppose other places, but in other places people may have 
purchased them themselves. 
 
What they were doing is taking the money that they were able to earn from Nevada tickets and purchase these 
three-wheeled scooters and then rent them out at a subsidized rate to the disabled, to the elderly, to the 
handicapped, and they would keep them serviced. They would rent them on a monthly basis, on an hourly basis. 
 
The people that started with them were paraplegics themselves. They were funded by the Kinsmen Foundation, 
by the Kinsmen club in Prince Albert, by the Kinette club in Prince Albert, I think the Optimist club, and a 
Masonic lodge out of Kinistino, to get their first batch of scooters. They have set up in a mall in Prince Albert. 
The mall was so glad to have them, because of the business aspect, that they gave them free space. So their 
overhead is next to nil, with the exception that they pay about $500 a month in expenses just to man the 
operation, to keep staff in place there so when people come they can get the things. 
 
Now what do they tell me? All of their funding from now on - they are now a company, a non-profit company - 
has been coming from the sale of Nevada tickets. They used to be able to make $200 on a box of Nevadas. Now, 
after they pay the tax - because it’s them that pays, not the consumer; it’s them that pays the tax - their profits 
are down to $100 on a box of Nevadas. So effectively - those are round figures - so effectively it’s halved their 
operations. 



 
I invite you to go and talk to either one of these people and show them that you, in the government, can spend 
this money in a more efficient or a wiser manner than this charity is. The objection here, Mr. Minister, is that the 
government is taking money away from a very worthwhile operation - something that I’m sure that you would 
back. I’m sure that there is not a one of you that would have something bad to say about Legs Unlimited and to 
say that no, you shouldn’t be making a profit. But effectively you’re doing so in directly by implementing this 
tax. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you would be, you know, prepared to send somebody to have a chat and 
find out for yourself about . . . from people like the Legion or Legs Unlimited. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I hope it’s not the intention of the member opposite to repeat all of 
the questions that he’s asked on several occasions of a couple of different ministers here in the past few weeks. 
 
Let me point out to the member opposite a couple of things. Firstly, I want to just make the comparison with 
regard to what I was talking about with projections and what’s happened to sales in other provinces, because he 
seems to have some quarrel with this. The province of Alberta up to the end of the week of August 5, they were 
at 88 per cent of their quota; Saskatchewan was at 83.2 per cent of their quota. Now those were the figures that I 
was giving you before, when I said that the other provinces were down, compared to their quota. So that’s 88 
per cent for Alberta; Saskatchewan was 83.2. That was for the week ending August 5. Now I just wanted to 
correct you on that. 
 
The other point I wanted to make, you talk about all of the negative aspects of this particular tax, and I can 
understand your position on that, but I would point out as well that there have been many letters of support from 
hospitals and hospital foundations and health agencies that feel that this is a very positive step. They’re very 
supportive of it, and they understand the commitment that this government has to health programs in the 
province. 
 
Now I certainly do not have any problem at all with the comments you make about the charitable organizations 
and the very worthwhile projects that they are into. I have been very involved with charitable organizations in 
the past, with Kinsmen and Lions and other organizations. And I know all of the worthwhile projects that they 
carry on, and I know also how difficult it is to raise funds. So every dollar that they raise, by whatever means, is 
very, very well earned, and it’s very, very well spent. So I don’t have any problem with your comments. And I 
certainly agree with you on the importance of what these organizations are doing, whether it’s Legs Unlimited 
or whatever the case might be. 
 
I would indicate to you that we certainly are aware of the fact that with the break-open tickets, even though the 
sales are up, that the amount of money that the charities are getting is going to be affected. And one of the 
problems that we’ve had there is that it’s taken us a little bit longer to get the new tickets into action, or into 
operation, than we had anticipated. 
 
Now as I understand it, Mr. Chairman, that a new break-open ticket will be released next week which is going to 
cot down on the prize package. And this was something that was agreed to with all of the consultations that we 
had, and the groups that we met with in Prince Albert were telling us the same thing. In the past the prizes for 
the break-open tickets have averaged around 73 per cent, which I think for the most part is considerably higher 
than in most parts of Canada. The new tickets now are going to be in the neighbourhood of 70 per cent, so that 
will of course have an effect on the charities, and the amount that they’re getting. 
 
The one thing that is going to be happening very shortly, Mr. Chairman, to this point charitable organizations 
that have been selling break-open tickets in conjunction with bingos have generally had to pay a $50 fee to rent 



a booth. This, of course, is going to be done away with, and that will be another $50 that the charity will now 
have at its disposal. So that will partially offset any change that there’s been with the profits that they’ve been 
getting. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, I have a very specific question about a portion of this piece of legislation, and that’s 
part 2 of clause 5. That’s the part of this legislation that will let you on September 1 begin to levy a head tax on 
the exhibition board casino operations in the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, just so that I’m sure that this is correct, currently the exhibition board casinos are paying a tax to 
your government of 7 per cent on the hold, minus the wages they pay out. I understand that this legislation will 
change that to provide for a tax to your government of 10 per cent on the hold alone before the wages are paid. 
In addition to that then, Mr. Minister, this legislation and what you intend to do on September 1 is to also levy a 
head tax at the door, so that anyone coming through the door of the casinos at the exhibitions would be liable to 
pay a $5 entry fee or a head tax at the door. 
 
I have several question, Mr. Minister. The casinos around the province, who you well know, provide the 
financial backing for our exhibition boards. They are saying that his head tax is simply going to be unacceptable, 
and it hold the potential of lowering their business by some 50 per cent, if not higher. 
 
Mr. Minister my question is: why have you decided to put a head tax on the casinos, not on bingo halls, but on 
casinos? So there’s the double taxation here; they’re paying their 10 per cent, and then they’re paying a head tax. 
They say it’s going to destroy their business. Mr. Minister, are you prepared to assist with the collection of this 
tax in the casinos, or are the casinos going to have to provide staff at the door to collect this tax? Is the tax going 
to apply to everybody who comes through the door? What about the spouse who wants to come into the casino, 
who doesn’t want to gamble, just wants to come in? Will that person have to pay the tax? I would like you to 
address some of those concerns that are brought up by the exhibition boards. 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe the member has raised those questions in the past and 
they have been answered, but I will certainly answer those questions at this time. There will be a head tax, yes, 
and the head tax is on the consumer. It’s not on the exhibition board; it’s on the consumer. The exhibition board 
will, yes, be paying 10 per cent on the next revenues. So you talk about a double tax. The one tax certainly is on 
the consumer; the other is on the exhibition board. 
 
We had several meetings . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well let me just go on and finish off here. We had 
several meetings with the exhibition boards. We asked them for proposals to be put forward as to how they 
wanted to see this done. These were suggestions that they were in fact marking, and they were talking about a 
head tax and they were also talking about the tax on the net revenue, such as they had been paying. So these 
aren’t suggestions that have come solely from the government; these were coming from the exhibition boards. 
So they were asked for their proposals. 
 
I would also point out when you talk about people going in whether they’re gambling or not, if you go to the 
horse races, anybody passing in through the gate also pays a fee whether they’re going to bet on the horses or 
whatever the case might be, so there are other precedents. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, one question was left . . . maybe all of my questions were left unanswered but at 
least one was left even unaddressed, and that’s the question of providing staff at the door, staff at the door to 
collect this tax. Would your government be accepting that cost? Will you be providing people at the door of the 
casinos to collect your tax? 



 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - A commission will be provided to the casino for the collection of the tax. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Well, Mr. Minister, will that commission that you’re going to provide cover the cost of a staff 
person to be at the door the entire time that the casino is open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - The same commission will be paid to the casinos for the collection of this tax that is 
now applied to the collection of sales tax and lottery tax. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - So, Mr. Minister, could you give us the figure then? What is this commission going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, at 7 per cent on the first $300, 1 per cent over 300, to a maximum of 
5,000. 
 
Mr. Calvert: - Mr. Minister, again specifically related to casinos, your colleague, the Minister of Finance, will 
receive this letter today, I think. It comes from the casino people in Prince Albert. I’m sure it could have come 
from any one of the casinos operating in the province. Mr. Stevenson writes to the Minister of Finance, and he 
says and I quote: 
 
The currently proposed flat tax of five dollars “($5.00)” (the head tax at the door) will without question have a 
devastating effect on the operations of Saskatchewan Agricultural Exhibitions and, in specific, reduce our 
Casino operations “(including an appropriate portion of our Casino payroll)” (people will be losing their jobs) 
by somewhere (he says) between fifty to seventy percent “(50% - 70%)”. 
 
That’s his prediction, 50 to 70 per cent. 
 
Unfortunately (he goes on to say), this neither allows the Exhibitions to continue (their) current operations nor 
allows the appropriate funds to be collected by the new tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think what has happened here is that your government decided how much money you wanted out 
of the casinos. You set that figure up, and then you figured out the system that would produce that much money. 
Well, Mr. Minister, if in fact the predictions of the casino people become reality, that their business drops by 50 
to 70 per cent, their point is well made. They are not going to be able to continue the valuable work they’re 
doing in our communities through the exhibitions boards, and you’re not going to get anywhere near the amount 
of money that you hope to get. 
 
Would you address those points that are made by Mr. Stevenson in his letter to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, I would think it’s difficult for anyone to speculate exactly what losses 
are going to be incurred in this particular case, if any are. After all, the tax is not going to be implemented until 
September 1, and that’s only going to affect casinos that are going to be operating shortly after that, which 
probably would only apply to the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
The other casinos or the other exhibition bards have been given a two-month extension. Of course that got them 
through the summer months when they were having their fairs. So we will be monitoring the situation certainly 
to see what the impact is. 
 
Now with regard to your suggestion that we arrived at a certain figure as to how much money we wanted to get 
out of casinos, yes, the original estimate was - and this was taken on the amount based on the amount of money 
that is spent on casinos now - we had estimated initially $2.1 million. But the current proposal now with the new 



formula with the head tax and with the 10 per cent on net revenues is $630,000. So I mean, for you to stand in 
your place and say that we have a preconceived figure and then we set up a formula that we would arrive at that 
figures is just not accurate. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - As a final statement on this Act, Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister and the government to 
consider at this time what’s happening in Saskatchewan. We have the games on. Saskatchewan people have just 
won 31 medals - a record for us. It’s been a very positive experience. It’s come about as a result of the money 
that’s been put into the cultural, charitable, and sports organizations - in this case, the sports organizations - 
through out lottery scheme, a very valuable and worthwhile operation that’s taken years and years to build up. 
And it’s helped by just increasing our own image of Saskatchewan tremendously over this last two weeks, the 
self-esteem of youngsters. And that’s the kind of image we want to project in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I ask you to reconsider, and in caucus over the next couple of weeks or however long it takes, about the 
advisability of maintaining this tax because I don’t think that you want to, as a government, have the image of 
becoming and sell-and-tax government. I think you want to maintain the kind of image that is happening in 
Saskatchewan and in Saskatoon right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: - Mr. Chairman, just a brief comment. Certainly we are very proud of the results with the 
games in Saskatoon, and what the Saskatchewan athletes are accomplishing. And there have been many, many 
positive reports made with regard to what Sask First has done. The minister has made a commitment of $10 
million to this program and we certainly are very supportive of what’s happening and will continue to be. 
 
The division bells range from 10:38 to 11:02 a.m. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 
Yeas 
 
Muller 
Duncan 
McLeod 
Andrew 
Berntson 
Taylor 
Smith 
Swan 
Muirhead 
Maxwell 
Hodgins 
Gerich 
Hardy 
Klein 
Meiklejohn 
Martin 



McLaren 
Hopfner 
Martens 
Baker 
Gleim 
Neudorf 
Kopelchuk 
Saxinger 
Britton 
 
-25 
 
Nays 
 
Romanow 
Rolfes 
Lingenfelter 
Tchorzewski 
Koskie 
Thompson 
Brockelbank 
Upshall 
Kowalsky 
Solomon 
Goulet 
Pringle 
Calvert 
Lautermilch 
Trew 
Smart 
Van Mulligan 
 
-17 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 82 - An Act respecting Small Business 
Investment Incentives 

 
Mr. Chairman: - Would the minister introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me today Jim Zatulsky, who is the director of our 
small-business investment programs in the department; and Tony Koshinsky from the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As I’ve indicated before in the House, Madam 
Minister, we on this side of the House support this Bill in principle. 
 
We do have some concerns though regarding this particular piece of legislation. It’s not unlike other pieces of 
legislation that this government has put before the House in that there are many areas that are left to regulation 
and not defined in statute, meaning the cabinet have the ability to make some fairly wide-sweeping changes that 



we have some concerns about. And I would ask the minister to give some though to this before passing of the 
Bill. 
 
Some of the areas that we do have concern that are put to regulation that we’re just not quite clear on. Under 
section 4(1)(g) indicates: “the corporation meets the other prescribed conditions.” 
 
And really, Madam Minister, it doesn’t give us any indication of what these prescribed conditions may be under 
the application for registration. 
 
As we move through the Bill under section 5(b), again in terms of eligibility the registration requires a list of 
regulations and we’re not really quite clear what the might be, regulations of course being done by cabinet. And 
I would like the minister to give some though as to if she may in fact want to make some clarification ins these 
areas. 
 
I think the other concern we have, Madam Minister, is in section 15 under the recapture section of this Bill, in 
that we’ve seen, on a number of occasions, this government put money into a private enterprise, the people of 
this province ending up stuck with the bill. And I don’t really believe that under section 15 the recapture area is 
tight enough, and I’m wondering if you would want to make some comments on that. 
 
We’ve seen in other departments where the GigaText operation has cost the taxpayers, through SEDCO, some 
five and a quarter million dollars - maybe more, we’re not sure at this point - and it does give some concern to 
members on this side of the House when government is involved in stimulating one particular area of our 
economy or another. And for that reason, we’re questioning that particular area of the bill, and I’m wondering if 
you would want to make some comments regarding that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: - In response to the hon. member, this Bill, even though you way that too much is left to 
regulation, we feel that we have expanded it substantially to take care of the few problems that we did have 
under the old Bill, that this Bill is designed to restrict entry into the program. If you look at the venture capital 
corporation Act before, it was really open to everyone. With this new Act, there is restrictions and there is . . . 
it’s designed to allow the department to move quickly in the case of infractions. You specifically had mentioned 
Joytec. With the new Act if . . . Under the old Act the company has two years to pay back the venture capital 
credit. Under this new Act immediately, if 75 per cent of the wages are not being paid in the province, we can 
move in the next day, so to speak. 
 
We also have expanded the Bill so that we can go after directors if there are infractions of regulations or of 
statues. So we think that it’s a tighter Bill; it will accomplish what’s it’s supposed to, but it is a tighter Bill. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Well, Madam Minister, I guess your first comment just indicated very clearly to me why I 
had some cause for concern in terms of the regulations. You indicated that the old venture capital was open to 
everyone. Under these conditions you’ve set out in this Bill, I’m not sure if this is just open to friends of the PC 
Party or it it’s open to Saskatchewan business people in general. And that’s why we’re concerned about the 
regulations, Madam Minister. 
 
I thought we could pass this Bill, we could let this go in a matter of five, 10 minutes because as I said, we do 
agree with the concept of this piece of legislation. But your comments today really put me at east, and I’m not so 
sure that we want to support this Bill. Maybe you want to clarify that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: - Well this particular Act, Mr. Chairman, is brought in to help small businesses, and by 
small businesses, we are looking at research and development companies, businesses related to the tourism 
industry, manufacturing and processing. So those are the types of businesses that will be eligible. 



 
I think the member must recognize that no Act can foresee all problems that may arise, so what we want with 
this Act is the ability to move quickly if it appears that a loophole surfaces. So that’s really the intent of the Act 
- to promote small business in the province, but also, to have the ability to move quickly in the areas that we 
would have to. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Well, Madam Minister, that’s all fine and well, you know, and I appreciate the concern in 
terms of research and development and involving small business, tourism, manufacturing and processing. But 
the point I’m trying to raise is the fact that there is so much left to regulation and there is so much ministerial 
discretion that I’m concerned that there may not be room for other than PC people who are wanting to be 
involved in research and development, tourism, and manufacturing and processing. 
 
I’m just indicating, Madam Minister, that because we do support the concept of this Bill and the intent of the 
Bill that we will be supporting, but I would want, Madam Minister, to indicate to you that we will be keeping a 
very close eye on the way your distributing these grants for these corporations. 
 
You talk about having the discretion, your department having the discretion to move quickly if you do see a 
problem area, and that I want to say to you, I do appreciate. In light of the fact that this government has just 
loaned five and a quarter million dollars through the GigaText operation, Crown investments corporation, and 
then involving SEDCO, we do really appreciate the fact, and we will hold you, Madam Minister, accountable in 
that you have indicated you have the ability to move quickly. We will be watching in two areas: number one, 
that there is an ability for the people of this province, all of the people of this province, to be involved in 
business ventures, meaning that it will cross party lines and that it doesn’t require a particular memberships in a 
particular political party to be involved; and that, number two, if and when there are some problems with a 
particular corporation, you will not delay action on moving and protecting the taxpayers’ money as you did in 
the Principal Trust fiasco. 
 
There are some credibility problems, I’m sure you will understand, and there is some concern on this side of the 
House and by people of this province in terms of your ability to administer. And I would just want to indicate to 
you, Madam Minister, that we will be closely scrutinizing the grants this Bill and the actions of your department 
surrounding this Bill. 
 
In terms of recapture, you may want to elaborate to the members on this side of the House, Madam Minister, 
just how that will be handled; how you will be scrutinizing these corporations of these investors, and how you 
will be guarding the taxpayers’ dollars, and just how you will be handling the recapture portion of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: - I think, Mr. Chairman, that the member doesn’t understand the Bill. I mean, he rambles on 
and on about friends of the Tories, and I would say that probably the majority of small-business owners in the 
province are Tories. I will admit that; I’m sure he will admit that. 
 
There are eligibility criteria, Mr. Chairman, in the Bill, and I would tell the hon. member that is a small business 
that is eligible under the Act applies for a grant, the minister does not have the authority of the ability to 
disallow it. So any business that is eligible under the program, that meets the requirements of the program, will 
be approved, because the minister has no authority to do the type of things that the member is suggesting. 
 
The minister did not have the authority to disallow eligible businesses under the old program, and will not have 
that ability under this program. 
 



I would point out, Mr. Chairman, that over the last five years of venture capital corporation Act that was in 
effect before, we have over 190 venture capital corporations structured in the province, and over $90 million 
was invested through these corporation. 
 
So the intent of the Act is still there. We feel this is a better Act. It cleans up some areas that we had concern, 
and it is a support for small businesses. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Well, Madam Minister, I don’t happen to agree with you in terms of the number of small-
business people that support the PC Party or the Tory government, but we’ll leave that to an election day and 
we’ll leave that to a time when they have a chance to pass judgement on this government. And I think the record 
will clearly show that that statement is wrong. 
 
We’re still a little concerned in terms of . . . you indicate that the minister has no discretion in order to disallow 
one particular applicant or another. You haven’t satisfied me in terms of that under section 4(1)(g): 
 
the corporation meets the other prescribed conditions. 
 
Who prescribes those conditions? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: - That is on an administrative nature, and those things will be prescribed in regulation which 
will be gazetted, I imagine. And it deals with the articles of the business and the fact that the department would 
have to be provided with a list of the shareholders, to pay the incentive, and that type of thing. All those things 
will be prescribed 
in regulation. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Madam Minister, I only have one more question before we allow this Bill to proceed. Would 
you have a list of those regulations, and would you be able to share those with this House? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: - We will send you a copy of the regulations, Member, as soon as they are completed. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Chair is asking permission to go page by page. 
 
Pages 1 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 27 - An Act to amend The Mineral Resources 
Act, 1985 

 
Mr. Chairman: - Order. Would the minister introduce her officials? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This morning I have with me, to the right, deputy minister of 
Energy and Mines, John Reid; immediately behind him is Pat Youzwa, the assistant deputy minister of resource 
policy and economics; next to her, Mr. Maurice Hall, director of industrial minerals; and at the back, Mr. Dan 
McFadyen, the director of the branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 



Mr. Solomon: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, the amendment is not a major one, but I have 
about four or five questions I want to raise on it. 
 
Can you just explain to the House what prompted the amendment at this time? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Mr. Chairman, for some time several provinces in Canada have had reciprocal agreements 
with one another in exchange for information as it relates to the mining industry. We have had several 
discussions at ministerial meetings and discussions between officials of various province, mainly because 
various companies are beginning to locate in more than one province. 
 
It is often mostly used for auditing purposes, and that is the intent of this amendment in there. It is to allow us in 
fact to be able to audit properly if we should have a mining company that is also located in another province. 
 
I believe there are approximately four or five other province that have such arrangements, and I am aware that a 
couple of other province along with Saskatchewan are looking at putting in the reciprocal agreements, along 
with the four that are presently there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - So the agreements . . . this amendment will provide reciprocity with all of the governments in 
Canada, or just the ones that you can negotiate reciprocity with? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - No, these be will individual agreements with individual jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Can you explain how that’ll work, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Well for example, Nova Scotia, Manitoba, Ontario, and British Columbia - and there may be 
one more, I’m not too sure about Quebec - do in fact have reciprocal agreements with one another, and we 
would, for example, begin discussions with those four provinces if that’s what we needed to do if there was a 
mining company in Saskatchewan that was also mining in that province. And we would sit down and put 
together an agreement as agreed upon by both sides, individually with each jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Has there been a circumstance to date in which you’ve dealt with these provinces to obtain 
information, and if so, what kind of information are we talking about? The Bill is pretty general and refers to all 
kinds of information, yet in your remarks the other day in second reading you referred specifically to tax audit 
information. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - It’s basically financial information, as I had indicated in second reading the other day and in 
discussion with you after that. Under the current regulations that we operate under, we cannot reveal taxation 
information to another jurisdiction at their request without having such an agreement into place. If we had a 
company, for example, in Nova Scotia that also mined in Saskatchewan and we wanted to do some auditing of 
not only their financial matters in Saskatchewan, but in Nova Scotia, we would not be able to do that without 
having the agreement in place with that province. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Has there been a requirement to date to search out that information with one or more of the 
companies that operate in Saskatchewan? Madam Minister, my question is very simply, you’re introducing this 
amendment to obviously obtain information. Other governments have reciprocal agreements, but my question 
deals with the need to do this. Has there been an example with one or more of the mineral companies that 
operate in Saskatchewan that you requested information of and were not able to obtain it and only through this 
amendment can you obtain it? 
 



Hon. Mrs. Smith: - No, we have to date not had any specific requests or a need. But I think the industry is at a 
point where indeed that may very well be possible in the very near future. Whether it’s potash between New 
Brunswick, for example, and Saskatchewan, we share a common producer. The gold, the gold mining industry 
is very much in a growth stage in this province, and as the hon. member knows, the mining companies in gold 
often move from one province to another and in fact not only locate but the activity carries on in more than one 
province. And we see for the very near future a very real need for this to take place. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Solomon: - How have you been able to monitor the actions of the companies that operate in Saskatchewan 
to date? Just give us an example of how that is done and whether you foresee an immediate need to have this 
amendment in place to obtain information that they would not co-operate in providing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Well the producers or miners in Saskatchewan agree to let our auditors in to in fact look at 
their books. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Could the minister request a report on some specific areas of the industry under the guise of 
intergovernmental information exchange and then use that information, or officials in their department leak that 
information for some private business interest? I guess that’s a question, Minister, but especially business that 
are trying to attract the government, for example, into a joint venture deal or vice versa. Is that a possibility? The 
concern I have is the possible abuse of that confidentiality being breached, and what requirements would you 
have on the officials in Saskatchewan, as well as those in other provinces that you provide information to, to 
adhere to the confidentiality clause? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Well I think it’s recognized that despite what system you have in place you may run the risk 
of some abuse taking place, and I guess that’s why it’s important to make sure that hose bases are covered and 
that there in fact is a check and balance within the system. Any kind of intergovernmental agreements in the 
past, and now and in the future, provide for the exchange of information; they must contain appropriate 
confidentiality provisions. That is a standard practice in dealing with intergovernmental agreements. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Could you briefly, Minister, explain what a confidentiality agreement is. What are the 
requirements and what are the penalties for breaching that agreement? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - What the Act says is that we would, in fact, if you had a reciprocal agreement, you would 
provide the information to another government at their request in order for them to enforce their taxing laws, as 
that’s what we would want to do. That’s why we would do that. If in fact we thought that the tax system had a 
loophole somewhere or a company was perhaps moving depreciation of capital or something like that from one 
area to another, then we would request that of another government. 
 
If another government were to break that confidentiality - and I would remind you that that is a very serious 
matter when you’re talking about taxation measures - if they were to in fact break that, two things would 
immediately be open to you, and I would think one would do. One would be the agreement would be broken. It 
is an agreement recognized in law. The court system would be open to you at that point. And secondly, I don’t 
think you would probably be giving them information for some time to come. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Final question, Madam Minister. Has the industry been consulted, and what has been their 
general response to this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Yes, and they will not object to this. 
 



Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 89 - An Act to amend The Department of 
Energy and Mines Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, again this is a very small, or should I say a short 
Bill amending The Department of Energy and Mines Act. I have some very general questions and maybe some 
specific one. Minister, section 9 is changed to that rather obtaining approval from the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, you can enter into agreements on behalf of the Saskatchewan government. Could you describe what 
that agreement might be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - These are the agreements that fall under the fossil fuels technology development program 
and are used for R&D (research and development) development. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Could the minister describe how these agreements operate? Do people apply for some kind of 
grant, and what is the criteria for the application? And what kind of success response rate is there for those who 
apply? And what kind of money are we looking at in individual grants? And what’s the annual budget? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - A company or individual that was interested in looking at a project under this particular 
program would in fact apply to the department. A technical evaluation would be done within the Department of 
Energy and Mines at that point, and if the department officials should choose, they would also ask for an 
evaluation outside by a consulting engineer or someone with that background before given its final approval. 
 
Once the approval is given, then they enter into a detailed mechanism with the applicant, and that also includes 
the reports that will come in on the project. There is monitoring that takes place during and at the end of the life 
span of a project. The dollars can range anywhere from a few thousand . . . for example, if you had a very major 
project in heavy oil it might be a couple of hundred thousand - there is a wide variance there. 
 
I believe your last question was the budget of the fossil fuels program, is 2.1 million. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Okay. Thank, Madam Minister. And you’re asking for, obviously, evaluations from the 
applicants, and there’s criteria they must meet. Under this Bill: 
 
“(2) The minister shall not make a grant pursuant to subsection (1) in excess of $10,000 unless: 
 
you meet certain requirements. Are you saying then, as a result of this amendment becoming law, you would be 
able to authorize without an order in council grants for greater than 10,000 in the vicinity that you described of 
around $100,000? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - What we’re talking about here are signed agreements, okay? I think our observation is a fair 
one if in fact this were a totally new system, so I’m going to go back and tell you what was in place before. The 
Heritage Fund was where the funding for the agreements came out of before, and that did not require Energy 
and Mines to obtain orders in councils for projects approved under the terms of the agreement. 
 



Now when the new Saskatchewan fossils fuels technology development program was initiated in 1988 and ’89, 
the program that year was funded out of economic diversification and the investment fund, and therefore the 
provisions of the Heritage Fund which allowed for that before were no longer applicable. As a consequence, 
Justice informed us that we require this agreement in order to do it as we had been doing it before. It was simply 
a matter of changing funding departments. I hope that clarifies it for the member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Thank you, Madam Minister. Your colleague’s remarks in second reading, the member from 
Weyburn, indicated that the amendment was an administrative and housekeeping nature, one of the 
amendments, and that it changes two of the current limited on the authority of the minister to make grants and 
enter into agreements with other governments, powers, persons and organizations, etc. 
 
I’m curious to know, you may not be aware of this but if you do, please inform whether other departments are . . 
. your colleagues are getting into the same circumstance whereby orders in councils are becoming . . . limits on 
them are becoming higher and higher, and that these housekeeping things are being done to ensure that the . . . 
or results in having cabinet members really have more confidentiality in terms of the orders in councils they sign 
allowing for the expenditures of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - No, the ceiling on the level for orders in councils has not changed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Are the regulations published now in the Gazette, as the apply to this program? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - There are no regulations for this program because this is contracts between the department 
and companies. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Madam Minister, in the Act amendment here says, and I quote: 
 
4 Subsection 9(2) is repealed and the following substituted: 
 
“(2) The Minister shall not make a grant pursuant to subsection (1) in excess of $10,000 unless: 
 
a) the minister obtains the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council before making the grant; or 
 
b) the grant is made in accordance with any terms of conditions that are prescribed in regulations made by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council”. 
 
I was referring to those regulations. The concern I have, Minister, is that if you’re getting away from providing 
an order in council for these grants. Orders in council are usually quite public, and we can have access to them, 
and expenditures are held accountable, whereas if you’re making expenditures without an order in council and 
according to regulations, that also provides some accountability. But you’re saying there’s no regulations, and 
I’m curious to know then how you would make those grants, if there’s no regulations, that would give you some 
guide-lines? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Well there’s . . . I think you’re thinking about the occasional grant that the department may 
make, for example, to the Canada energy research, which does not come under the fossils fuels program. The 
fossils fuels program stands by itself and very specific, and people must apply for it. It is very much different 
than the kind of a grant that any department would give out - $5,000 or $6,000. Regulations for the occasional 
grant that the department might put out that is not under the fossils fuels program, but outside of it, would in 
fact be covered by regulations. This is specifically the fossils fuels program. 



 
Mr. Solomon: - Why do you want to make the changes then from an order in council to this new system? Could 
you give us your comments on that? The member from Weyburn did, and they don’t seem to coincide with 
yours. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - Well I gave you the history of this and why it necessitated a change. And the system that was 
in place previous to needing this change was very effective and very efficient. We simply want to restore that 
into place and do it legally, and as a consequence the administrative changes here. 
 
Mr. Solomon: - Well, Madam Minister, you’re saying you want to do it legally now. What do you mean by that? 
Have you been undertaking to provide these grants illegally? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: - We want to re-establish in laws as it was before when it was out of the Heritage Fund, okay? 
They had the power to do that. The source of the funding has changed to economic development and something 
else, and the legislation presently in place does not allow us to go over the 10,000 without that OC (order in 
council). We want to restore what was there before so it can run as efficiently as it did before. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 - An Act to amend The Parks Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 71 - An Act to amend The Renewable 
Resources, Recreation and Culture Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: - When will this Bill be read a third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 60 - An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 



 
Bill No. 26 - An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: - When will this Bill be read a third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 87 - An Act to amend the Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill no. 38 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation Reorganization Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 86 - An Act respecting Co-operatives 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that those amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: - When will this Bill be read a third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 

Bill No. 76 - An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 
1985 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that those amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: - When will this Bill be read a third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 
 



Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 67 - An Act respecting Gaming and the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that those amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: - When will this Bill be read a third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 72 - An Act to raise Revenue for Hospitals by 
the Imposition and Collection of Taxes with respect to 
Participation in and the Operation of Lottery Schemes 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 82 - An Act respecting Small Business 
Investment Incentives 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 27 - An Act to amend The Mineral Resources 
Act, 1985 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 89 - An Act to amend The Department of 
Energy and Mines Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 
 


