





























































Hansard: July 28, 1989


July 28, 1989 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the Assembly, two special guests seated in your gallery. They are Mr. 
Derek Fox and his wife Viola Braun-Fox. Derek is the Agriculture critic and the Deputy 
House Leader in the opposition in the province of Alberta. He is the member for 
Vegreville. I hope he and his wife enjoy the proceedings here today, and I would like all 
members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation to Investors re Principal Trust 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, this morning your colleague in Alberta, Premier Don Getty, 
announced the compensation package that will be paid to the investors of Principal Trust. 
Mr. Premier, what he has announced as you will know is that the depositors in 
Saskatchewan will receive either 18 cents on the dollar or 15 cents on the dollar, 
depending on which firm they had their money in, bringing the total up, sir, to 75 cents 
on the dollar. 
 
Mr. Premier, given that your government compensated those who lost money in Alberta 
in the Pioneer collapse; given that your government ensured that they were compensated 
up to 100 per cent of their investment, do you think it’s fair that your colleague in Alberta 
is only compensating up to 75 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It is, Mr. Speaker, our government’s position, and it has been since the 
collapse of the respective Principal companies, that Alberta should make the full 
compensation. We haven’t changed our position. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will again address my question to the Premier, given that 
it was the Premier of Alberta who expressed the actions of the Alberta government this 
morning; I will again direct my question to the Premier. 
 
Your Minister of Finance says your position is that the Alberta government should 
compensate the Saskatchewan investors up to 100 per cent. What, sir, have you done 
about it, then, to ensure that this will happen? 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have expressed to the Alberta government our position on 
numerous occasions, that they should fully compensate the investors. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, apparently whatever you’ve done wasn’t good 
enough, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of Finance, what do you intend to do 
from this day forward to ensure that the Alberta government compensates Saskatchewan 
investors to 100 per cent, just as you did with Alberta investors in regard to the Pioneer 
collapse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I don’t know who’s feeding the questions. My understanding is 
that the NDP in Alberta said don’t give anybody else anything. So we’ve certainly taken 
the position that we did rely on the province of Alberta, as did other provinces, and our 
position has not changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, my question was very simple. I’ll put it to you again. What 
do you intend to do about this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve indicated our position, and we have communicated, and we 
will again raise it with the province of Alberta. If you have taken the time to read Premier 
Getty’s statement, Alberta indicates they will pursue this with other governments. 
Saskatchewan’s position will be quite clear that we did rely on Alberta, and Alberta 
should compensate 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will you table in this House 
your correspondence, your communications with the government of Alberta in this 
regard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well certainly we will get the information for the hon. member and 
indicate . . . I’m advised that there have been numerous discussions again, as well, not 
only at the ministerial but at the officials’ level as well, so we’ll have to pull that 
information. 
 

Call for Resignation of Minister 
 



Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a new question again, this time to the Premier. And I 
specifically address this to the Premier because, Mr. Premier, in Alberta the Premier of 
the province now has admitted that his government fouled up in this whole matter. He’s 
expressed their negligence in his statements this morning and his actions this morning, 
and part of what he has done, sir, is to remove Mrs. Osterman from cabinet. And that of 
course was the correct thing to do. 
 
Sir, will you inform the House today whether you have now demanded or have received 
from the minister of consumer and commercial affairs at that time, the member from 
Maple Creek. Have you demanded or received her resignation this day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Mr. Speaker, my quick 
supplementary then is why, Mr. Premier, why? When your minister of consumer and 
commercial affairs licensed the companies in this province, why is she not now negligent, 
as the minister has been shown in Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance said, that we hold that 
Alberta should pay 100 per cent compensation, and the minister here has acted 
appropriately, and Alberta has admitted that in fact the mistakes were made there. 
 

Cut-off of Power Supply 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question yesterday from the 
member for Quill Lakes on two electric accounts at SaskPower. One of them was dealing, 
Mr. Speaker, with a farmer in the constituency of Quill Lakes. And I should point out that 
the member for Quill Lakes called my office at 9:30 yesterday morning and was told 
prior to his grandstanding exercise in the House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower 
would, in fact, try to work out an agreement with these people. 
 
But the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, of this farmer in the Quill Lakes constituency is that 
they have not had their power cut off. They have not had their power cut off, Mr. 
Speaker. They are in arrears, Mr. Speaker; this account is in arrears to the tune of about 
$48,000 — or $4,800, I’m sorry — and, Mr. Speaker, the degree of arrears is seven to 
eight months, Mr. Speaker — seven to eight months, SaskPower has agreed, Mr. Speaker, 
to meet with these people and work out some arrangement to take care of that arrears, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The second account, Mr. Speaker, that the member brought up in his grandstanding 
exercise yesterday, was a restaurant in Regina, Mr. Speaker. This restaurant was a new 
account to SaskPower in December of last year. The first bill was sent out, Mr. Speaker, 



the first bill was sent out in January of this year. There has been one payment of $250 on 
that account, Mr. Speaker. The approximate balance outstanding is $6,000. 
 
There was an agreement made a short time ago, Mr. Speaker, between the owner of that 
account and SaskPower to have some orderly arrangement, Mr. Speaker, to cover off the 
arrears. The agreement was not met; there was not one payment made under that 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower on Monday or Tuesday cut the power off. Today, 
Mr. Speaker, they have that customer in, working out another arrangement to cover off 
the arrears, I think an eminently reasonable process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to direct a question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I 
want to say that the business man in which the problem with SaskPower, phoned in today 
and thanked us for raising it, because he could get no communication with SaskPower to 
make an arrangement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want also to clarify, Mr. Deputy Premier, that in respect to the farmer, I 
did contact your office at 9:30, and not a single contact has been made with the farmer. 
And as I indicated, August 1 is approaching. They have 12,000 broilers, 75 dairy herd, 
and they are in a crisis because . . . the farmer’s wife just finished phoning me saying 
absolutely nothing, no contact has been made to advise them that their broilers and their 
cattle in fact will be protected. I ask you, have you made an arrangement, have you 
communicated it to the farmer as you have alluded to in the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the office of the member from Quill Lakes contacted 
my office at 9:30 yesterday — 9:30 yesterday — at which time he was told, Mr. Speaker, 
at which time he was told that SaskPower would be contacting these people to make 
arrangements to cover off the arrears. What those arrangements would be, I don’t know, 
and I’m not the guy that makes the phone call. 
 
He tells me that the customer, the restaurant customer from Regina contacted him this 
morning and thanked him, and thanked him, Mr. Speaker. I’m not entirely sure that I will 
take that as gospel. Mr. Speaker, I may well contact the restaurant owner myself to see 
whether in fact that phone call did take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, you know 
the crisis that exists in rural Saskatchewan — 11,132 notices of foreclosure. Those were 
the statistics that were released — 10,132 foreclosure notices. That’s the statistics. And 
the crisis in agriculture is there. Here is a farmer who absolutely depends upon his 



operation for power. I ask you: have you communicated to this date with that farmer? 
Have you worked out an arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Pinocchio mentality of members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
boggles my mind. He’s got the Leader of the Opposition talking about 10,000 foreclosure 
notices; now he’s talking about 11,000-and-how-many. In fact, it’s something like 2,600 
or 4,600 or something. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t recognize a fact if they tripped over it, Mr. Speaker. 
And we don’t have to apologize, Mr. Speaker, for the support that this government has 
given agriculture in Saskatchewan — in no way, shape, or form. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — If you contrast, Mr. Speaker, the programs that this government 
has put in place in support of agriculture with the lack of even an understanding for the 
agricultural sector by members opposite . . . At a time when interest rates were running at 
22 per cent, Mr. Speaker, they sat there . . . Oh yes, they had land bank. They were 
gobbling up the farmers’ land. And that’s all they had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now he’s trying to suggest that it’s right for all customers of SaskPower to be in 
arrears up to six months, $6,000, and make no payment and expect SaskPower and the 
rest of the paying customers, Mr. Speaker, to carry them at no cost. The system doesn’t 
work that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, the 
farmers are in trouble because of your agricultural policy, or lack thereof. That’s the truth 
of the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I say that this farmer and his family that are working hard, 
diversifying as the Premier is calling upon them to do under his policies, they may have 
arrears with power. But what I asked you, will you give a commitment that by the end of 
the day that you will contact these people so they can rest assured that they will have 
power and not have all of their 12,000 broilers destroyed, and also their dairy herd? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my guess is that had it not been for the agricultural 
policy of this government, Mr. Speaker, the member’s friend from Quill Lakes would 
have a lot more company in the difficulty that he faces today — a lot more company. 
 



That member doesn’t recognize that the real problems in agriculture come from drought, 
come from prices, come from international grain wars, but I don’t expect members 
opposite to understand that, Mr. Speaker. They know nothing of agriculture or agriculture 
policy. They’re midgets in that field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As it relates to his friend from Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that before the day 
is out someone from SaskPower, assuming they’re available, someone at SaskPower will 
be talking to the family at Quill Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One final question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, you 
exposed here the total amount of debt of one farmer that has a problem. He is dealing 
with the Department of Agriculture with ACS. There’s no regulations for restructuring of 
debt. That is his problem, and they can’t meet the commitment to restructure the debt 
because there’s no regulations for the restructuring of it. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, in light of the fact that the burden rests with the Premier 
for inaction on agricultural policies, will you apologize to the farmer in Quill Lakes who 
here publicly you start exposing his financial difficulties of $4,800 in respect to it? I 
didn’t expose the total amount. I indicated that there was a problem; I asked you to solve 
it, not to run at the farmer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to have to ask the Deputy Premier to withdraw the remark he 
just directed to the member from Quill Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remark unequivocally that the 
member for Quill Lakes exposed his stupidity, Mr. Speaker, and I withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the hon. member withdraw the remark with no 
equivocation, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw and apologize. 
 
Now to answer the question, Mr. Speaker, that member and the degree of hypocrisy 
displayed by that member in his last question is immeasurable, Mr. Speaker, 
immeasurable. That member yesterday at 9:30 talked to my office, got the assurance, Mr. 
Speaker, that SaskPower would be in touch with this customer and work out some 
arrangement. Then what does he do, Mr. Speaker? At 1 o’clock he is the guy that brings 
it into the floor of the House and does his grandstanding, Mr. Speaker, and alleges that 
SaskPower, SaskPower in some way have behaved inappropriately in this matter. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that in the circumstances SaskPower has 
behaved in a very tolerant way, Mr. Speaker, and a very patient way. And they are 
willing to do more, Mr. Speaker, willing to do more. They are prepared to go out there 



and help that member’s constituent, Mr. Speaker, work out some system to work off these 
arrears, Mr. Speaker. I think that is eminently reasonable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A final question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I phoned at 
9:30, there’s a crisis on that farm in respect to knowing whether anything is going to be 
done. The lady on that farm, the housewife, phoned here today at noon and said: my 
husband is desperate; I need assistance; I have nowhere else to turn. Mr. Koskie, will you 
see if you can get immediate response and contact with SPC in order to alleviate the crisis 
that we’re facing here on the farm? 
 
I ask you: what is the delay: Why haven’t you attended to it? Why haven’t you contacted 
them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Let us allow the Deputy Premier to . . . Would the hon. 
members come to order. Come to order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this 
account is seven to eight months in arrears — seven to eight months in arrears. That 
member, Mr. Speaker, waited seven or eight months — seven or eight months. I mean, 
my heavens, how long does it take that member to wake up to realize that there is a 
problem? Is he representing his constituent or not? 
 
So he phones my office at 9:30 yesterday morning; he got the assurance that it would be 
looked after, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower doesn’t take these 
things lightly. SaskPower has worked and worked and worked to try and work out some 
arrangement with accounts like this. Now in the areas where there’s been co-operation, it 
seems to just work okay. In this case there seems to be no co-operation and so it got to 
the point where it got to. 
 
But I didn’t bring it into the House, Mr. Speaker. That member brought it into the House. 
And I think that the farmer from Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, should thank that member for 
bringing this to the level that it’s got to. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower will 
be out there to work out arrangements with that farmer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, I know 
you’re obsessed and occupied with GigaText, and I know that the president of the power 
corporation is obsessed with privatization. 
 



I want to relate to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, that these farmers have been working and 
attempting to get a solution, and in desperation . . . they could get no arrangement worked 
out and they came to me and asked me to take it. I did as soon as possible, and I expected, 
Mr. Deputy Premier, that in the light of the seriousness of the problem confronting you 
that you would have acted immediately rather than running at the farmer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, two things. Two things, Mr. Speaker. The power has 
not been cut off — that’s number one. The second thing, Mr. Speaker, is it did not have 
to come to this House. The only reason it came to this House, because the work was 
already being done to work out the arrangement . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well there 
is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only reason that it came to this House, Mr. Speaker, was for that member to 
grandstand. Mr. Speaker, for that member grandstand and try to score some cheap 
political point. And it’s also, Mr. Speaker, an indication of the depth of research that goes 
on on that side of the House, because they’ve obviously run out of questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grain Transportation Rate 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Premier, Mr. Premier, you’ll know earlier this spring the federal 
government by order in council set the grain transportation rate at $9 a ton, a 22 per cent 
increase over last year. Even in the light of the fact that the national transportation 
authority set the rate, or recommended the rate, the government’s own body 
recommended the rate be $6.79 a tonne less than the previous year — a full 33 per cent 
over what the rate is now. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this House what representation you made to the federal 
government to let them know that that was unacceptable, that the farmers of this province 
with the good example we’ve just heard cannot afford these unnecessary increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we made representation to the federal 
government, the results of which are evident today, and certainly with about a billion 
dollars in payment coming out to the province of Saskatchewan and the prairie provinces 
where we get almost 50 per cent, which will mean 4 to $500 million in cash coming from 
the federal government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . which, Mr. Speaker, is not something that is a loan. It does not 
have to be paid back. It is cash that comes into the province of Saskatchewan — 4 to 
$500 million. And that’s the kind of representation we’ve been making. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the deficiency payments, we received in the 
neighbourhood of the same amount of money, another 4 to $500 million that could come 
out to Saskatchewan farmers. In the last few years the average farmer has received in the 
neighbourhood of $100,000 in cash, in interest rate protection, in various kinds of cash 
advances, in money that goes directly into their pockets — it doesn’t have to be paid 
back. It’s the largest support in the history of Canada for agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan from both the federal government and the provincial government, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will continue to make that very sound representation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you’re allowing the burden in 
this province to be shifted from the federal government onto the backs of Saskatchewan 
farmers who cannot afford it. In fact, this will cost Saskatchewan farmers $62 million 
more this year, $72 million more than it would have been if the rate would have been set 
at the NTA (National Transportation Act) levy — $72 million more. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you, when you meet your federal counterpart in Prince Albert early 
next week, will you make representation to him to tell him to reverse this increase and go 
with the NTA recommended rate before the beginning of the crop year? Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t buy the hon. member’s number of $62 million, 
and I would appreciate it if he’d table his analysis there because if you look at the amount 
of grain that was marketed out of the province of Saskatchewan, either he’s got a lot 
bigger numbers than the farmers do or else he’s making this up, because you will not find 
it’s that kind of cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. member, we are providing cash to farmers from the 
provincial government and from the federal government in very large amounts. We know 
that the capacity of farmers to carry themselves when you face high interest rates, or 
drought, or $2 wheat, or international subsidies is difficult; that’s why we put together 
literally billions of dollars in cash to help people. 
 
The hon. member talks about transportation. We have not had a transportation problem in 
this last year because we haven’t had the grain to market. I think he’s missed the boat on 
this one, because if he was really concerned he’d be talking about cash in their pockets, 
not transportation costs on grain — there isn’t any grain to market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
At this morning’s proceedings, we had called orders of the day. We now move to 
government orders. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 
Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I will be recognizing the member from Moose Jaw South to speak, 
unless the member from Weyburn wishes to raise another issue. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to again participate in this 
very historic debate, the debate that would have the government opposite attempting to 
sell off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to people, to corporations, to 
governments far removed from this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the Bill designed to put into private hands this great public asset, this 
great public asset that has so well served the people of Saskatchewan, and in future could 
serve this province and our people for generations and generations yet to come, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the government opposite, through Bill No. 20, want to place this great asset into the 
hands primarily of people who don’t even live in the province of Saskatchewan, to put 
this corporation and its assets and to put control, therefore, of this resource, this vast 
resource of potash, into the hands, not of the many but into the hands of the few. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House object. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of 
the House could never support taking this great asset now in the hands of the many and 
putting it into the hands of the few. Selling it off, selling it off. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had 
opportunity to participate in this debate and I’m thankful for that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the very outset of my remarks I encouraged members opposite to join in 
the debate, and I see that the Minister of Education will want to do that at some point 
today. I was given an indication this morning that the minister from Regina South also 
wants to participate, and other members opposite. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be taking my 
place at some point, and I will look forward to the interventions. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Please don’t. 
 



Mr. Calvert: — The Minister of Finance asks me not to take my place. He might 
encourage me to continue longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the debate and the points that I have tried to raise, I would like 
to, by way of summary, just touch on those points briefly. Again, if you will permit, by 
way of summary. Mr. Speaker, I have tried in my remarks to make the case that the 
government opposite does not have a mandate for this Bill. First and foremost I’ve tried 
to make the point that the government opposite does not have a mandate to do what 
they’re trying to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — They do not have that mandate because when they went to the people of 
Saskatchewan seeking the opportunity to govern, they did not identify to the people of 
Saskatchewan that this was part of their agenda as government. They did not go to the 
people of Saskatchewan and say, look, if you re-elect us, we’re going to privatize SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and we’re going to privatize SaskPower, and 
we’re going to privatize the potash corporation. No, nothing of the sort; in fact, just the 
opposite. 
 
Leading members of their government were travelling the province saying, no, 
privatization is yesterday’s theory. We’re not going to have out-of-province investors 
honing in here. It makes no sense, they were saying before the election, it makes no sense 
for one government to build and for another government to come along and sell off. Well 
I agree entirely, Mr. Speaker, it makes no sense. In fact, there’s nothing about this Bill 
that makes any sense from my point of view. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when they went to the people in 1986 asking for a mandate to govern, if 
anything they were saying to people, no, we’re not going to privatize. So if anything they 
have a mandate not to privatize. 
 
What we have had since, of course, the 1986 election and the election of this group of 
men and women, again we have had nothing but privatization. And this session is perhaps 
the best example of it. Since we’ve come into this session way back in March, day after 
day after day we are asked by this government to deal with privatization. We’ve dealt 
with privatization in regard to Bill No. 1, the Bill that would establish the department of 
privatization. That was the first Bill in this session, Bill No. 1, the first priority of the 
government was to establish the department of privatization. 
 
We’ve gone through the attempt of this government to privatize SaskPower, the natural 
gas division of SaskPower. We saw the public reaction to that, Mr. Speaker. We saw how 
the people of Saskatchewan rejected that completely. And they are rejecting it today and 
they will reject it in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, no whitewash commission is going to change that, no 
whitewash commission will ever change that. The people of Saskatchewan want their gas 
utility and their electrical utility kept in public hands, make no mistake about that. And 
now we come to the debate on potash, the privatization of the potash corporation. And 
just as the people reject privatization of SaskPower, just as they would reject the 
privatization of SGI, so too they reject the privatization of potash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government does not have a mandate to do what they intend to do with 
this Bill. They have no mandate. And therefore, by persisting in this, they make a sham of 
parliamentary democracy. That’s my opinion, Mr. Speaker. They make a sham of 
parliamentary democracy when a government comes to office having said one thing 
before an election and then to do just the opposite after the election. Mr. Speaker, that 
was my initial point. 
 
I have tried to point out in this debate as well how the members opposite, the government 
of the day, how they seem to have had a change of heart, Mr. Speaker, a striking change 
of heart, because now what we see is the Premier of the province travelling about the 
province, saying to the people of Saskatchewan, this potash corporation is an albatross 
around your neck; this potash corporation is a detriment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what he’s saying now, but that’s so contradictory, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve tried to 
point out; it’s so contradictory to their own statements when describing the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan through its own annual report. It’s just so contradictory. 
 
As late as this most recent annual report, the 1988 annual report, we find phrases in that 
report telling us that this corporation last year alone made $108 million — well over a 
million dollars of net income in one year. That’s from this year’s annual report, and the 
now Premier tries to paint it as an albatross around the people’s necks. How can that be 
true? I just simply do not understand. 
 
We have reports, annual reports, including the latest annual report, that describe the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s holdings, its mines, as the most efficient in the 
world, as the most productive in the world, as offering the highest quality of potash in the 
world, Mr. Speaker. Those are statements made by this government. How then their 
leader, the Premier, can go about saying that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is 
an albatross around the necks of the Saskatchewan people is beyond me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where this change of heart has come from unless it is — and I 
submit it is — just an effort to convince the people of Saskatchewan that it somehow 
should be sold, that it somehow should be sold. Mr. Speaker, this change of heart has not 
gone unnoticed by the people of Saskatchewan because they know, as we know, the 
Potash Corporation Saskatchewan is anything but an albatross, anything but an albatross 
around the necks of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought it was important in this debate to talk about the resource, to talk 
about this resource that we call potash, this resource which is buried in Saskatchewan soil 



in such abundance, this God-given resource for which we, the people of the province, are 
stewards. And as elected members of the Government of Saskatchewan, this government 
in opposition, we bear a very special responsibility for the stewardship of this resource. 
 
The decisions that we make in this House will influence the course of this resource and 
the use of this resource, the control and benefit of this resource, not just for the next year 
or two years but perhaps for generations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are here talking about the most valuable mineral resource in our province, bar none, 
far more valuable than oil, far more valuable than uranium, far more valuable than any 
gold we have now discovered or might discover, far more valuable than any diamond 
finds we now have found or may in future find. This is a resource that far surpasses any 
other mineral resource in the province of Saskatchewan, the supplies that will last a 
prediction of 4,000 years. 
 
We in this House are charged with the responsibility, the special responsibility for the 
stewardship of this resource, surely because the resource belongs to all of the people of 
Saskatchewan, a right that we fought for, Mr. Speaker, a right that we fought for and 
won. But because this resource belongs to all the people of Saskatchewan, we as a 
people, as a province, have the responsibility for the stewardship of the resource. But that 
responsibility is vested primarily, primarily in this House, in this legislature, among we 
who have been elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite — the government opposite — would intend to 
take this resource that is now publicly owned and turn it over to foreign interests. Mr. 
Speaker, I challenge that as very poor stewardship of the resource, of potash, in 
Saskatchewan. I think that’s a tragic stewardship of the resource. And not only our 
generation but generations, if they accomplish their goal, not only our generation but 
generations yet to come will suffer because of what they are doing in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this resource is a resource whose primary use, whose first and primary use 
is in the production of fertilizer and therefore directly related to the production of food to 
feed the people of this globe. I’ve tried to point out in my remarks that the population of 
this world, currently at 5.4 billion people, is expected by the United Nations to double. In 
the year 2025 the United Nations expects that the population of the globe will be 10 
billion people, 10 billion people who must be fed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a resource here for which we are the stewards that can play a key 
role in feeding that world population. The United Nations at the same time talks about the 
population of the world almost tripling by the end of the next century to 14 billion figure. 
That resource will become more and more valuable, more and more in demand. There 
will be a demand for this resource so long as the resource is in the ground beneath 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this resource will never become obsolete. It will never 
become obsolete. 
 



Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are here dealing, as I said initially, in a very historic debate, 
because decisions that are made today, decisions that are made in this legislature in this 
session, can well affect the course of this resource for years and years, generations and 
generations to come. Mr. Speaker, we are the stewards of a very valuable resource, and 
let us as legislators not forget that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have tried in the course of my remarks to postulate where in the world the 
idea comes from that we should somehow sell off everything that we own, including the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. That is not, Mr. Speaker, in my view a made-in- 
Saskatchewan policy. That is not a made-in-Saskatchewan idea. 
 
In my view, that idea is foreign to this province, foreign to our history, foreign to our 
traditions. Many of us in this House have had parents and grandparents and perhaps 
great-grandparents who pioneered in this province, who built this province with a vision 
of co-operation, of working together, of striving together, of building together for the 
common good, for the common good. Not this mentality that says profit above all else; 
greed is the great motivator. Not that, Mr. Speaker. We are a province who have 
developed with co-operation. 
 
And a great symbol of that co-operation and a great outgrowth of that spirit of co-
operation and working towards the common good has been the development of public 
enterprise in our province. It’s been our tradition, it’s been our history, and it can be, Mr. 
Speaker, I submit, our strength to meet the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the notion that everything should be in private hands, that 
the only people that somehow survive and achieve in our economy are the private 
entrepreneurs, that notion is simply foreign, Mr. Speaker. And I asked in the course of my 
remarks to this debate, where does that idea come from? Because it is foreign to 
Saskatchewan; it’s not a made-in-Saskatchewan policy. 
 
It’s been delivered here to us by this government, and I’ve argued in my remarks that 
they have imported this privatization ideology from their friends in Great Britain and 
from their friends out in the Fraser Institute, and I tried to illustrate that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve looked, in the course of my remarks I’ve tried to look at the accomplishments of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan under a New Democratic Party administration, 
under New Democratic Party management, and under Progressive Conservative Party 
administration and Progressive Conservative Party management. And the contrast is 
startling, Mr. Speaker, the contrast is startling. 
 
Up until 1982 when this group of men and women took over the management of that 
corporation, the success of that corporation was simply . . . could only be described as 
phenomenal; in those few, short, early years of its existence having returned to the people 
of Saskatchewan hundreds of millions of dollars of royalties and taxes, having returned to 



the people of Saskatchewan $100 million in dividends. And then the new managers came 
aboard and things have gone bad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the point I make is that if I am a shareholder in a business and I have employed 
managers who have so dismally failed me, my response is not to sell the company, my 
response is to get rid of the management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, because I anticipate the comments of other members, I have 
tried in the course of my remarks to pose a number of questions, questions that are being 
asked by the people of Saskatchewan in regard to the sell-off of their potash corporation, 
our potash corporation. 
 
I want members opposite to explain to the people of Saskatchewan where indeed they 
intend to find these revenues that will no longer be available to the people of 
Saskatchewan, where they intend to find the hundred millions of dollars that now have 
come to the province and to the treasury, and through the treasury to the people of the 
province from dividends paid by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Where do they 
intend to replace that money with? Where do they intend to replace it from? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked a number of questions that people are asking in coffee shops and 
in work places and in kitchens all over the province. They’re asking, I mean, if 
privatization is so good, if the potash privatization is so good, then how come . . . why is 
our deficit still climbing, why are taxes still going up, and why are our services 
disappearing if privatization is so good? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want to know, if this government is so bent on selling everything off, 
and they’ve sold a fair bit off, they want to know where’s the money gone? Where has it 
gone? It hasn’t gone into services; it hasn’t gone into lowering taxes; it certainly hasn’t 
gone into lowering the debt of the province. Mr. Speaker, people want to know that, and 
they have a right to know it. 
 
(1345) 
 
Mr. Speaker, people across Saskatchewan, when considering the sell-off of the potash 
corporation, want to know where will this money go. We are not talking here about a 
small amount of money. We’re talking about hundreds of millions of dollars. Where will 
the money go, Mr. Speaker? Members opposite will want to address those questions. 
 
I’ve tried to point out in the course of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, what people are saying, 
what people are saying about this privatization and about the government opposite. 
They’re saying regularly and in all corners of the province, they are saying this 
government has gone too far. Mr. Speaker, this government has simply gone too far, and 
it’s time for a change. It’s time for a change in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there are many areas that I have not touched in my remarks 
that I might have. I might have easily spoken in regard to . . . I might easily have spoken 
about the relationship of the free trade agreement to this Bill. I might well have spent 
some time on the Lanigan expansion and the consequences of that, and the government’s 
decision in that regard, the consequences of this government’s decision to cut our market 
share, pulling us out of international markets and marketing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that at the bottom line the most important tests of this 
legislation or any other piece of legislation that we might look at is simply this: does this 
piece of legislation do what it intends to do? Does the sell-off of our potash corporation 
benefit those who already have much, or does it add to those who have little? Does it 
provide to those who have little, or does it benefit those who already have much? 
 
And the answer to that question when applied to this legislation is obvious, sir, is 
obvious. It intends to take that asset, that resource, which is owned by the many and put it 
into the hands of a few, the few who are now already wealthy, the few who are able to 
participate in share-buys, those who are able as foreign governments to buy large chunks 
of our assets and resource . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps the minister from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd would like to speak? Would he like to get into the debate? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — He would like to get into debate. Would he like to ask leave to get into 
the debate? Well if the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd would like to speak, I am more 
than happy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Perhaps if we refrain from across the board debates the 
debate itself will run more smoothly. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd sits in his seat and 
says he wants to speak in the debate; in fact, he does speak in the debate, but from his 
seat. I’ve offered him an opportunity. If he wants to stand up and speak, then let him do 
so, or please, please refrain from comments from the seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m wanting to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 
Wolseley describes my question as drivel. And I want to remind the member what my 
question is. Does this legislation benefit those, does it add to the wealth of those who 
have much, or does it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m going to ask the hon. members to simply contain 
themselves, and I’ll ask the member from Moose Jaw South simply to stick to the text of 
his speech. And if we don’t have any diversions, the debate will proceed in a more 
orderly fashion. 
 



Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, why I apply my test, my test being: does this legislation add 
more to those who already have in abundance, whether it be an abundance of wealth or 
power or privilege, or does it add to those who have much need? My conclusion is that it 
is a failure. It is a failure because what it does, it takes the assets now held by the many 
and puts them into the hands of a few. And on that basis alone, Mr. Speaker, on that basis 
alone, I will be opposing this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing this 
piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given that the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd has on several occasions this 
afternoon requested to participate in the debate — I know that he already has once — so 
to facilitate that, I will now ask the leave of the Assembly to allow the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd to participate in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this debate on Bill 20 this afternoon. 
I’d like to discuss three areas, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks today. Firstly a few remarks 
about the significance of this debate, Mr. Speaker, then a few remarks about change that 
the world is undergoing, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is not insulated from, and our 
ability as a Saskatchewan people to adapt to and adopt a new economic blueprint for our 
province and our people. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a few words about why we see potash privatization as part of 
that new economic blueprint, and why we face the future with all of its challenges with 
enthusiasm and with confidence and with determination with our friends and our family 
and our children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, about the significance of this debate, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s already been 
referred to in this House on more than one occasion about the historical nature of this 
debate. It’s been compared to that other great event some 10, 11, 12 years ago when the 
potash industry was significantly nationalized in this province, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 
privatization of same potash industry is seen as very historical by those inside and outside 
this legislature. 
 
I’m not going to talk in any detail today, Mr. Speaker, about the details or the what, if 
you like, relative to the potash reorganization, or how it’s going to be done, although the 
legislation obviously details that. And I suspect in Committee of the Whole it would be 
addressed, and as well the Minister of Finance in his opening remarks talked about the 
structure, about the how and the what. 
 



What I would like to concentrate my remarks on today, Mr. Speaker, is why. Why do we 
have Bill 20 before this House? Why are we looking at, indeed, doing the privatization of 
the potash industry, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Is it, as the NDP have suggested, is it because we are somehow ideologically driven, 
blinded right-wingers, merely agents for Margaret Thatcher, merely driven by the advice 
of the Madsen Piries, as the NDP opposition have suggested in their speeches? Is that the 
reason, Mr. Speaker? I mean, that was what the NDP would have us believe. I would like 
to suggest that that’s not the reason, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to make the case for that 
in my remarks today. 
 
What I really believe, Mr. Speaker, is that why we’re doing this is because we are at a 
hinge point in history, as some people have sometimes described events like this, a break 
point in history, if you like. It really boils down to two different visions, Mr. Speaker, of 
how this province should unfold — the NDP vision on one hands, Mr. Speaker, and the 
PC vision on the other hand. They see one course, Mr. Speaker, for the future; we see 
another. 
 
We are not ideologically blinded, Mr. Speaker, but I would suggest to you that the 
position they are taking, this position of clinging to the past, this blind ideology and 
dedication to an economy of the past really does have very deep ideological basis in the 
NDP Party. 
 
But first, to answer my own question. Are we ideologically driven? Is that the reason we 
are doing this, Mr. Speaker? Well the answer is no, and I’ll tell you why. First of all, if 
this privatization agenda was merely a Tory agenda, merely an agenda of our Premier or 
of this Progressive Conservative Party, if that’s the case, then, Mr. Speaker, why is it that 
100 countries all across the world, of all political stripes, are engaged in privatization to 
some degree or other? 
 
Certainly we are only one of a hundred. Yes, we happen to be a Progressive Conservative 
administration, Mr. Speaker, certainly we are a Progressive Conservative administration, 
but I think one would hardly accuse the government in Spain of being a Progressive 
Conservative administration, or in Portugal or in Sweden or in Cuba. 
 
And these countries, Mr. Speaker, are just a few of the hundred that are into privatization 
across the world. They are not driven by Madsen Pirie or Margaret Thatcher or our 
Premier or this administration or our view. They are doing it for quite different reasons, 
Mr. Speaker — for the same kinds of reasons, I would submit, that we are. 
 
In Spain’s socialist government they’ve sold auto manufacturers, truck and bus 
manufacturers, large government textile manufacturers. In Portugal, after having a state 
domination of the economy that kept living standards behind that of most European 
countries, their prime minister recently committed his government to a major 
privatization program. Sweden’s government, a socialist government, Mr. Speaker, has 
sold a bank, a minority interest in their very major government holding company, and a 



ship port. In Cuba, certainly one . . . Who would ever have guessed 10 or 20 years ago 
that Cuba would be into a privatization agenda, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So the first point I would make in terms of, are we driven by ideology, the answer is no, 
Mr. Speaker. And the answer is no because we’re only one of several dozens of countries 
around the world that are engaging in this new economic era, Mr. Speaker, that of less 
emphasis on Keynesian economics, less emphasis on the Crown corporation as the model 
for economic existence and government domination in the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second point that I would lay before the legislature, Mr. Speaker, is would a 
government, if it was so ideologically hidebound and so ideologically right-wingish in its 
tendencies and so against Crowns, would that government then set up Crowns? 
 
I mean, obviously if the NDP make the observation that the reason that we’re destroying, 
in their minds, this potash corporation is that we’re against Crown corporations or against 
government intervention, then the illogical mirror image of that argument would be that 
then certainly that same administration wouldn’t start up a Crown corporation, wouldn’t 
embrace a Crown as perhaps a useful model for anything. 
 
Well what is the truth, Mr. Speaker? Has the progressive administration under this 
Premier been blinded and just ruthlessly destroyed Crowns, or have they in fact set up 
some Crowns where they thought it was useful? 
 
Well I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that one of the very first initiatives that this 
Premier undertook after the 1982 election was the setting up of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, a Crown corporation. Does that sound like somebody who’s guided by blind 
ideology, Mr. Speaker, when he saw as part of his government’s agenda and mandate for 
the people to provide them quality of life and some rationalization with water in four or 
five or six different departments, I think, as the hon. member for Morse one time pointed 
out — 38 or 39 different pieces of legislation that somehow mandated water management 
in this province? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, we are not blinded. We saw that a Crown corporation route might be a 
useful way to deal with irrigation and diversification and water management in this 
province, and so we set up a Crown corporation. Not anathema to this party or this 
administration; we set up that Crown — a major Crown, Mr. Speaker, right up there with 
SaskTel, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, SaskTel, not blinded by any ideology. If it 
makes sense, Crowns have a role. 
 
And I could talk about SaskExpo, I could talk about the Future Corporation. You 
compare that to the, what I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the opposite approach, 
that of the NDP when they were in government. I mean, can we come up with any 
examples where they nurtured the private industry? 
 
I can think of none. I can think of tremendous government intervention. I can think of a 
string of the family of Crown corporations. I can think of land bank. I think back to 1981-



81 when there was some jokes and stories going around in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
Because the NDP were so bent on nationalizing everything, there was a little cartoon 
going around — zap, you’re a Crown corporation. 
 
They were blinded by that, Mr. Speaker. They saw as the economic models strictly that of 
the Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think then I have made the argument in opposition to the points made by 
the NDP that we are not driven by ideology when we look to privatize the potash 
corporation. Other countries are doing it. Socialist countries around the world are doing 
it, Mr. Speaker. And quite frankly in this case, yes, we’re privatizing a Crown 
corporation, but in other instances we have indeed set up Crown corporations. 
 
Another point I would like to pick up in terms of the observations made by the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, is they’ve made a great to-do, and the NDP have made a great 
to-do about pre- and post-management, pre- and post-1982 management of this Crown 
corporation. They’ve painted the picture on the one hand that during the NDP years this 
Crown corporation did very, very well, was well managed, was nothing but sunshine and 
roses, Mr. Speaker. Then somehow, somehow magically in 1982 when the Progressive 
Conservative administration took over, that somehow it’s been nothing but 
mismanagement and anything but sunshine and roses. 
 
(1400) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those points I suppose can be made for pure political and ideological 
reasons. But let’s stand back and look at the issue, and I will engage in that as well as 
anyone, and you know that in this House, Mr. Speaker. But let’s stand back and look at 
the potash industry for what it is. 
 
Would it really have mattered, Mr. Speaker, who was managing it, whether it was PCs or 
NDPs or Social Credits or Creditistes, independents? What was the world situation in 
which we sell this potash? What was going on in the world, Mr. Speaker, that might have 
accounted for a change in the well-being of any potash company, Mr. Speaker, in 1982? 
What was going on? 
 
Was it simply an isolated incident that we had a change of government in Saskatchewan 
and things, at least in the NDP’s mind, fell apart? I would suggest not, Mr. Speaker. And 
why I would suggest that is because you have to ask the question, which you’ll never hear 
the NDP ask, what do you use potash for? What do people in China buy potash for? Well 
farmers buy potash, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a fertilizer. Now the NDP really have never 
acknowledged what you use potash for. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They don’t know what a farmer’s for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well somebody says they don’t know what a farmer’s for . . . 
 



The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the hon. member from Moosomin on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the House to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce some very special people in my life, 
my aunt and uncle from Oregon. My uncle’s a pastor of the Methodist Church, and 
they’re here in our province . . . Actually, Mr. Speaker, they came to visit my 
grandmother who passed away recently, and they’re just on their way home. And I would 
like to ask members of the Assembly to bid them a warm welcome to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, so as I said, what potash is used for, and our farms 
in Saskatchewan here for certain are not deficient in potash in our soils, but in many 
countries, particularly China, they are, and so that’s what potash is used for is to make 
fertilizer. 
 
Now if you put yourself in the position of a Chinese farmer, for that matter a U.S. corn 
farmer, which in that area they also are very . . . the soils are very deficient in potash, 
what would determine whether you’re going to buy a lot of potash or not very much 
potash, Mr. Speaker? Well, you yourself are a farmer. You know that when things are 
good and you can afford it and you can see the market potential for your crop, you’re 
going to buy all the inputs you can to put yourself in a position of growing the best 
possible crop. 
 
And that’s true of any farmer in the world, I think. They love to grow. And the more and 
the better quality they can grow, that gives them a certain pride and satisfaction right 
there. Well somehow in all of this debate, this political namby-pamby, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP ignore this large fundamental global happening that in 1982, as you well remember, 
when we first came to office in this government, the world agriculture economy was 
undergoing a fundamental restructuring. We’ve seen the commodity price collapse. 
We’ve seen trade wars. We’ve seen farmers, because of burdensome debt, withdraw from 
the fertilizer market. They’re buying less chemicals, less herbicides, less fertilizer. 
 



Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder — you know farmers’ thinking. I know farmers’ thinking 
— is it any wonder that there was a change in purchases of potash fertilizer by farmers 
across the world? And, Mr. Speaker, any realistic person would look at the market-place 
and read that into it. They wouldn’t get into this picayune sort of suggestion that some 
manage better than others or worse or whatever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was this larger cyclical fundamental agriculture issue overhanging the market, Mr. 
Speaker. It led to drop in price; it led to stockpiles in the industry. And nobody likes that. 
Nobody likes to see people in the potash mines go without jobs. But if farmers aren’t 
buying, they don’t need it, what do you do? Just keep stockpiling it and stockpiling it and 
stockpiling it? Pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, there’s a diminishing return in terms of how you 
can use that approach for an economic stabilizer. 
 
I think that point has to be made, Mr. Speaker, because otherwise we can get into this 
debate . . . And I know the Leader of the Opposition in his opening remarks tried to 
suggest that under the Tory years — he never talked about fertilizer and world agriculture 
and what was happening there — he just suggested that when we got in in 1982 we just 
tried to wreck the company, just tried to wreck the company, starve it so we’d have a 
reason to sell it off. 
 
But yet later in his same speech, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance was on the 
verge of tabling the latest Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan annual report that I think 
showed one of the largest profits in the history of the corporation — something over a 
hundred million — which obviously spoke to the fact, to use his argument, there must be 
some pretty good management there that they’ve done that well; then he switched his 
argument from one of; well you’re starving the company so you can sell it off to your big 
corporate friends — to all of a sudden: oh you’re just fattening it up. 
 
Well which way is it, Mr. Speaker? You can’t have it either way. And quite frankly, if 
you stand back and look at the larger question, neither is probably true, Mr. Speaker, or 
neither is probably true. 
 
The other point that they have raised in debate, Mr. Speaker, is they say we will control, 
that we will lose our say, that there are no safeguards in the legislation for Saskatchewan 
and Saskatchewan people. Well I’m not going to get into this in detail, but certainly the 
Minister of Finance has laid out about head offices and directors and maximum 
shareholdings and who can vote what and those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, because our 
interests are the same as the Saskatchewan people, and the safeguards are there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I would ask the opposition NDP members, I would ask the members of this side of 
the legislature: under the Crown corporation structure, under this magnanimous family of 
Crown corporation structure that the NDP put in place in this province over the years, I 
ask you, Mr. Speaker, I ask any member in this legislature, did you ever get invited to the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan board meeting? Did you ever get a vote at the board 



table, Mr. Speaker? Did you ever get a say, did you ever get a dividend cheque from the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? I would suggest not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I could contrast that quite frankly with what’s happening at Saskoil, with the 
changes that have taken place there since we privatized Saskoil, and I’ll do so later in my 
speech, Mr. Speaker. So what we’re talking about is really, Mr. Speaker, who has 
ownership as opposed to perceptibly who has ownership and control. 
 
One of the attempts, Mr. Speaker, to sort out all the mumbo-jumbo about the economics 
of owning or not owning, or nationalization versus privatization of the potash industry, 
was one of the groups that tried to sort this out for the average public. And I picked this 
out of today’s Leader-Post, a full page ad, sponsored by the Institute for Saskatchewan 
Enterprise. At the top of it it has pictures of and reference to four members of the 
editorial committee who put this together, and those people are: Dr. John Brennan, dean 
of commerce, U of S, Saskatoon; Dr. Ralph Cheesman, manager of Saskatchewan Mining 
Association; Ted Renner, president of Saskoil; and Gordon Wicijowski, managing 
partner of Clarkson Gordon, chartered accountants, Regina. 
 
Arthur Andersen & Co., Mr. Speaker, did a study for the institute, and I’ll just read the 
last four sentences that they’ve highlighted as a result of their study, Mr. Speaker. And I 
read those names into the record as to who was on the editorial committee, because I 
think no one would question the credentials, if you like, of Dr. John Brennan, dean of 
commerce, and Dr. Ralph Cheesman, manager of the Sask Mining Association — very 
reputable individuals, Mr. Speaker, dean of commerce, for example. 
 
And their sort of four highlighted conclusions are: number one, Saskatchewan’s potash 
investment has lost $950 million, minimum. Secondly, Saskatchewan received no net 
returns from PCS. Instead PCS, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, cost $1.950 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. The most the potash corporation is worth is 1 billion. And their final point 
is, and I quote: “It’s up to you to decide if the $950 you’ve lost so far was a good deal.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they are saying here is that unlike the opposition’s rhetoric about this 
world of sunshine and roses that comes with owning a Crown corporation, in this place a 
resource Crown corporation, that subject to cyclical agricultural global trends, instead of 
its paying a dividend and us collecting our dividends or having a shot at the board table, 
what we’ve got and what we’ve had, Mr. Speaker, is a bill for $950 for every man, 
woman, and child in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined why we are not embarking on this for ideological 
reasons, why we see this in that larger global context that’s . . . I want to make the point 
clear in answer to the opposition who have suggested we’re just a bunch of right-wingers 
engaged blindly on a privatization agenda. I’ve made those points. Now I want to 
examine why the NDP are for nationalization and blindly, I might add, Mr. Speaker, 
against privatization. 
 



I say to you and all members of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that they are blinded by 
their ideology. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, they are not here to save the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, they are here to save their own political hides. It’s 
got nothing to do, Mr. Speaker, with the corporation; they want to save their own political 
party and their own political hides and their seats. It’s purely a personal gain that they’re 
looking for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would suggest to you that they continue to pursue this “big government is good 
government” agenda. I would suggest to you that while a hundred countries around the 
world are prepared to cope with change, investigate the potential of a new economic 
blueprint, the NDP are not, Mr. Speaker, and they are not because they are dinosaurs and 
they have their heads stuck in the sand, the sands of time of decades past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And, Mr. Speaker, I will now in the second part of my speech 
make the case for this blind ideology and show how the NDP is clinging to the economic 
models of the past when it comes to nationalization and privatization. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP are interested only in the old economic 
theories — old economic theories? I quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Post, July 19, I 
think it’s ’89, although I can’t quite see it. The headline of the article is: “The state of the 
NDP and its search for the magic elixir” and it’s by Ish Theilheimer, who is president of 
the provincial New Democrats in Ontario Renfrew North. And in her article here she 
talks about how an NDP Party strategist, Robin Sears is keenly aware of the NDP’s 
problem. I’ll quote: 
 

Sears says that, instead of formulating new policies for changing times, the party 
(talking about the NDP Party) has “taken refuge” in earlier successes, like 
government pensions and health insurance, labor laws and Crown corporations. 
 
Worse, some of yesterday’s successes have become major turn-offs. Who loves 
Ontario Hydro or Canada Post? Sears is aware of “big negatives associated with 
the collective delivery of goods” and the notion that governments are inefficient. 
 
The party’s establishment has failed to confront . . . 
 

And by party’s, Mr. Speaker — I interject there in the middle of my quoting — party 
being once again the NDP. 
 

The party’s establishment has failed to confront gritty truths for several reasons: 
fear of alienating labor (and I want to touch on that a little further, Mr. Speaker) 
and other traditional supporters, dread of repeating the Waffle debate which split 
the party in the early 1970s and general complacency . . . 
 

It went on further to say in this article: 



 
The NDP has come to rely on a tried and true message: that “ordinary Canadians” 
need the NDP to “fight for you”. But people don’t want to be thought of as 
“ordinary”. 
 

And that’s exactly it, Mr. Speaker. The NDP cannot confront the new realities. And I’ll 
tell you, the constituents in my riding are not ordinary, Mr. Speaker; they’re very wise, 
intelligent, dedicated, committed people of this province, and they resent being sort of 
viewed as somehow ordinary, and big government, this big NDP Party will look after 
them, let along fight for them. 
 
That’s what I call part of clinging to the past. And even their own strategists and own 
presidents of their own parties, in some regions perhaps more progressive than the one 
here in Saskatchewan, have recognized that, Mr. Speaker. They’ve recognized that. 
 
But one of the reasons that is pointed out by this president of an NDP association is that 
the NDP is not prepared to formulate new policies because they don’t want to alienate 
labour unions and cling to Crown corporations. They don’t want to confront, they’re 
afraid of fear of alienating labour and traditional supporters. I’m going to examine that in 
a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could go on to talk about other articles that have been written along to the same line. 
Here’s one out of Alberta report, March 20, 1989. The headline on this one was, “Toward 
a newer Jerusalem” — the New Democrats’ search for a new leader and a sensible 
economic policy. They’re really saying the same thing. 
 
And the gist of the article is, you know, I mean this has been the most spectacular non-
race in the history of political parties in this country, Mr. Speaker, this NDP race. And it 
makes the point in here that countries like France and New Zealand and Australia, where 
nominally socialist parties that are in power, privatization and deregulation are in. 
 

Veteran NDP strategist . . . 
 

I’ll just quote briefly from it: 
 

Veteran NDP strategist and former national party director Gerald Kaplan was one 
of the founders of the . . . Waffle faction. 
 

He says — this is quoting Kaplan’s political views: 
 

I’m pretty much persuaded that the field of public ownership . . . 
 

And he would be referring to things there, Mr. Speaker, like public ownership of potash 
mines and resource companies, Saskoil, oil companies, those kinds of things. He says: 
 



I’m pretty much persuaded that the field of public ownership and nationalization 
is outdated. 
 

(1415) 
 
Now this is Mr. Kaplan, a well-known NDP, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In places where it’s been tried it hasn’t worked with the success that we thought it 
would. It also seems to me that national Keynesian policies, pumping big bucks 
into one’s economy, doesn’t make as much as sense as we used to think it did. 
 

Now there is the key, Mr. Speaker: Keynesian economics is the wealth creation version 
of NDP economic policy. It’s outdated; it’s outmoded. It has a place in down times, in 
downturns, Mr. Speaker. They were using it in the halcyon days of the ’70s, pumping 
public money into Crown corporations. Yes, they have a place, but it has to be used at the 
right time in the history of a country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well anyway, a president of . . . or a well-known NDP strategist making a similar point 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another article, and I won’t get into it, the headline was “Along the red brick road to 
nowhere land,” referred to the same thing. The NDP are adrift, have no economic 
blueprint, no idea of what a wealth creation policy should look like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And just to make the case, Mr. Speaker, about how they are dug in on this privatization, 
one has only to look at some remarks that were made in an anti-privatization meeting on 
April 19, 1989 at Martin Collegiate where the hon. member from Regina Elphinstone . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. While the previous speakers have also dealt with the issue 
of privatization, I think you must tie in your remarks to Bill 20, rather than dealing with it 
in isolation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is: what is the stand of the 
NDP Party in this province as opposed to in other provinces and as some of their 
strategists would see them in terms of the nationalization on the one hand, versus 
privatization and deregulation on the other hand? 
 
At a rally in this very city, Mr. Speaker, an anti-privatization rally, the member for 
Regina Elphinstone stood on the platform, and when the president of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, Barb Byers, said, we must fight privatization with all means — that 
includes making the province ungovernable — the member from Elphinstone was there 
clapping and cheering with the rest of them, Mr. Speaker. And in fact he said, if fighting 
privatization means we are out of step, then I am with your cause. 
 
Why I introduce that, Mr. Speaker, is even NDP people across the country, across the 
world, editorial writers across the world recognize that they cannot cling to the old ways; 



they must make change. But here they say, we want to stay out of step with the rest of the 
world, Mr. Speaker. We want to stay out of step with the rest of the world. 
 
And that led, Mr. Speaker, that led to this commentary in the Regina horizon a couple of 
years ago, shortly after the new Leader of the Opposition took his place. I quote: 
 

Thus far Romanow has not demonstrated a propensity to make clear and 
meaningful stands on major issues. In time he may, and find a new direction for 
the NDP, one that gives people a better idea of where the party and the leader 
stands. 
 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, that’s got to be true on this historic issue of privatization and 
deregulation when the whole world, 100 countries across the world, are into it. 
 
The article went on to say: 
 

If Romanow hopes merely to swing into office on the current backlash against the 
provincial government, he should take note of history. Hoping the past is good 
enough to convince people to vote for you just does not seem to work in this 
province . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I must once more call the hon. member to order, that he 
must relate his remarks to Bill 20. He seems to be dealing with the issue of privatization 
in only a very peripheral manner or in isolation of Bill 20. I’d ask you to relate your 
remarks to Bill 20, then it will be relevant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will shift gears here a little bit. 
 
I want now to . . . As I said earlier, I wanted to make the case that, in rebut to the 
opposition observation, that we are not driven by ideology. Many countries are pursuing 
this. There are some larger global trends and realities that are impacting on why we 
would pursue this course here in Saskatchewan and Canada, why Cuba would pursue it, 
etc., etc. 
 
Now I want to make the point as to why . . . Who was against it, and why are they against 
it? Why are some . . . and I know there’s concern; that’s natural in a debate of this sort. 
But why are some people against privatization, and who is against it when you come to 
privatization of the potash, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is, as you will know, rallies across the province. 
We’ve had petitions presented in this House relative to privatization, and certainly much 
debate in this House on this very issue — potash. In fact, it wasn’t all that long ago, Mr. 
Speaker, that we had a rally on the steps of the legislature, an anti-privatization rally. And 
it was estimated by the media at the time that attendance there was 2 to 4,000 people. 
Now that’s a significant number of people. I think a lot of people in the NDP, and 
certainly in the media, and certainly in our party here in the legislature wouldn’t have 



been surprised if it had been 7, 8, 9, even 10,000 people out because of the emotionalism 
of this issue. But as it is, there’s somewhere between 2 to 4,000 people, as I understand it, 
Mr. Speaker. And the Leader of the Opposition spoke there. The president of the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Barb Byers, spoke there, and other spokespersons 
from the Coalition for Social Justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what did the protesters want, Mr. Speaker? And this was probably put by a writer for 
the Leader-Post better than I could put it, and I’ll just read two brief sentences into the 
record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ron Petrie commented on the event, in the Leader-Post this would be, and I don’t have 
the exact date. I think it was May 17. And I quote — commenting on this rally, Mr. 
Speaker, with 2 to 4,000 people. He starts off, and I quote: 
 

And what did the protesters want? Change? No. A new economic blueprint? 
Hardly. The highly partisan group actually marched down Albert Street in favour 
of the status quo, namely an economic system designed by the innovators from 
decades past and highly dependent on public ownership to succeed. 
 
Devine is bang on when he insists, as he so often does, that it is his democratic 
right to proceed with privatization and face either the wrath or gratitude of the 
electorate. In the process, one can only hope that notion of Saskatchewan as 
somehow being on the leading edge of political and economic experimentation 
will be quietly laid to rest. 
 

Now you contrast this rally, Mr. Speaker, you contrast this rally that the NDP coalition 
and the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) coalition and all the to-do that they 
made about that rally — you contrast that rally, Mr. Speaker, with another privatization 
rally in this province that we heard virtually nothing about in Regina. 
 
And where was this one held, Mr. Speaker? Well it was held in Meadow Lake, 
Saskatchewan. Now what’s the population of Meadow Lake compared to Regina? One-
tenth, maybe? Meadow Lake is a very prosperous and thriving community, but it 
certainly doesn’t have 160,000 people in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, as part of this larger and new economic blueprint, the 
10 bands in the Meadow Lake Tribal Council — we’ve had debate on this very point in 
the legislature before — through their investment company, own 50 per cent of a new 
company, Norsask. The other 50 per cent is owned by mill employees and management 
through Techfor Services Ltd. 
 
Well they made this announcement, Mr. Speaker, and this announcement will result in 
the injection of about $100,000 into the economy and the creation of more than 150 jobs. 
Now they made this announcement, Mr. Speaker, and they invited the people of the area 
to come out and to share in this new news, this privatization with the Indian bands, Mr. 
Speaker. 



 
And how many people turned up, Mr. Speaker? Three thousand. Three thousand people 
turned up to that rally. Now you contrast that with the rally, the NDP, Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour coalition rally here in the legislature. I would like to suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that the NDP, the reason that they are having trouble with this potash 
privatization is because they cannot make the change from the old economy to the new 
economy. They want to cling to their radical past. And as was pointed out in that one 
article, they do not want to alienate traditional supporters. 
 
They are, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you, putting the union hierarchy, not the real 
workers, the rank and file who I count as my friends, and everyone in this building counts 
as their friends, who work hard and are dedicated and great community people — all of 
those people that work as part of the union structure in this province. But I would suggest 
to you that the NDP opposite are putting the union hierarchy ahead of the people of this 
province. And I’m going to make that point, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to make that point, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My first piece of evidence, Mr. Speaker, for that would be this. Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour, NDP Coalition for Social Justice rally — all there together. Should it surprise 
us, Mr. Speaker, then when we see headlines like this: “CUPE vows to stop Devine 
privatization.” Should it surprise us when we see this one: “CUPE solidly behind NDP 
fight against privatization.” Or this one which is in a letter, a newsletter to the civic 
employees union. One of the lines goes like this: 
 

To do this we obviously have to inform the voters that things like privatization 
and tax reductions are not in their best interest. Planning an extensive media 
campaign . . . (and those sorts of things) The way to deal with them (that is to say 
the Progressive Conservative Government), is to throw them out of power. 
 

And here’s the line, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We have suggested to the members, and are sending out a question to every 
member requesting an affiliation to the New Democratic Party. 
 

It speaks for itself. That’s from a newsletter to the civic employees union. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to have to once more call the hon. member’s attention to the 
topic which reads, Bill No. 20, An Act respecting the reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Now, sir, you’ve been talking about privatization almost 
exclusively, and while certainly the reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is a strong element of that, I would ask that you direct your remarks more 
directly to the Bill under discussion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your ruling. The issue that 
we’re dealing here with in potash privatization, as I’ve talked about earlier, is part of a 



global phenomena, a change, a fundamental change, if you like, that’s part of a new 
economy to create quality of life for citizenry, no matter what the country. 
 
The NDP continue, whether it’s potash or any other issue, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
continue to be obsessed with the old economic models, obsessed with the view that 
Crown corporations are the only answer, obsessed to the point where they would put the 
family of Crown corporations ahead of us, ahead of us as ordinary citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
And why are they doing that? They’re doing that because, Mr. Speaker, it’s more 
important for them personally and as a political party to maintain their ties to the big 
union leadership, whether it be Bob White or Shirley Carr or Barb Byers, or anybody 
else. 
 
We see headline after headline to make that point. The potash privatization is being 
worked at hard on by all groups out there as part of the NDP union leadership coalition, 
Mr. Speaker, to do just that. And we’re not restricted to it in this province, we see it in 
other provinces. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough and sadly, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the saddest kinds of tactics when it came to this whole privatization debate, the potash 
privatization debate, part of this campaign by the NDP-Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour coalition to stop potash privatization and to stop privatization, Mr. Speaker, was 
they published a colouring book, a children’s colouring book. And it talks about the good 
family going on holidays, and how these big, rotten capitalists that run the park now are 
charging a hundred dollars a night for camping, and 2 or $3 at outlets, and boat rent for 
$10 a minute, and all those kinds of things. 
 
Well I’m not going to bore members with that colouring book. But others, Mr. Speaker, 
including myself, took umbrage at that because it was simplistic, it was nonsensical, it 
was probably an attempt to be a manipulative advice. But I want to quote what one writer 
had to say. It was Dale Eisler on the 30th of July, Mr. Speaker. And he’s quoting, and he’s 
talking about this comic book on privatization, and potash privatization is obviously part 
of that. 
 

In fact this kind of mindless propaganda aimed at politicizing young children does 
a disservice to the privatization issue and adds nothing of substance or value to 
the debate. At the same time it undermines SGEU as being a credible voice on the 
subject. 
 

He went on to say further: 
 

A good place to begin would be conceding that at least in some cases what’s good 
for SGEU might not necessarily be in the best interests of the majority of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 

What I’m trying to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this is what the NDP have got to separate 
out in their minds. They must not just pay blind homage to the SGEU (Saskatchewan 



Government Employees Union) leadership or the CLC (Canadian Labour Congress) 
leadership, or the SFL leadership, or the CWC (Communications Workers of Canada) 
leadership, and the list goes on and on, as the stories I’ve referred to earlier have said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What they’ve got to do, Mr. Speaker, is put the real people of the province ahead of their 
traditional structures and traditional supporters. They’ve got to now start concentrating on 
what it is that rank and file union member wants. That ordinary, or in my mind, not so 
ordinary — that extraordinary person who works and toils, whether it be a farmer or 
somebody in Ipsco or elsewhere in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1430) 
 
It’s time to cast off this blind ideology of Crown corporations as simply and only the only 
economic engine to fuel economies and indeed to create wealth. And this is the big issue 
that the NDP face, Mr. Speaker, and really this is what this debate is about, this potash 
debate: will we have a new economic blueprint or will we cling to the old? 
 
Well let’s look at what the new one, the one that the Progressive Conservatives subscribe 
to looks like, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are not going to cling blindly to any given model. 
If we need a Crown corporation, we’ll set one up. If privatization, more privatization is 
the answer, that’s the way we’ll go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now I want to ell you why. I want to tell you why, Mr. Speaker, I received on my 
desk in late May, Mr. Speaker, a copy of a paper entitled “Privatization in Saskatchewan” 
by a young student named Heather Rodine from my riding. And she had written this 
formal essay for an Economics 30 class in the middle of May, and I might say she 
received fourteen and one-half out of 15. She’s a top student; in fact, at their graduation 
last month was the senior pin. And a fine young Christian lady who has, in my mind, a 
very bright future ahead of her, and a fine writer. 
 
I read through this paper because this is this potash privatization debate through the eyes 
of our young people, Mr. Speaker. And what did she have to say in her essay? I’m just 
going to read some very selected parts because it speaks to exactly why are we 
privatizing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 

The issue of public participation is one of the most current and timely economic 
topics facing Saskatchewan at the present time. This program is basically 
“widespread public involvement through bond offerings, delivery of services to 
the private sector, non-profit organizations, and through employee-owned and 
operated companies.” 
 
This is far different than simple privatization which is simply selling off 
government assets. Public participation is a modification and improvement on 
this. 
 



She went on to say: 
 

It has been acknowledged that spending the amounts of money necessary to 
support these sorts of programs in Crown corporations cannot be afforded in less 
than affluent times. Competition is fierce, and governments as well as business 
must become as efficient as possible to meet the challenge. 
 
Of course, a major turn-about in policy and practice is bound to be met with some 
concerns and resistance. 
 

And we’ve seen that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen that. But the point that she makes here in 
this second paragraph is that we are kidding ourselves. And she recognizes, as a young 
person, if we think that to expand, for example, the potash corporation and make it into a 
mega-international company, a mega-international fertilizer company for example, where 
they do additional formulating, but to come to the people of Saskatchewan, to come to the 
young people of Saskatchewan, to come to the students of Saskatchewan and ask them 
for a half a billion dollars, or $500 from every man, woman, and child, so that the potash 
corporation can expand, they are going to say, no, the money just isn’t there. And if there 
is a half a billion, then we would like to see more spent in health and in education and 
roads, those kinds of things. Very sensible young people. 
 
And she makes that point, Mr. Speaker. She makes that point. And she went on to say: 
 

The exciting part of this policy, (and she’s referring to privatization, potash 
privatization, those kinds of things) is the possibility of economic employment 
and investment opportunities that are expected for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

She then asks: 
 

One of the first questions that come to the minds of people about privatization is 
why sell; we already own. The answer to this has to do with how realistically we 
can say that we can feel control of our own ownership. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the point that I made earlier, with the potash corporation over the last 
10 years, did you get a dividend? Did you get a vote? Ddi you get a say at the board 
table? She makes the same observation, Mr. Speaker, the same observation. 
 
And finally, one other reason that she lays out as to why we must look at privatization of 
the potash industry or public participation in the broader context, and I quote: 
 

. . . to take advantage of opportunities for large industrial projects in an era in 
which capital rationing for Crown investments has become a reality. 
 

You know where she got that statement, Mr. Speaker? She got that statement — it’s 
appendix by number four — I suspect that statement, Mr. Speaker, came from the NDP 



proposal, the share proposal that was in place when the NDP opposition secretly 
examined privatization, unbeknownst to the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She finally concludes by saying: 
 

It offers true ownership of business and an opening up of government to the 
people of the province. Less political interference and greater efficiency are spin-
offs that will benefit the corporations and, in turn, help strengthen the economy on 
the whole. A new capital investment pool of resources will open. The financial 
resources, talents, and competitive advantage of the private sector will be more 
open to develop. Employees and communities will have more incentive to support 
and develop companies they have a direct influence over or gain direct rewards 
from, depending on the company’s performance. 
 

Her final sentence, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

It seems that public participation may well be an important step in the economic 
development of our province. 
 

And this is from a young student, a high school grade 12 student, and I can see why she 
received 14 and a half out of 15 on that paper, Mr. Speaker, because that young person 
looks . . . and why I found it particularly useful, Mr. Speaker, is there is somebody 
looking at it from a young person’s perspective, because they are the ones that really are 
going to reap the benefits of this privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The final point that I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, is — and I would like to use the 
Saskoil analogy here — somehow the opposition have suggested that if we privatize the 
potash corporation, the world will come to an end. Well we privatized Saskoil, Mr. 
Speaker. I think the government’s ownership there is something below 50 per cent, 
maybe even below 35 per cent at this time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Allan Blakeney bought shares. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Former members of this legislature — NDP members of this 
legislature — have shares in there. 
 
Well if we could expect . . . if we went through the model, Mr. Speaker, and said, well 
here’s what happened to Saskoil after it privatized, and here’s what potentially could 
happen to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, this speaks directly to the points that 
that young lady made in her essay about building and growing and developing and 
diversifying our resources and our Crown corporation companies. 
 
Well Saskoil stock is currently trading at $11. That means for the individual person, the 
former leader of the opposition, the hon. Allan Blakeney, who’s now retired from this 
House, his investment that he bought — presuming first issue — the investment has 
doubled in two years. 



 
SaskPower V bonds, Mr. Speaker, were issued at $100 at a bond. They trade as high as 
$118. The accrued interest amounts to 10 per cent on those bonds over and above their 
capital gain, giving an effective rate of return of 46 per cent in one year. That’s not too 
bad, Mr. Speaker. And that’s privatization, public participation in the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let’s look at this application of this model to the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan a little closer. Value of PCS — since 1985 the estimated value of Saskoil 
has grown 3.8 times from $265 million to over $1 billion. And that is exactly the point we 
have been making about why we privatized the potash corporation, is to make this 
company grow from a small company that can’t get funds to expand from the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer, to go and access the equity markets. That’s exactly what Saskoil 
has done, gone from 265 million to $1 billion, Mr. Speaker — a 3.8 ratio, I’m led to 
believe. 
 
Employees have gone up, Mr. Speaker, and if we were to look at that same ratio for 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, it would go from 800 million to 3 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. The work-force would go up 1,300 to 1,820. Production in Saskoil went up 
some 2.42 times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on the contrary, on the contrary of companies, Mr. Speaker, these companies, when 
they’re privatized with the view to expanding and diversifying do exactly that, and 
Saskoil provides us with an excellent model. 
 
Production has gone up. The value of the company has gone up. The company that we 
still as a province, if you like, still own in terms of our shares that we hold there. They’ve 
diversified into natural gas, and 65 per cent of the employees own shares in Saskoil, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the kinds of good things that have happened when we unleashed another 
commodity — oil — from merely the government’s constraints, management. That’s 
what’s happened there. 
 
I believe that’s what can happen at the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So I would just say, Mr. Speaker, that we do not pursue this for blind 
ideological reasons, we pursue this because it’s part of and makes sense in this new 
economic era, in this new era of globalism. I know these are competing visions of the 
future. We have one vision and the NDP want to cling to the past. That is not our view. 
 
We know that the NDP/SFL coalition is a very strong and powerful one. But I say, Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing this not for the NDP/SFL coalition. We’re not doing it for the 
NDP/Bob White coalition. We’re not doing it for the NDP Coalition for Social Justice 
coalition. 
 
We’re doing it for the farmers and the home owners and the workers across this province 
and the young people and the children, because we want to see them have good jobs and 
improved quality of life. We’re doing it for that 123,000 bondholders who already exist 



in Saskatchewan. We’re doing it for those 425 employees, Mr. Speaker, at Saskoil that 
have already seen what privatization can do. We’re doing it for that 1,000 people who, 
because of Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, have jobs directly and indirectly across this 
province. We’re doing it for the Indian bands, Mr. Speaker, in Meadow Lake who like 
that, because we’re prepared to put those kind of people ahead of the NDP federation of 
labour union hierarchy coalition, Mr. Speaker, and we won’t apologize for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — They can be a toady, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can be a toady 
for the SGEU; they can be a toady for every union hierarchy alike. We’re going to stand 
behind the rank and file union worker. That’s who we stand for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it doesn’t matter whether it’s in the North, South, East, or West, whether it’s in the 
resource commodities or the service industry. It doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker, we put 
people ahead of coalitions, and that is a plain and simple fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is we approach the future, as I said in my opening; we 
approach it with confidence, we approach it with hope, determination — yes, because 
there’s challenges there, but we see the opportunities. And we will not, Mr. Speaker, we 
will not allow ourselves to slip into the fearmongering and the change resister mode that 
the NDP opposite are. Because I believe that that young lady who wrote the essay 
epitomizes, Mr. Speaker, the kind of hope and confidence and challenge just that she 
espoused there, that all the citizenry of this province espouse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I will be supporting item 2, Bill 20, with all the support I can muster, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would urge members opposite to join the new age and come inside, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to begin my 
remarks by congratulating the member for Weyburn for his involvement here today. I 
sincerely, and my colleagues on this side of the House sincerely welcomed your speech, 
welcomed your presentation. We certainly disagree with it fundamentally, disagree with 
most of it factually, but we welcome your standing on your feet rather than heckling. I 
ask you, sir, to notice that for the roughly 45 minutes you were on your feet, not once did 
anyone from this side of the House heckle . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I don’t see how those remarks are relevant to Bill 20. I 
would ask the member to . . . 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was going to mention that the member 
for Weyburn spoke about the Ontario New Democratic Party, about the New Democratic 
Party leadership race, about the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, about the Meadow 



Lake Sawmill. He spoke about a constituent of his who wrote an essay, and I congratulate 
her for what was a fairly interesting essay to those of us on this side of the House. 
 
I simply point out that was certainly, most assuredly, far ranging debate as it should be. 
And I congratulate you, sir, for allowing such far-reaching debate on this important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I of course will appreciate the same consideration. 
 
The potash debate started in April of this year, and I want to quote from a Leader-Post 
article — I’m not going to quote terribly extensively, but simply to set up the opening 
remarks of my presentation today. The article says, “Historic potash debate begins at the 
legislature”, and the first paragraph reads: 
 

The resource the good Lord granted Saskatchewan people to last 4,000 years will 
be for ever lost to foreigners and eastern Canadians once the government 
completes its privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, NDP 
Leader . . . (the member for Riversdale) charged Wednesday. 
 

I guess I can use his name in a quote, but I excluded it. A little further in the article it 
points out that the Leader of the Opposition was threatening, according to this article, to 
enter a personal filibuster of this Bill 20 until the 1988 potash annual report was tabled. 
And indeed the government took it seriously enough that by the time he was on his feet 
the next time, they had tabled the report. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is purely indicative of the lengths this government will go 
through to keep the facts from the people. There’s late filing of reports. Yesterday we 
received a report from 1985-86 tabled in this legislature. We received a report from 1987, 
and lo and behold! We actually got one from 1988. Here we are day what? You do the 
math, but it’s certainly been a long time this legislature has been in session. Most 
legislative sessions would have been over by now, and the government is still tabling 
reports . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . day 86, the member from Saskatoon University 
tells me, and thank you for that. 
 
But here we are getting reports from ’85 and ’86, and I think that’s a shame that the 
people of Saskatchewan can’t depend on the government to come through with timely 
reports to try and keep certainly the opposition as aware as we can be of the business of 
the government, therefore the business of the people of Saskatchewan, but it’s a shame 
that they introduced the major Bill of this session without having had the courtesy to table 
the annual report. 
 



Those are some of the concerns we have. A further concern I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is still in the first column of this article in the Leader-Post, and this is a short paragraph. 
It says: 
 

But Lane, who has said the NDP can have as much time to debate the Bill as they 
want, told the Assembly the government has every intention to march on with 
what is the natural course for PCS. 
 

Well we are pointing out, my colleague from Moose Jaw South has pointed out a polling 
done, not at the request of either the government or the opposition, but independent 
polling, a survey of more than 800 households geographically spread throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that poll showed that less than one-third of the people 
thought that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan should be privatized. Fewer than 
one in three agree with the so-called natural course that this government is taking. You 
have to wonder why and how a government could possibly get so far out of touch, so far 
removed from reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would proceed against the wishes of 
two-thirds of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s an astounding disgrace, 
and nothing short of that. 
 
Nearing the end of this article, Mr. Speaker, and I’m of course tying this to the potash 
debate as an historic debate, and they quote Dr. John Archer, who is the author of a great 
many books, but the latest, or the one they’re talking about here is Saskatchewan A 
History. And Dr. Archer says: 
 

I don’t think anyone dared foretell how important it (the potash debate) would be 
in 1975. 
 

Many debates have been very important milestones. Maybe this will be one. Dr. Norman 
Ward, a political science professor at the University of Saskatchewan for more than 30 
years, said: 
 

The current debate is likely “at least as important” as the ’75-76 debate that 
created Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. There’s no doubt (the article goes 
on) that the issue will further polarize the two sides of the Assembly, Archer said. 
It will be the first time we will see clearly where everyone is coming from. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could not agree more with Dr. Archer and Dr. Norman Ward that 
this debate focuses the difference between the Conservative government and the New 
Democratic current opposition. This debate is about control, it is about ownership, and 
the fundamental question, as my colleague pointed out earlier today, the fundamental 
question is: does, at the end of the day, does this Bill enhance ownership, enhance 
control, enhance the privilege of those who have little, or does it enhance the ownership, 
control, and privilege of those who have much? And of course the answer is as obvious as 
the nose on my face, and for my friends and relatives, they know that’s fairly obvious. 
 



Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill enhances the control, the ownership of the privileged. It is 
not going to be the people working for minimum wage, the single mothers, single fathers, 
the single people starting out in life, struggling to buy their first stereo, making payments 
all too often on a stereo. They’re not the folks that are going to be buying shares in any 
potash company. Indeed, as the member for Regina North West, my colleague, has 
pointed out, 14 per cent of adult Saskatchewan residents own any shares — 14 per cent, 
14 people out of a hundred. That’s a pretty low number. 
 
And the point I am making, of course, Mr. Speaker, is that the government is telling us 
this potash privatization is going to enhance our ability to participate in the potash 
industry. I wish to point out, there are a half a dozen private potash corporations currently 
operating in this very province. There is absolutely no shortage of opportunities for any 
and all of those 14 per cent who will own shares or other people to invest in any one of 
those half a dozen companies. There is ample and all kinds of opportunity for those 
people to invest in the potash industry. They can hopefully make some money in the 
current half dozen privately owned potash companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
But why should those wealthy people, those out-of-Saskatchewan, out-of-Canada 
corporations and wealthy individuals, why should they benefit at the expense of 
Saskatchewan people? Why is it that we would want to look after the wealthy around the 
world who are quite capable of looking after themselves without our help? Why would 
any government be looking out first and foremost for those big corporations? It’s a real 
interesting question. We’ve talked about that in various times. 
 
There is all sorts of forms of pay-offs. Some of them are legal. There is certainly 
corporate donations to political parties. There are over and under the table deals that are 
made. There are interest-free loans given to individuals. Indeed if you look at the 
Canadian government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s getting almost to the point where the 
reason the Prime Minister built a penitentiary in his own riding was so he could have his 
cabinet meetings there. And it’s a sad, sad commentary on the state of Canadian affairs. 
It’s a sad commentary to realize that all too often our lives have stooped to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Weyburn talked about a 123,000 Saskatchewan people 
participating in the purchase of bonds, and he was saying how this is tied into 
privatization — it’s somehow part and parcel of privatization. I fail to see how a bond 
issue in any way, shape or form has any connotations of privatization. Certainly share 
offerings, shares are directly the issue. Bonds are not. Bonds are simply a promissory 
note. There is no ownership at all given up with bonds — none whatever. Never is there 
ownership changing because of bonds. 
 
On the contrary, with shares there certainly is. Because you buy a share you become an 
owner of that portion of shares that you have purchased. What the member is suggesting 
is that those of use who have ever purchased Canada Savings Bonds have somehow 
participated in the privatization of Canada. And boy, you’ve got to draw one awfully long 
bow to tell anybody and convince anybody in the world how the purchase of a Canada 
Savings Bond somehow is privatization of our great, beautiful country. 



 
Mr. Speaker, I want to bring a little historical context into this debate. Earth has been here 
for somewhere between 10 and 15 million years which, let’s say, represents this much 
time. But that’s an awful long time; that’s an awful long time. So let’s take just a tiny 
little bit at the end and make that a line. That would represent the maybe 3 million years 
that man has been alive on earth, but that line is too long. So let’s take just this little bit at 
the end and stretch that out to form a new time line. And we have there perhaps 10,000 
years, the amount of time that there has been civilizations on earth. And those of you that 
are better at history, please forgive me if I have missed by a few thousand years, but I 
think not significantly. 
 
But this 10,000-year time line is too long, so let’s chop it off a bit. Let’s take just the time 
of Christianity, 2,000 years, and so we’ve got yet another time line. Well 2,000 years at 
the time of Christ, I don’t believe potash was used as a fertilizer, so it’s obviously not 
germane to this debate for us to be talking about this time line. Let’s take this little 
portion at the end again. We’ll talk about the twentieth century when potash was 
discovered as a useful fertilizer. 
 
And so we’ve got this century time line, but in the history of Saskatchewan and potash 
development of Saskatchewan even a century is too long, so we’ll only take about a third 
of that. Then we get into the potash debate; then we get into the development of potash 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The expansion of world-wide markets for potash — we see in the initial stages, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we find that nobody had the knowledge about how to get deep enough 
into the ground to get that potash. There are a number of technical reasons, not the least 
of which I understand there’s a certain lake over it that caused no end of water problems. 
So finally a couple of companies decided they could freeze the lake and then pour the 
cement for the shaft and then thus get through that particular lake, which the name of the 
lake escapes me at the moment. That happened under the Liberals, the government led by 
the late Ross Thatcher. There was interest in potash in Saskatchewan prior to that, but it 
was while he was premier that they made the breakthrough and actually got the first 
potash mine operating. 
 
The late, right-wing premier, Premier Thatcher, felt that these companies should be 
rewarded, and he rewarded them royally. He set a royalty rate of two and one-half per 
cent on the potash that was mined, and then he extended that to all companies for a period 
of 20 or 30 years which resulted in — want to get the figure right, Mr. Speaker — it 
resulted in 14 or $16 million. I’ve got it right here — in $15.7 million collected in 
royalties and taxes by that Liberal administration in the five-year period, 1965 to ’71, 
15.7 years. 
 
(1500) 
 
So there was some jobs. There was some spin-offs that way. Certainly I have a brother 
who worked at the Allan potash mine, worked as a lab technician there, played hockey 



with the Allan potash team. So there was certainly some benefits. That was a good start 
for the potash industry, but it was sadly lacking in any return to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we had was a multiplicity of private corporations coming here for one reason and 
one reason only, and that was because they knew, it was proven by then, that 
Saskatchewan had the best, highest-grade, largest resources, largest reserves of potash in 
the free world — the largest reserves. Couple that with a stable democratic government. 
So not much danger of a war shutting down the potash mines. Add all of those things 
together, add a highly-trained, highly-educated work-force, add to that the ability of 
Saskatchewan people to tackle any job and excel at it because of the hardships we have 
had to overcome since Saskatchewan was settled. 
 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are well aware, being a farmer 
yourself, Saskatchewan people are very innovative. I bet you that I would be hard-pressed 
to find a challenge on your farm, sir, that you could not overcome one way or another. 
And the same can be said for virtually farmer in this province. That’s a real credit to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
But the potash industry, the potash companies knew that if they set up mines in 
Saskatchewan that they were going to have a work-force that could make almost anything 
work. They would have a work-force second to none, so they were quite happy to come 
in. 
 
The problem was the mines developed faster than the markets. And indeed the late 
Liberal premier Thatcher . . . I’m not going to pretend to use an exact quote, but it was 
something to do the effect that never has he seen so many reasonable and good business 
people in so much trouble before. That was the gist of what he was saying. And so he set 
up potash prorationing, which of course history shows was challenged in the courts and 
ultimately found to be lacking, to be wanting, to not being the method that could be used 
to control the potash industry. So he was really at a dilemma. 
 
But along came the hon. Al Blakeney and the crew of New Democrats, and they formed 
the government in 1971, thereby taking away that major worry from the late Ross 
Thatcher, the late hon. Ross Thatcher. 
 
But it was no accident that Al Blakeney and the New Democrats came along, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it was no accident that they had a commitment to the resource industry in 
this province. They had had from 1964 to ’71, or roughly seven years, to formulate their 
ideas, their policies, what it was they were going to do for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I have before me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a copy of the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan program for progress titled New Deal for People, this being the blueprint 
for the 1971 election; this, as you will recall, being the blueprint that was sent to 
everyone in the province even before the election was called, not waiting until the day 



that writ was dropped. It was in the hands of Saskatchewan voters before the premier 
called the election — very much up front, as has been pointed out to me by my colleague. 
 
This booklet — and I’ll call it a booklet because indeed it’s at least 21 pages long and 
they’re not exactly tiny pages, I can assure you — dealt with agriculture, it dealt with 
values of rural life, labour, employment, resource and economic development, small 
business, taxation, education, health, social security, and welfare. It dealt with senior 
citizens, it dealt with pollution, it dealt with housing, consumer affairs, Indian and Metis, 
human rights, and electoral reform, amongst some other things. 
 
But those were the issues that New Democrats of the day fought the election in 1971 on, 
and they won it with a resounding victory, largely because the people appreciated that 
finally here was a government that put their program up front. 
 
You didn’t have to agree with everything in the program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 
asking too much of everybody. But if you agree with the basic tenets of it, if you agree 
that at least you’ve got a government that doesn’t simply say: elect us, we’re the best-
looking crew; or, trust us, with no reason for you to trust them, once you realize that 
you’ve got to have some . . . governments have to be responsible for their actions, is what 
I’m saying. And I haven’t said it terribly well, but that’s what I’m trying to get at. 
 
And on the resource and development section which took a full page, I just want to read a 
few excerpts from that 1971 booklet, New Deal for People, and it said: 
 

New Democrats recognize the need for research and planning, and the folly of 
“growth for the sake of growth.” We must take into account all aspects of the 
well-being of citizens, including their right to a healthy environment. 
 
Towards these ends, a New Democratic government will: 
 
3. Oppose any further sellout of our resources. With respect to new development, 
the NDP will give first priority to public ownership through crown corporations. 
Co-operative ownership will be encouraged. Partnership arrangements between 
government and co-operatives or private developers will be undertaken when 
appropriate. Limits will be established with respect to foreign equity capital, and 
every effort will be made to limit foreign investment in resource development to 
non-equity capital. 
 

Non-equity capital. Next point: 
 

5. Review existing royalty, and other arrangements with a view to renegotiating, 
where necessary, those not in the interests of Saskatchewan people. Where 
feasible, we will reclaim ownership and control of foreign-owned resources. 
 

And next point: 
 



6. Spare no effort in renewing those resources that are renewable, such as fish and 
forests, while conserving non-renewable resources, such as oil and other minerals. 
 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the key of this very extensive New Deal for People put out by 
the New Democratic Party is: 
 

Review existing royalty and other arrangements with a view to renegotiating, 
where necessary, those not in the interests of Saskatchewan people. Where 
feasible, we will reclaim ownership and control of foreign-owned resources. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, contrary to what the Conservative government would have 
you believe, New Democrats campaign on what we believe in. We always have and I 
hope we always will. We tell the people before, during, and after an election what it is we 
are standing for. We are rewarded with the loyalty and faith of a good and growing 
number of people because over the years they have come to realize NDP is truth. We are 
honest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may argue that, well that was 1971 and the 
potash was not privatized until some time after the next election. Well if we were true to 
the Tory view, we’d have just shut up about it, because it was a hard and bitter battle 
fought in 1975-76. It was a battle that took in excess of 120 hours of the legislature of 
Saskatchewan’s time — in excess of 120 hours. Here we are in this historic debate 
somewhere around hour 45. I may be a few hours out, but I’m not very far. Somewhere 
around hour 45, compared to 120 hours allowed in 1975-76. 
 
Here we are, hour 45; there’s been talk of closure for over a month now; talk of the 
government using closure for the first time in Saskatchewan history. I hope it just remains 
talk because this issue is fundamentally important to my constituents, it’s important to 
me, it’s important to my children, and I hope it’s important to their children and their 
children’s children. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are talking about a God-given resource that should never be in 
the control of foreign multinational corporations. It should remain as it currently is now, 
as we’ve . . . (inaudible) . . . It must remain in the control of the people of Saskatchewan 
so that we, the people of Saskatchewan, can keep the benefits of our potash right here. 
 
I was talking, Mr. Speaker, about the 1981 New Deal for People. And I want to come 
back, not to the ’71 New Deal for People, but I want to point out that in 1975, in the 
election then, in the New Deal ’75 put out by the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party 
— this being even a lengthier document by some three pages, this one being 24 pages 
long — it dealt with a number of issues. 
 
But this time, instead of resources being on page 7 and 8, it was bumped up to being on 
page 4. So we’ve heightened the stakes — if anything, been trying to highlight the New 



Democratic Party’s position with respect to our natural resources by putting it right 
behind the most important industry to the people of Saskatchewan, which was and is 
agriculture. 
 
The index of the New Deal ’75 consists of the following titles: agriculture, natural 
resources, northern Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, transportation, small business, co-
operatives, housing, urban and community development, labour, education, health, social 
services and security, senior citizens, rights of people, consumer affairs, environment, 
parks and leisure activities. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this matter of resources — and I’ll quote fairly briefly from 
this New Deal ’75 that was put to the people of Saskatchewan before the election in 1975 
so that they would know what they were or were not voting for; so that they would have a 
better idea, better understanding of what it is that New Democrats stand for, what it is we 
believe in. That’s why this was put out. 
 
Under resources, it says, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

In 1971, the New Democrats promised to act decisively to see that Saskatchewan 
resources are developed to benefit Saskatchewan people. Under the Blakeney 
government, that has been done. Direct revenue to the provincial government 
from minerals alone in 1974 was more than four times what it was in 1970. These 
revenues will be still higher in 1975. 
 

(1515) 
 

When re-elected, New Democrats will continue to act to see that Saskatchewan 
people get the greatest possible benefit from our resources in the decades ahead. 
 
This may well involve new approaches to public ownership, to joint ventures 
between the government and private enterprise, and to resource royalties and 
taxation. All approaches will be measured by the test of what will give to 
Saskatchewan people the greatest overall benefits in the decades ahead — benefits 
in revenue, in industrial development and job opportunities, in conservation of 
scarce resources, in the ability of Saskatchewan people to have a greater control 
over their own destiny. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear. I’m not going to take the time of the Legislative 
Assembly to read all 24 pages of New Deal ’75, although I would dearly love to, as I’m 
sure you can appreciate. And the reason I would dearly love to is because if I were to read 
the New Deal ’75, all 24 pages, the people of Saskatchewan — those who have been 
around long enough and were voting then — would know that the Blakeney NDP kept its 
promises — kept its promises, took them sincerely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my grandmother was a CCF MLA in this very 
Legislative Assembly. She had the good fortune of being part of the very first Tommy 
Douglas government here. My grandparents . . . I should rephrase that. My grandmother 
lived all her life in Saskatchewan. It looks like my grandfather, who is now 94, will likely 
live all his life right here in Saskatchewan. Their children, with the exception of one, 
lives right here in Saskatchewan. That one lives in the province right next door to the 
west. 
 
The point I am making, Mr. Speaker, is that we New Democrats are not here for a good 
time, we’re here because we believe in Saskatchewan. We’re here for the present, we’re 
here for the future. I want my great-grandchildren to be able to look back at this debate 
and say, yeah, great-gramps is a bit of a fuddy-duddy, but by gosh, he had his day; he 
stood up when it was counted. I don’t understand everything grandpa believes in, or 
great-grandpa believes in, but by gosh, he stood up for the people of this province when it 
counted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — That’s of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, assuming I should be so fortunate to 
live that long. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well even if you don’t live that long, they’ll still say it. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I hope so. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re on the right side of the debate — standing up for the people. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I hope so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we can never go wrong when we are 
standing up for the people of Saskatchewan, the people in our constituencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I think as long as we are true to ourselves, true to our constituents, true to 
our province, people will be most accepting of the odd blunder, of the odd mistake made 
in good faith, as long as we’re doing our utmost to stand up for them, for what we believe 
in, what they perceive they elected when they elected me. And I hope I can survive the 
tests of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the potash debate we see that the latest thing to have happen is 
the Institute of Saskatchewan Enterprise, which, as you are well aware, is a pure right-
wing Tory front — one of the directors is Dr. Barber. I could go through the whole list of 
directors, pure right . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who are they? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Roger Phillips of Ipsco. 



 
An Hon. Member: — Who else? 
 
Mr. Trew: — My colleagues are saying, who else, so we’ll go through some of who else. 
We have here Dr. John Brennan, dean of commerce, U of S; Dr. Ralph Cheesman, 
manager of Saskatchewan Mining Association; we have Ted Renner, the president of 
Saskoil, hardly a New Democrat; we have Gordon Wicijowski, managing partner of 
Clarkson Gordon, chartered accountants. I do hope I pronounced his name properly, and I 
extend my apologies to that gentleman if I mispronounced it. But the fact is that 
gentleman is not a New Democrat, is a Tory in a right-wing group that take out . . . I 
mean, took out a full-page ad in today’s Leader-Post. I shouldn’t be giving them this kind 
of advertising, but can you imagine the expense, more than $2,000 for this newspaper 
alone. 
 
There’s another one in the Star-Phoenix, I’m told. There’s another 2,000 — we’re up to 
$4,000. Well all the weeklies, there’s news . . . they’ve been in the news ever since they 
released their report that misleads the people. Talk about a group. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ordinary Saskatchewan people coming up with 
the $10,000 or more to mount a full-page ad campaign in the dailies and weeklies 
throughout the province? And that’s just right now. This is going to go on, I suspect, as 
long as we are debating this Bill 20, this potash Bill, here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now we can have all the money, the Tories and their various front groups can spend all 
the money they want on full-page ads; they’re welcome to it. They’re welcome to it, but . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll come to that in a second. They can spend all the money 
they want, but the difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fundamental difference is the 
people of the province have made up their minds — very, very many of them have 
already made up their minds. 
 
They’ve said so in a number of ways. They’ve said so in a privatization poll that asked 
them a question about potash; are you in favour of selling PCS? Fewer than one-third of 
them said yes, they agree with the government privatizing, selling it off. 
 
We have a situation where 45,000 Saskatchewan citizens have voted with their feet in the 
last four and a half years. That’s an average of more than 10,000 people per year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re talking net. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Net. Thank you, member for Moose Jaw North. That’s the net loss, that’s 
not just the people who are leaving. That’s the people who are leaving, minus those who 
come in, and we’re still 45,000 people short. Now, 45,000 people. You can understand if 
it’s a few thousand. Sometimes there is some tough times. Sometimes there is. But you 
never get 45,000 people over a four and a half year time frame. You don’t get that 
number of people, Mr. Speaker; you don’t get that number of people leaving without that 
there is significant big and growing problems in the province of Saskatchewan, problems 



that those 45,000 people have decided are not going to be resolved in the very near future 
— not going to be resolved. So that’s a very sad statement. 
 
So we’ve got, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have got the people of Saskatchewan on our side. 
Doesn’t matter how many full-page ads the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise puts 
out, doesn’t matter how much advertising they do, the people know who it is that’s 
standing up for them. They know, and I will be coming to it in, I hope, a reasonably short 
time in my presentation, the financial reasons why we feel so strongly about this. And 
there are some very good financial reasons why the people of Saskatchewan should 
benefit by keeping control of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to point out one thing that has happened in this Institute for Saskatchewan 
Enterprise ad. They missed one of the board of directors. Now I wonder why there would 
be four pictures when the fifth director happens to reside right here in Regina, but they 
couldn’t get a picture of this fifth member of the board of directors of this Institute for 
Saskatchewan Enterprise despite the fact that I can absolutely guarantee that every daily 
newspaper in this province has that person’s picture. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who is it? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Who is it, I am asked. The fifth and conspicuous by his absence director of 
this right-wing radical group happens to be none other than Lloyd Barber, president of the 
U of R. That’s the same Lloyd Barber who is currently chairing the SaskPower hearings, 
the privatization hearings. That’s the same Dr. Barber who has this same Tory front 
making a presentation to his own commission. He’s writing a letter to himself in effect, 
writing a letter to himself, and of course he’s able to read it — Dr. Barber being a very 
well-educated individual. 
 
But with clear, right-wing ideology, Dr. Barber, by being one of the five on the board of 
directors of the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise, and all of the garbage that they put 
out, by the very fact that he is one of the very lead players, Mr. Deputy Speaker, shows 
that he has no credibility when it comes to the SaskPower hearings. And indeed because 
of that and the fact that he tried to sell off the university’s library last year, things like that 
— because of that, Dr. Barber has, and the Institute of Saskatchewan Enterprise have, no 
credibility when it comes to discussing whether something should be under Crown 
ownership or privatized — no credibility at all. He has got his ideological blinkers on and 
he is going that way. It’s simple as that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Going right. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Always to the right. But you know, Mr. Speaker, speaking of always going 
to the right, you know, we’ve referred to government members as being right-wing all the 
time. And the interesting thing about being right-wing is that if you stop and think about 
it, you take your left wing off and you start flapping around, you’re always turning to the 
left. So things are going to turn around. 
 



Things are turning to the New Democratic Party. Things are turning left, and the right-
wingers are driving people to us. The right-wingers are sealing their fate, and they’re 
sealing it by coming with the ill-fated SaskPower Bill that we won. The people of 
Saskatchewan won that. It’s put off for now. They’re sealing their fate by day after day 
after day coming at us with this Bill 20, this potash privatization Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that fate is sealed. It is astounding, the number of people that I 
meet throughout this province who don’t even care if they talk, don’t even care if they 
talk about politics, because they’ve made up their minds. They know how they’re going 
to vote, they look me right in the eye and say, not to worry, New Democrats are going to 
get my vote. That’s before we even have a nominated candidate anywhere, and they’re 
saying, not to worry. 
 
They believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the old Confucius saying, “Fool me once, shame on 
you; fool me twice, shame on me.” And they’re not going to be fooled twice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have talked about, why would we privatize the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Why would we issue shares? And there’s a number of observations I have, 
but a number of questions that are very much unresolved, and I have not heard the answer 
in any of the interventions, the very few brief interventions from government members. 
 
(1530) 
 
Why would you privatize? Why would you offer shares in a potash corporation that is 
owned by all of us? Why would you ask people to buy shares in something they already 
own? It absolutely baffles me. Second question, we’ve got a half a dozen currently 
privately held, privately owned potash companies. Most or all of them sell shares on the 
stock-market. There is no shortage of potash mines in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 
people or outside of Saskatchewan, other Canadians or Americans or Europeans or 
Japanese or people from anywhere in the world, they can invest in those half dozen 
mines. 
 
So we have no shortage of share offerings. Why would we try to use the argument that, 
well, we’ve got to give people the opportunity to purchase shares in a potash mine, 
especially when you realize they already own the mine. Mr. Speaker, it’s got to be a 
harder sell than selling ice cubes to the Eskimos. It’s got to be a harder sell than that. 
 
I own . . . My good car, which is sitting out front — my 1981 Plymouth with 181,000 
kilometres on it — I own it outright. I’m not sure any lending institution would give me a 
loan on it because, as you can appreciate, it doesn’t have a huge amount of value. But I’ll 
be darned if any government or somebody can come along and tell me I have to buy the 
car I already own. 
 
They’re going to sell me shares in my car? No, they’re not. I own that car — outright. 
You’re not going to sell me some piece of paper telling me I own that car. I know I own 
it. I drive it every day. 



 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of observations I have regarding 
potash and what has happened since we formed the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
in that previous historic debate, 1975-76. And in the time leading up to the formation of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, we had up to . . . starting with one, and then it 
got up to 12 potash companies operating in Saskatchewan. Twelve potash companies 
operating in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was not one head office in Saskatchewan — 
not one —until the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and then we now have a head 
office for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in Saskatchewan. Stationed in 
Saskatoon, that head office is providing many jobs that would have gone to New York or 
Switzerland or Tokyo, but primarily New York. 
 
Those head office jobs that would have been in New York are now in Saskatoon. There 
are sons and daughters of Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan business men and 
women who are working in that head office in Saskatoon. That means that the wages and 
salaries that they are earning for doing a job stays in Saskatchewan, is not paid out to 
New York, New York, to people living in New York. It is to the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There have been occasions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the potash corporation has hired 
somebody from outside of Saskatchewan to work in its head office. And that’s fair 
enough. You need a little mix, local grown. You can’t expect everybody to come off of a 
farm or out of a small business to be able to run a huge corporation such as the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, or you can’t expect everybody to be able to do all of the 
jobs. 
 
So occasionally you bring in an expert, but in every case they’ve become Saskatchewan 
citizens. They have been living in Saskatchewan. They’ve been earning their salary here, 
and they’ve been spending their salary here. They’re buying their new vehicles here. 
They’re purchasing their residences right here in Saskatchewan. They buy their groceries 
here. Some of them go to market gardens. That enhances market gardening opportunities 
for the many co-operative market gardeners that there are throughout this province. 
 
So you see there’s a great spin-off from the hundred-odd jobs that are created by the head 
office of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. There’s a great spin-off that Saskatchewan 
people have developed for ourselves since Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan moved to 
Saskatchewan. Now I know that the government promises that a head office will remain 
in Saskatchewan under a privatized Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, but there is no 
shortage of post office boxes right here — post office boxes. 
 
How many people have seen something advertised — and I’m not trying to slam T.V. 
advertising — bus seen some fly-by-night thing advertised at 2 in the morning, dashed off 



their money, and then not ever received the goods, and also not ever known who to 
contact. All they have is a post office box in Minnedosa, or some other equally — with 
apologies to Minnedosans — some other equally obscure place. 
 
The point I’m making, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we can have a head office here in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. We can have a head office right here in Saskatchewan that can 
be a real head office like we have now, with roughly 100 people employed, or we can 
have a post office box: Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Head Office, Post Office 
Box 4, Saskatoon. Well, some head office! 
 
The assurances of this government don’t wash. The people of Saskatchewan know that 
they don’t wash. They’re fed up with it. They wish that instead of us being here and 
debating this incredibly important Bill, instead of us being here . . . I was going to say 
giving up our summer holidays, but that would sound like I’m somehow bitter about it or 
disappointed about it. On the contrary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m excited about the 
opportunity to participate in this historic event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I’m excited to participate in this event, as 
obviously are my colleagues. We’re proud as punch to be able to be here, and we will be 
here. 
 
But the point I was getting to, the people of Saskatchewan wish that instead of us 
debating this, they would sooner see us out on the hustings with an election having been 
called. That’s what they’d really like. Never mind that it’s the dead of summer. I’m sure 
that New Democrats take vacations, as do Conservatives. I think it would balance out, 
kind of. Call the election; people will get home in time to vote. Call the election and let 
the people who really will decide ultimately the fate of PCS and the fate of SaskPower 
and the fate of Saskatchewan Transportation Company and the fate of what remains of 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Company, let the people make the decision now. 
 
Not once in your previous elections have you ever had the courage to put out a statement 
saying: we’re going to privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, not once — not 
once — because you wouldn’t get elected and you knew you wouldn’t get elected. You 
speak no evil; you speak no good either, that’s the problem. People don’t know what 
they’re electing. You promised to eliminate the gas tax. Well, the gas tax is higher than it 
was when you came into office. There’s more gas tax collected now than there ever was, 
through this scheme now, than there ever was under the New Democratic . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 



An Hon. Member: — I suppose you’re going to say he’s off the subject. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member for Regina Centre not to address the 
Chair when the Speaker’s on his feet. I would ask the member from Regina North to 
relate his remarks to Bill 20. I’ve allowed a pretty far-ranging debate and he’s drawing a 
pretty long bow. And I would ask him to get back on the subject that is before the 
Assembly, Bill No. 20, the reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you for your guidance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will endeavour to 
stay germane to the potash debate. And it is very germane that the people of 
Saskatchewan know what it is that a government, any government, whether it’s New 
Democrat, Conservative, Liberal or something else, it is very important that the people of 
Saskatchewan know before the election what it is that that party, that potential 
government stands for. I think that’s a fundamental thing in a democracy; it’s the way 
democracy works the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I appreciate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact this is a historic debate. We 
appreciated the member for Weyburn telling us about his constituent having written a 
letter or an essay and the fact that she got 14 and a half out of 15 potential marks. That’s 
not bad for any student. 
 
I’ll tell you I’d be proud if that was either of my sons or my daughter. I’d be proud if they 
did that well. I can assure you just for the record that my sons and daughter have done 
that well on some of their exams, but they certainly don’t on all of them. I can also assure 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my sons and daughter do not support that position. 
 
Another observation I have about the whole Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
indeed the potash industry, any royalties, any revenues that are collected from potash, 
every single dollar, Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes from where? In Saskatchewan? No, it 
comes from out of Saskatchewan. Every single dollar that the potash corporations, 
whether it be PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) or the private corporations, all 
the market is out of province. 
 
And I hope nobody’s going to jump on me and say, yes but we sell 50 tonnes a year in 
Saskatchewan. I realize there’s a minute quantity of potash sold here in Saskatchewan. 
I’m told that quantity is growing, but everybody knows that that quantity is not enough to 
keep one single mine — any single mine in production for a single day. That’s how small 
the Saskatchewan purchase of this great fertilizer is. 
 
So all of the money that comes from potash comes from American, Indian, Brazilian, 
Chinese, south-east Asia — did I mention Japan? — Europe, certainly out of province. 
 
So it’s, if you like, a very, very valuable export. Of course it is a non-renewable resource, 
but as has been pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, potash reserves, there’s enough potash 



to last for four to five millennium. I like the word millennium; it reminds me of Star 
Wars and the opening credits when they talked about whatever millennium it was. But a 
millennium of course is a thousand years. 
 
So we’ve got 4 to 5,000 years of being able to sell Saskatchewan potash at current rates 
of production — 4 to 5,000 years of proven resources. And all of that money, all of those 
resources will be sold outside of Saskatchewan with, as I pointed out, a very minute 
amount being sold right here. 
 
Another observation I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that in the first five years of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, total revenues from potash, total revenues collected 
by the Government of Saskatchewan amounted to $985 million — $15 million shy of 1 
billion. That’s in five years, from 1976 to ’82. 
 
(1545) 
 
I think that’s not a bad record especially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you compare it to 
the immediate five years subsequent, when in the immediate five years subsequent to that 
in the total potash industry, total royalties and revenue and income taxes totalled $274 
million over a like five-year period. Not bad, not bad when you see what having a 
government that’s committed to — as we pointed out in the New Deal ’75 — we have a 
government that’s committed to extracting the greatest possible benefit from the natural 
resources for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean, it’s not much wonder that you see such a great divergence between what New 
Democrats did and what Conservatives are doing. You might say, oh yes, but you know 
the potash industry’s really gone through some tough, tough times. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tory times. 
 
Mr. Trew: — As my colleague from Moose Jaw North points out, gone through Tory 
times. And Tory times are tough times. I don’t disagree with that at all. So I guess the 
potash industry has. 
 
But let’s look at the record of the potash industry in Saskatchewan. In the five years 
since, from the time that Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was set up until the 
government changed in 1982, that five-year period, there was 32 million tonnes of potash 
mined in Saskatchewan. 
 
Compare that to 31 million tonnes in the next five-year period since the Conservatives 
took office. So you’re comparing 32 million tonnes to 31 million tonnes — a drop in 
production of 1 million tonnes, or one thirty-second. That would be almost like taking an 
inch out of a yard, or for today’s metric children, it would be like taking a centimetre out 
of a metre . . . pardon me, three centimetres out of a metre. I’ll get it right yet — three 
centimetres out of a metre is the correct amount. So not a significant change in the 
production. 



 
And what was the situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with regards to the average price of the 
product that was sold, of the fertilizer that was sold? Well we see that in the great years, 
the boom years under the NDP, under the New Democrats, the average price was one 
hundred and — I just want to check it, I think it was $109, almost certain — $109.50, but 
we’ll call it $109, that being while the New Democrats were the government and while 
the people of Saskatchewan owned the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the subsequent five years, the Conservative five years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
average price of fertilizer dropped, and it dropped by less than $3 a tonne, less than $3 a 
tonne. It dropped to $106.69, average price. Let’s call it $106. 
 
Well how do you explain that minimal drop in production and that minimal drop in price? 
We see the difference in revenue being some $711 million, revenues from potash, total 
revenues from potash dropping from $985 million all the way to $274 million, in each 
case taking a five-year period. That’s to take some of the peaks and valleys out of it, but 
in each case, taking a similar five-year period. 
 
Well some people might question me still. They might say well, don’t quite trust what the 
member is saying. I’m going to put it in a slightly different context, and this makes it 
crystal clear. If you take 1 million tonnes, the drop in production, remember from 32 to 
31 million tonnes, the difference is 1 million tonnes. You multiply 1 million tonnes by the 
difference in the average price, so you multiply it by $3, and you’ve got $3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m missing a little bit, and I will ask my colleague from Moose Jaw North 
to give me the right figure on that because I would not want to mislead anyone. But 
there’s a drop in production of 1 million tonnes, and a difference in price of $3 a tonne — 
$3 million, Flat on, $3 million, by gosh. Well how about that! 
 
It’s amazing when you look at a $3 million difference, and yet the reality is under the 
Conservatives we had a $711 million drop in royalties and income taxes. If you took the 
total difference, the total difference, every penny of it, not just the royalties and taxes, but 
every penny of that difference, it totals only 3 million. 
 
Yet they parlayed it for their big-business friends, the half dozen still-remaining private 
corporations, potash corporations, they parlayed that into a $711 million tax savings for 
those big-business friends of the government members opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some people are still wondering, still saying, well who do I believe? 
Should I trust the New Democrats or should I trust the Tories? Many of these people have 
become cynical because we have a government that wants them that way. We have a 
government that goes around saying, oh, well all politicians are the same; they’re all 
alike. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re not all alike, because in 11 years, 11 New 
Democratic Party years headed by Al Blakeney, not one time was there a cabinet minister 
or an MLA before the courts and convicted of anything — not one time, not once. 
 



Not one time in those 11 years did we ever have a deficit budget . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — The people of Saskatchewan enjoyed 11 successive surplus budgets, 11 out 
of 11. You can’t do a whole lot better than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we have seen 
since is seven out of seven deficits, seven out of seven. We see the Minister of Finance 
introduces a budget that missed by a mere $800 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whoops! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Whoops is right. And I will get back to potash because I appreciate why 
you’re getting a little fidgety, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I confess I strayed a little bit there. I 
hadn’t intended on focusing on that fiscal mismanagement of everything else for so long. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a huge number of us who have decided to stay in 
Saskatchewan rather than to join the 45,000 people who have left in the last . . . net loss, 
in the last four and a half years. But many of us have consciously decided to stay — 
many of us have consciously decided to stay. But some have unconsciously decided, 
look, Saskatchewan is my province, I love it. I have my family here. Saskatchewan has 
been pretty good to me. I remember my first girl-friend or my first boy-friend from . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve been allowing the member a lot of leeway in the 
debate. And I’ve certainly been taking some notes down, and he’s been repeating himself 
and he’s certainly been irrelevant . . . Order, order. 
 
I’d ask the member for Regina Centre and the member from Moose Jaw North not to 
address the Chair from their seat. When the Speaker is on his feet there’s supposed to be 
silence in the House, and I’d ask the members to adhere to that — and the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
The member from Regina North is going on and on, irrelevance, and I would ask him to 
relate his debate to the potash Bill that’s before the Assembly. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, on your ruling. I think if you go back, 
as I have done this afternoon, and attempt — boring as it might be — to read the Hansard 
of July 4, 5, and 6 when this hon. member spoke, and what he said on each of those days 
of July 4, 5, and 6 is exactly the same, and it’s exactly the same as he’s been saying 
today. Now that’s a sign of . . . if there’s a filibuster, Mr. Speaker, a filibuster has to take 
a bit of talent. It’s not just simply stand up there and let words dribble out of your mouth. 
It says the same thing for four days now in a row. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to address the comments 
made by the member from Kindersley, and it’s a key point in this matter. It is true that a 
member may not repeat himself over and over again. That falls within the definition of 
tedious repetition. But if the member from Kindersley’s suggesting today, as he’s 
suggesting yesterday, that members may not use the same arguments, that I think is 
clearly inaccurate. 
 
Each member is allowed to state why he does not with to vote for the Bill or why they 
wish to vote for it. Inevitably some arguments are going to be repeated. The member 
from Kindersley cannot point to an argument yesterday and say the same argument’s 
being made today. It’s being made by a different member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
He wasn’t. He just started today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s point of order is well taken. 
Members cannot repeat at length what they have said before or what other members have 
said. And I have been keeping notes just this afternoon. The member has been repeating 
himself in the debate this afternoon and certainly has been repeating himself as I have 
listened to the other debates that have been going on, and he has repeated himself on 
other members’ debate. 
 
And I will read rule 25(2) to the members again. 
 

The Speaker, or the Chairman, after having called the attention of the Assembly, 
or of the committee, to the conduct of a Member who persists in irrelevance, or 
tedious repetition, either of his own arguments or of the arguments used by other 
Members in debate, may direct him to discontinue his speech . . . 
 

So the point is very well taken that members cannot repeat their own statements or 
statements of other members. 
 
Order, order. The member may continue to speak if he has something new to add to the 
debate. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Perhaps if my girl-friend’s name, my first 
girl-friend’s name had been potash, it would have been more relevant. But it was not. I 
will endeavour to follow your ruling, sir. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are unique. In Saskatchewan we have a vast population unlike many 
provinces such as Ontario where they’ve got 8 million people in not much bigger land 
mass than what we have. Indeed they’ve got some 4 to 5 million people within 100 miles 
of the centre of Toronto. So they’ve got some problems certainly because of that. 
They’ve also got some opportunities because of that. They’ve got some industrial 
opportunities because of the great consumption. 
 



The member asks what that has to do with potash. And I will tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and for the member from, I believe it was Saltcoats, exactly what it has to do. 
We don’t have a population base that will allow for a huge manufacturing industry here 
in Saskatchewan. It is not natural. It is natural for us to have a potash industry here. We 
have the greatest reserves in quantity, in quality. We have the world’s most productive 
mines. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is the most efficient potash producer in 
the world. We refine our potash here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I refer, Mr. Speaker, to July 4, 1989, Hansard, page 2375, and ask 
the Chair to review that and determine whether or not the hon. member is once again 
engaging in repetition. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Kindersley suggested the 
member’s repeating himself, is being repetitious. The rule 25(2) that the member refers to 
says quite clearly it must be tedious repetition. For the member to repeat . . . it may be 
tedious for the member opposite because he doesn’t agree with it. But for the member to 
repeat one or two times some subject, is not tedious repetition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I find that the point of order is well taken. It’s the 
decision of the Chair when repetition becomes tedious repetition . . . Order. And if the 
member from Regina North has something new to add to the debate, certainly he can 
continue to debate, or else he can discontinue his debate. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly have something brand-new to this 
debate that I did not bring in before, nor has any of my colleagues. 
 
What this is is out of the Star-Phoenix, Thursday, July 27, which was yesterday, and it’s 
an editorial that says, “Debate should run its course.” And I quote from that article: 
 

The legislative debate over the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan (PCS) should be allowed to run its course. This is not the time for 
government to invoke the closure rule and curb the discussion. 
 
That closure has never yet been invoked in the Saskatchewan legislature is a 
positive testimony to the democratic process. Sometimes its wheels grind more 
slowly than the government would like, but that’s not necessarily a shortcoming. 
If the legislation the government has introduced is good for the province, it should 
be demonstrated as such through the debate. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: —  
 



And the argument over privatization of a Crown corporation like PCS, one of the 
province’s major industrial players, is hardly a trifling affair (the editorial says.) 
 
As has been aptly pointed out, it took 120 hours of debate on both sides of the 
house to nationalize the industry in 1975. Why attempt to limit the privatization 
debate after only 40 hours? And why has the debate so far been (and the article 
goes on) and why has the debate so far been so one-sided? Shouldn’t government 
members be rallying to support a policy they claim to believe in? (the article 
says.) 
 
If the Tories do resort to invoking closure, the measure promises to create more 
problems than a protracted debate would ever cause for the government. The NDP 
has vowed to pull all possible tricks out of the bag to thwart the measure. As a 
result, the public would perceive the legislature as even more petty and 
discordant, although it’s hard to imagine possible. 
 

The final paragraph says: 
 

It’s better to let the debate go on. If MLAs want to take their time debating 
privatization and pay their own expenses while they’re at it (their daily expense 
allowances ran out July 5), then let them do it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, welcome back to the Chair. The natural resources in the ground and the 
benefits from those natural resources should belong to the people of Saskatchewan, 
should go to the people. 
 
I was talking with a friend of mine earlier today and she described the multinational 
corporations as being something like a bloodsucker, were her words. They would provide 
some short-term jobs, but their bottom line is purely and only their interest in pursuing 
profits, dollar profits. That’s the only reason they have for existing. 
 
This friend of mine was wondering, is this sell-off of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, is that a quick fix to allow the government to funnel hundreds of million 
dollars to their other multinational friend, Cargill? Is it to allow those sorts of things to go 
on? Is that why the potash corporation is being privatized, or is attempted to being 
privatized? And this friend of mine pointed out something that I have truly not heard in 
this debate before and it is a very good point. 
 
If the government gets its way and the shares are offered in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, there will be an investment tax credit for investors, costing the treasury of 
Saskatchewan more millions of dollars. In other words, for the treasury to get some 
money in it’s going to give some money out to the wealthy investors. So we’re faced with 
a double whammy. The wealthy gain control of our resource potash; the poor lose 
control. The people of Saskatchewan lose control, collectively, of that potash corporation, 
and as if to add insult to injury, only those wealthy investors get the tax credit. 
 



So the poor get hit with a double whammy and they’ve lost everything. The wealthy 
come up with the shares in the potash industry. In the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and the treasury of the people, the treasury of Saskatchewan pays them to 
take ownership, to take control of our resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is Tory economics at its worst, and that is why we are so vehemently 
opposed to this potash privatization Bill. We have seen the results of privatization here in 
Saskatchewan. I spoke . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Let us allow the hon. member to continue his remarks in 
an orderly fashion, and continuous interruptions of course are not acceptable. I know hon. 
members realize that and I’m sure they will want to co-operate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that ruling. We’ve got a situation here in 
Saskatchewan that has been a long time in the growing. Even prior to the 1982 election 
we had potash companies lobbying vociferously against the government, lobbying 
vociferously because they realized that they were paying their share of royalties and 
taxes. 
 
Now they would of course grudgingly follow the laws of the land, but they didn’t like it 
so they lobbied, because if you look at it, lobbying is a very, very inexpensive way to get 
results. A thousand dollar donation to someone’s political campaign can indeed put that 
politician in the hip pocket of that corporation. A mere thousand dollars goes a long, long 
ways. 
 
(1615) 
 
A lunch bought in a seemingly very innocent way bonds some friendships, and whether it 
is intentional or not, all too often that lunch winds up costing the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan many, many, many, many, many thousands of times whatever the price of 
that lunch was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the potash corporation had a total debt of $88 million when the present 
government took over. They ran it up, and now we’re looking for a way out. Well we’ve 
offered them the way out. The way out if just let this Bill sit, get on with bringing 
forward needed legislation, get on with bringing forward legislation that would allow for 
things such as the inflationary increase for retired civil servants and Crown corporation 
employees, even Crowns such as the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. We promised 
to pass the Bill the same day it’s introduced. The government controls the agenda. 
 
Their ideological blinders are on, and so we’re into a situation where we’re debating 
potash, potash, potash from 8 o’clock in the morning until 11 o’clock at night starting 
Monday morning until Friday night. Tonight at 11 o’clock, I and my colleagues will still 
be here, and we’ll still be debating potash, the Premier points out, and so will they, and 



good for them. And I’m pleased to see that today for the first time in a good long time 
we’re also getting some input from government members. It will be most interesting to 
hear what the Premier has to say about it, if he ever dares to speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pointed out that in over a five-year period in potash, it had cost the people 
of Saskatchewan $711 million in lost taxes and royalties. The situation is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. members are making some noise, but the 
member from Regina Centre, I would just suggest to him that he be very careful in how 
he refers to other members in this House. I’m not going to call him to order, make him 
apologize on this occasion, but I’m just warning him that those kinds of phrases are not 
acceptable, and you can be sure that next time you’ll be required to apologize for remarks 
of that nature. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I pointed out the loss in income to the people of 
Saskatchewan — $711 million. I merely do that to set up . . . the resource sector has been 
blessed under the present government with royalty tax holidays, with all sorts of tax 
breaks;, lowering of the corporate tax rate. The situation in potash is a loss of what we 
estimate $711 million. The loss from oil is more than double that. 
 
And so it’s small wonder we wind up with a $4 billion deficit here in Saskatchewan. It’s 
small wonder we wind up with debt in Crown corporation after Crown corporation. It is 
really incredible that these wonderful fiscal managers, this great business people opposite 
who come from the likes of Peter Pocklington and those sorts of enterprises, it’s amazing 
that these fiscal managers have run us into a $4 billion debt. And it’s just . . . it astounds 
me that they still have the audacity to stand up and say that they are great fiscal 
managers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, I believe, wants to introduce some guests. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the House, I’d like to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the Assembly today, some guests seated in your gallery. In your gallery 
are Mr. and Mrs. Homer Burke from Watrous and their son, Donald, and accompanying 
Mr. and Mrs. Burke is a young man from France, Jean-Laurent Hugues, and he is from 
Beziers, France — I hope I pronounced that right — which is along the Mediterranean 
coast. Jean-Laurent is over on a Rotary exchange where he’ll be spending a month in 
Canada in the Watrous area, and in return Donald Burke will be going back to France to 
spend a month there. And I think these are very useful exchanges. 
 



And they are here today taking in the proceedings. They’ve had a tour of the legislature 
and will be visiting around Regina before returning back to Watrous. So I’d ask all 
members of the House to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 (continued) 
 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I indeed I wish to join my colleague from 
Humboldt in extending a welcome to our guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I hope 
you’re enjoying this historic debate on the ownership of potash, the biggest resource in 
Saskatchewan, and the one that should last for 4,000 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear the Premier now talking from his seat, and we look 
forward to his entry into this debate. It would be a refreshing change if he would come 
clean and tell us what it is he stands for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I am, as you can appreciate, I am much nearer the end of my 
debate than I am the beginning. My recollection is I spoke for between three and four 
hours earlier in this month, and I’ve been at it for a while today. I don’t know — hour and 
a half, two hours. So I can assure you that I’m certainly within five or six hours of 
concluding my remarks. Actually I’m much closer than that. 
 
In 1975-76 when the people of Saskatchewan became owners of the new Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, we became masters in our own house. We started for the 
first time ever to truly control our destiny with regards to the ownership and the benefits 
and the jobs that come with such a bountiful resource such as potash. We set up the 
marketing arm of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan which, by the time we set up 
the marketing arm, PCS was the largest single potash corporation in the world, in the free 
world. 
 
And I recall vividly the 1982 election. It was about some mythical golden bathtub, 
sunken golden bathtub that doesn’t exist. It was about tax breaks, a 10 per cent cut in 
personal income taxes that nobody has even close to seen — certainly the big 
corporations have. It’s about those sorts of things, and I don’t want to expand on them 
simply because I want to maintain some focus on potash, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one of the issues in that election campaign was this idea, this statement that the 
Premier made. He said, we will disband the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
marketing arm. Elect a Tory government and we’ll disband that. 



 
And I have to ask, why? Why would you disband the marketing arm that could 
potentially develop new markets in countries such as Brazil, countries such as India, such 
as Japan and China at the time? Why would you disband a marketing arm? Why would 
you even promise that before you were ever even elected into the Legislative Assembly? 
Why would you promise such a thing? Why the haste? Why not say, we’ll look at it and 
if it’s feasible it’s gone. But instead, they gave up the whole year’s sales by promising it 
during the election and not delivering until the very end of the potash sale season, June 27 
or 28, 1982, when the final announcement was made. 
 
Why the big hurry? A government elected in April, why would they be in such a hurry to 
disband that marketing arm? And of course, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan paid a 
dear price for that; they paid a dear price in that at the end of that year they had to go cap 
in hand to Canpotex, the marketing arm of all Saskatchewan potash, and say, sorry we 
were such bad people and we said such nasty things about you, but will you share some 
of your sales that you’ve made? Not a very tenable position. 
 
And as a result, the production records — I’ve got them here somewhere — but they 
show that the production records in the year immediately after the government, present 
government took office were about two-thirds of the level they were the year before. And 
again, I’m not very far wrong when I say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now here we are some seven years later, debating not simply the shutting down of the 
marketing arm of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, but we are being told that the 
government has every intention to sell off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in 
total. And they further intend to sell an asset that is worth, estimated, about $2 billion, 
and they plan to sell it for somewhere between 5 to $900 million. In other words, less 
than half price. 
 
Why the hurry? Why on earth would you want to give away such a valuable commodity, 
such a hard-earned gain for the people of Saskatchewan? Why would you have such a 
haste to give it away? I’m wondering if the Premier believes in Saskatchewan’s long 
term? I wonder if the Premier thinks that Saskatchewan is a province worthy of looking 
to the next decade, to the next century. I wonder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier believes he’s going to get 
elected next time, because . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize for not rising a 
couple of minutes earlier. But I want to refer the Speaker to page 2449 of Hansard, July 
6, and page 2451, the second paragraph of that page, and refer the Speaker to July 5, 
1989, 2400 and 2401. If the Chair would take the time to read those two pages, two and a 



half pages roughly, one would find that the last five minutes what the hon. member has 
said he repeated almost verbatim from what he said back July 5 and 6. 
 
If I can read to you, Mr. Chairman, and we will recall this: 
 

After the markets closed . . . PCS had to go to Canpotex, cap in hand. 
 

Do you remember him saying that just a few minutes ago? You can go through that time 
after time after time on those four pages and you’ll find exactly the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have also made a 
point of doing so when the member first raised the point. I’ve made a point of reviewing 
the member’s comments made before, comparing with the comments he made now, and 
they are different. I’m not going to go through the entire routine and outline what he said 
before and what he’s saying now, but they’re different comments and he’s making a 
different argument. 
 
The member from Kindersley may be able to find a phrase that has reappeared. That 
doesn’t mean he’s making the same argument; he’s not. They are different arguments, 
albeit on the same subject, and some of the same phrases are going to arise. So I suggest 
here is no repetition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Member for Regina Elphinstone. Without having the 
opportunity to go through the pages as the Minister of Justice indicated, I would say this, 
that no doubt the hon. member is having some problem. He has indicated a little earlier 
that he has spoken for quite some time. And I have been watching the monitor, and he has 
been having trouble with repetition earlier on. So I simply am drawing this to the 
attention of the hon. member for Regina North, that while you may be finding it 
somewhat difficult now not to repeat yourself, you’re going to have to pay a little closer 
attention and make every attempt not to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Speaker in the chair on two occasions, not 
more than 15 minutes ago when I raised the question — I want to bring it to your 
attention because you were not here — and at that point in time the Deputy Speaker 
addressed to the hon. member rule 25(2) . . . the Deputy Speaker raised to — and the 
Clerks were up at the Speaker’s — raised to the hon. member rule 25(2) and cautioned 
that member that if he repeated, if he repeated that they would have to take the necessary 
step and ask him to discontinue. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that earlier this day when the member 
from Weyburn was speaking, I listened closely while the member . . . 
 



An Hon. Member: — You weren’t in here. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I was in here and I listened to him talk a great deal about the NDP 
federal leadership and many other issues, a very broad-ranging debate, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe that hon. members have had their . . . Having 
listened to the arguments . . . I’m just going to once more caution the member for Quill 
Lake. I’m just going to once more repeat my ruling, that the hon. member will have to be 
very, very cautious and careful that he doesn’t repeat himself. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member for Kindersley raised a point of order about repetition. 
You ruled on it. Before the member could even speak again, he made another point of 
order which was exactly the same. If that’s going to be allowed, we could get up and 
make points of order for the next six hours and never get the speech completed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe what we’ll do now is proceed with the hon. 
member’s debate. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you for your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I believe I was having a little 
difficulty a little earlier on in my speech, but I think I’m on track now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — As Hansard will show, as the record, even for the member for Kindersley, 
will show, I was speaking of something I had not, nor had any one of my colleagues 
mentioned earlier in this debate. I resent being harassed and continually interrupted. 
When I moved on . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — When I had moved on, and my intention is to continue moving on a little 
further, but I was asking whether the Premier had faith in Saskatchewan, whether the 
Premier of this province thinks that the citizens are worthy of his attention, are worthy 
and able to control our future. 
 
Because if he is, I also asked if he was expecting to be the Premier after the next election. 
I’m not coming from, well call an election right now, but if he is convinced he can pull 
this rabbit out of the hat, if he’s convinced he’ll become Premier, then I ask him simply to 
table this legislation, just set it aside because they have never once campaigned on the 
privatization of Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Trew: — So my argument is, set this legislation aside, run the next election with that 
being one of the issues — and I assure the Premier we would make it a dominant issue — 
make that one of the next election issues. And then, I don’t care, you could wait until 
your term is up, but call the election and run on the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, run on the privatization of the power corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and then you might as well just keep on running because you’ll be so 
badly rejected by the people that you won’t want to show your face here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the government have, I believe, used the argument about 
return on equity. If not the government, then certainly the Institute for Saskatchewan 
Enterprise have used the argument revolving around return equity, their argument being 
that in recent years the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has not had a satisfactory 
return on equity. 
 
That may well be, but there are two points I wish to make. One was made by my 
colleague for Moose Jaw South, so I won’t belabour it, but that point is the recent years 
mismanagement should be laid where that mismanagement belongs, and that’s at the feet 
of the present government. They keep . . . seven, more than seven years after they were 
elected, they keep saying: oh, it’s the NDP’s fault. Well it doesn’t wash any more, if it 
ever did — long since doesn’t wash. 
 
The second point I wish to make on the point of return of equity is that if you were to use 
the guide-lines that the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise and the Conservative 
government use, I think you would be very, very hard-pressed to find even a handful of 
farmers in Saskatchewan who should still be operating their family farms because the 
return on equity is inadequate. The return on equity . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell the truth. 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Cut Knife-Lloyd says, tell the truth. We’ve got farm 
foreclosures going on at a record rate in this province — record rate — by the thousands, 
and he says, tell the truth. We have farm legislation that New Democrats forced the 
government to bring forward, and we passed it the same day. And now they just want to 
deal with potash. Now they just want to deal with potash. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to see under rule 25(2) how farm legislation 
has any relevance to the potash debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on that point of order I think he was responding to the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloyd who was yelling from his seat. Also I find it interesting, 
the minister from Weyburn who talked at great length about the NDP federal leadership, 
would be now the one to be critical about staying on topic on potash. 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Having listened to the hon. member’s point of order and 
notwithstanding the arguments of the member from Regina Elphinstone, the point of 
order is well taken. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Quill Lakes, if he has any comments to make relative 
to the role of Chair, I advise him to do it in the proper manner. What is your point of 
order? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The point of order is the consistency and respect to have the member 
from Weyburn stand in this House to call points of order, when this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, we never interfered with him. You called him to order once. His entire . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member is debating the ruling of the Chair. That 
is . . . Order. That is not a valid point of order and it is out of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m going to also remind the member for Regina Elphinstone that 
he restrain himself. Remarks directed towards the Chair are not going to be tolerated, and 
if you have a problem, you know the proper route to follow. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Using the same arguments that the Institute for 
Saskatchewan Enterprise uses and the government uses, farmers and PCS should both be 
sold. That’s the tie-in, the same thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to the comments briefly that the member for Weyburn 
made with one minute of 2 o’clock. At that time, the member for Weyburn said the New 
Democratic opposition doesn’t even realize that this debate is about fertilizer. It’s not a 
direct quote, but that’s the gist of what he was saying. This debate is about fertilizer, and 
very close to 2 o’clock today he said . . . and none of them over there know it. 
 
Well I just want to take a moment to point out that on my first intervention, July 4, I said, 
and I quote: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join the great fertilizer debate tonight. 
 

First sentence — fertilizer. My second entrance, the very next day, July 5, my first 
sentence: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, colleagues. It’s again my pleasure to join 
the great fertilizer debate . . . 
 



I’ve only one more and it won’t take long. Then on July 6, again my first sentence, Mr. 
Speaker, I said, and I quote: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s again my pleasure to join in this great fertilizer 
debate yet another time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — If we seem to be a tad repetitious at times, it’s because we don’t seem to be 
getting through. We have had numerous speakers on my side of the legislature talking 
about fertilizer, talking about potash, and yet we have government cabinet ministers not 
realizing that what we are talking about is fertilizer, potash, and the control of that potash 
— who will ultimately have control; who will benefit from the ownership of that largest 
resource, natural resource, this province has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is my, I believe, my last new point and I will be very brief because this 
takes a bit of a bow, but it’s an article that I found in Grainews, and the headline, and I 
know this is going to seem strange, “What to do if your tenant damages your property.” 
And of course it’s talking about farm land and it talks about voluntary waste and 
permissive waste. 
 
Now the government of the day is merely like a tenant; you have temporary custody of 
the province. When we form the government after the next election, the premier, the 
member for Riversdale, will have but temporary custody. Whether he is premier for 4 
years, 8, 12, 16, 20, or 28 years or longer, it is but a temporary tenure, a very temporary 
tenure. 
 
And so what we’re faced with, Mr. Speaker, is a situation where the government wants to 
fundamentally change a vehicle that we can use to finance goods and services for the 
people of Saskatchewan. We can use the . . . for example, last year the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan had a $106 million profit. Well we can use some of those 
profits to pay for things such as the children’s dental program and the prescription drug 
plan, and I could go on and on, but that sets the drift, and I’m not hereby trying to waste a 
bunch of time. 
 
I’m simply pointing out that’s one of the major vehicles that a New Democratic 
government will have to fund the things that we will be wanting to provide to and for the 
people of our great province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, yes, in conclusion, the question I guess is why is it that 
the next premier and those of us on his team are so adamantly opposed to this potash 
privatization? 
 
(1645) 
 



Why is it? And it can best be summed up with the fact we want to maintain that control 
and ownership and the benefits of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan for all the 
people of Saskatchewan, not for the multinationals, not for out-of-province and out-of-
country rich, wealthy investors, but for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We want the revenue opportunities to be here. We want for the next government, whether 
it’s a New Democrat administration, a Liberal administration, or something else —we 
know it’s not going to be a Conservative one —but whatever, whoever takes over this 
badly in debt province will, of necessity, have to have as many tools, as many levers to 
the economy at its disposal as it possibly can, because we see after seven years, we see a 
deficit, and a gross redeficit, if you like, of $4 billion, and we see an ever growing debt 
on the Crown corporation side. 
 
So we’re looking for where can we extract money other than by jacking up liquor, 
cigarette and personal income taxes. Where would a New Democratic government get its 
funding from? And the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is one of the major players 
in that financing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — We want, Mr. Speaker, to protect the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
because of the jobs that will continue to stay right here in Saskatchewan. We want to 
have the ability to expand minds, not at the whim of some corporation owned somewhere 
else, not at their whim, but we want to be able to expand it for the reasons of economics 
for Saskatchewan, not for a corporation based in New York — for Saskatchewan. 
 
And because of that ability to expand with decisions made right here in good old 
Saskatchewan, we can create jobs in the construction or expansion of existing mines, 
construction of new mines, expansion of existing mines. We can create jobs so that 
people like my neighbour would no longer have to travel to Ontario for work. He’s an 
ironworker, and I was talking to him when he was home not so long ago. He tries to get 
home for one weekend of the month, and it must truly be a depressing thing to have his 
family here while he is in Ontario, but simply so he can keep a roof. That neighbour 
doesn’t want to leave Saskatchewan though, for some of the reasons I talked about 
earlier. 
 
Anyway we need to have the ability to expand potash mines with decisions made here so 
that we can put people like my neighbour across the street . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to once more have to draw the hon. member’s attention to 
repetition. He indicated himself that he has spoken at considerable length, and that would 
make it difficult for most people. However, it is the hon. member’s responsibility that if 
he chooses to speak for that long, it’s his responsibility then to be able to speak in such a 
manner as to stay within the bounds of the rules. And now he’s getting quite repetitious 
and I want to bring that to his attention, that he must watch how he advances his 
arguments. That’s your responsibility. 



 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m in no way trying to challenge you, but I would like to ask 
a question. If you choose not to respond to it, that of course is your right. But I was 
talking of jobs and the ability of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to create jobs 
with Saskatchewan decisions, and I truly, sir, do not recollect having broached the subject 
of Saskatchewan decision making with regards to the potash corporation and job creation 
before. Have I, sir? 
 
The Speaker: — I would just like to say that in the last few minutes, your arguments have 
tended to be repetitious notwithstanding that perhaps one isolated point might not have 
been. I’m drawing your attention to the fact, as I said earlier, that you’re becoming quite 
repetitious, and to be careful of that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought I was moving along at a reasonable 
clip, but I will try and be more careful. I guess it boils down to things like revenue 
sharing and the ability of Saskatchewan to share, of the province to revenue share with 
urban and rural municipalities. And where does the money come from? Potash again is a 
big one. 
 
It boils down to us keeping a head office with roughly a hundred people in it. It involves 
research and development which will be naturally stationed at the University of 
Saskatchewan based right here in Saskatchewan, in our province. It makes all kinds of 
sense, Mr. Speaker, for those farm kids to have the opportunities to be involved in 
research and development and perhaps to find a future in some arm of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening to the member speak all this afternoon, 
all this afternoon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Martin: — I’ve been listening to the member from Regina North speak about this all 
afternoon. He has raised the same issues that he’s raised earlier this day, and I would like 
to ask the Speaker to deal with it in the proper fashion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I say by way of general background that some of these 
points of order really approach being vexatious, and that is, not put forward for the point 
of raising a point of order but for the point of harassing someone. The member from 
Regina North spoke, it is true, about the general subject of the head office, but he was 
talking about jobs, the good jobs that are lost. He’s now talking about something very 
different, and that is research and development, which are always associated with a head 
office, bring to the province. The two are quite separate, the jobs and the technical 
research and development. He did not talk about research and development. The hon. 
members opposite, from their vehemence will which their views have been put forward, 
they perhaps are being sincere. So maybe I should withdraw the comment about these 



things being vexatious. But the member from Regina North is now on a subject which I 
have not heard this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order, and in response to the point of order I 
would only say this, I would only say this. There might be some argument about a 
particular job mentioned or not mentioned. I would say that I know the hon. member is 
having some difficulty, and I’m going to give him another opportunity because I wish 
him to have the opportunity to speak. But once more, I draw to his attention that in his 
remarks it’s his responsibility now to take extra care that he doesn’t repeat himself, 
because that has been drawn to his attention several times. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve not spoken about the potash equipment that 
has been sold and then leased back, and I don’t recall any of my colleagues. They may 
have, and if they have I apologize to you, sir, but I am truly unaware of this point having 
been raised previously. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s the point of order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I believe yesterday the question was . . . was it earlier today? 
Earlier today the question was brought to your attention regarding the use of telephones, 
as well as lap-top computers in the Legislative Assembly. I believe at that time, as well, 
Mr. Speaker, if I remember correctly, you will, I am sure, confirm what you ruled, that 
my recollection is that you ruled in the absence of a specific reference in the rules for the 
members of this Legislative Assembly, that until that was specifically addressed that you 
would not permit the use of those telephones or lap-top computers or have them present 
within the Legislative Assembly Chambers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just following the point of order raised by the member from Morse, as the 
member from Regina North stood to his feet and began to speak, he was interrupted by 
the Minister of Finance’s telephone call which was ringing in this Legislative Assembly. 
The Minister of Finance jumped up with his telephone in hand and dashed out of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that in light of your ruling which was made just earlier 
this day, within the last small number of hours as a matter of fact, that you would address 
this and make a ruling regarding the conduct of the Minister of Finance. 
 
My concerns as well, Mr. Speaker, is that he Minister of Finance clearly understood your 
ruling and is defying a ruling made by yourself, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, this shows you how frivolous 
the NDP are, and how little respect they have, that not only do they wish to waste their 
time but all of the government members’ time. 
 



It also shows you their disregard for modern technology, how far back in the past they 
are, and I submit that the point of order is frivolous. There is no rule against electronic 
devices . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have listened to the point of order, and quite frankly I 
was so intent on watching the member for Regina North and listening to him that I 
certainly wasn’t watching what’s going on there. 
 
However, having . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh no, you don’t watch them. He broke the rules. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Quill Lakes, he is once more challenging the Chair, for 
the second time this afternoon. Now before I deal with the point of order, I’m going to 
ask you to rise and apologize in the proper manner. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry. 
 
The Speaker: — Now, to deal with the point of order, I was intent on listening to the 
member’s speech; I did not see it. 
 
However, having said that, I ruled this morning that those devices or any other similar 
devices, in the absence of rule, a specific rule, are not to be used in this House. 
 
And I am once more reaffirming that rule, that members should co-operate and not bring 
those devices into the House. And I’m reaffirming the rule this morning that was made. 
And I expect members to abide by that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying before I was so . . . well, 
interrupted by the sound of the phone call, I was talking about potash equipment. And I 
was wondering why it is that when a corporation such as the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan owns equipment to mine potash, owns it outright, how in the world it 
could possibly make sense to sell that to an investor from Ontario and then lease that 
same equipment back, the equipment that was down 3,000-or-so feet below the surface of 
Saskatchewan. The equipment in the mine never even had to be shut off, and yet the 
ownership changes. 
 
How is that in any way, shape, or form anything other than Tory wizardry of finances? 
Small wonder that PCS could make money every year under the Blakeney New 
Democrats and lose money most years under the Tories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Small wonder, Mr. Speaker . . . 



 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


