


















































June 19, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 19, 1989 
 

2013 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 35 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is George MacKay, who is the vice-president of finance 
and administration with the research council, and on my left is 
Ron McGrath, who is the comptroller. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, can 
you explain why payments to the property management 
corporation for the Saskatchewan Research Council increased 
by 24 per cent, and, in this same spending estimate that you 
present to the Legislative Assembly, payments for research 
programs increase only 13 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well the reason for the large 
expenditure to property management is because the research 
council moved into the new wing which added a tremendous 
amount of area to their facility and something that was very 
badly needed so that they could centralize more of their 
operation, part of which was the bovine blood lab that was 
moved over from other facilities on the campus. That’s the main 
reason for the much larger increase. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And how much floor space did the research 
council have last year as compared to this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The area was increased, Mr. 
Chairman, by approximately 30,000 square feet. The total area 
that the research council has now is 15,469 square metres. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’ll be honest, Mr. Minister. It concerns me 
that you spend this kind of money in payments to the property 
management corporation. You do this also in your own 
Department of Science and Technology. We see the same thing 
happening in all government departments, where there are 
massive increases in payments to the property management 
corporation, and program costs get cut. This is a consistent 
trajectory. And I realize that there is new floor space at the 
research council, but I think it’s a cause for concern. And I urge 
you to look toward making the . . . now that you have facilities 
for the research council, that you look to increasing your 
program or your research expenditures, so you can begin to 
capitalize on the money you’ve invested in building. 
 
Under the funding for the research council, a portion of it 
comes from contracts, and a portion of it comes from provincial 
government grants. Can you tell me what percentage of the 
contracts, the contractual revenue, is derived from contracts 
with the private sector, and what percentage is derived from 
contracts with the public sector. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Two questions that the member

asked, Mr. Chairman: the one he’s concerned about, it’s not as 
much money or not as large an increase going into research. 
He’s looking really only at the grants from the provincial 
government. I would point out that there’s also money from the 
fee for service, money that’s raised from contracts, some of 
which also goes for research. So it could well be that there’s 
much more money being spent on research as a result of 
increases in contracts. 
 
The breakdown roughly is about 50 per cent would be from 
industry contracts, and the other 50 per cent is split just about 
25-25 for the provincial government and federal contracts. So 
the provincial grants cover about a quarter of their total budget. 
The rest, then, is fee for service with the federal government, 
plus grants of 25 per cent, and the other 50 per cent would be 
fee for service on contracts with private companies. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And how does this compare with the previous 
year or two? What kind of trajectory or similarity is there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The provincial grant from our 
government is up about 13 per cent, I believe. The industry . . . 
fee for service from industry is up quite a bit. The federal side 
of it, though, is down somewhat this year to what it was last 
year. 
 
Our grant is up, I think, in the neighbourhood of $600,000, and 
that has been designated, I believe, 300,000 for CAD/CAM 
(Computer Aided Drafting/Computer Aided Mapping) service, 
which is provided in helping companies with tech transfer. And 
the other $300,000 for fermentation capabilities. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Your grant may be up $600,000. I’m 
wondering though, how does the percentage of contractual work 
undertaken by the Government of Saskatchewan relate to the 
last two years of contractual work undertaken by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. I’m not talking about the 
provincial government grants, but provincial government 
contractual work. What’s the comparison there for the last 
couple of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The last two years, Mr. Chairman, 
have been very similar. Now there was a decrease from a couple 
of years before that, the main reason being the change with 
regard to the heavy oil research that was being done here in 
Regina. There was a change there because the previous 
agreement between the federal and provincial government was 
done away with — well actually it expired — and prior to that 
period of time it was treated as a fee rather than a grant. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And so what would the percentage be of 
contractual work by the Government of Saskatchewan agencies 
for, let’s say, last year? Am I to take it it would be 
approximately 25 per cent? And for two years ago it would 
have been what per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — For the last two years, it would 
amount . . . The fees from government departments, agencies, 
and so on, would have been 13 per cent last year, 14 per cent 
this year, of the total budget — total budget being in the 
neighbourhood of $16.3 million; for 
  



 
June 19, 1989 

2014 
 

the current year, projection $17.2 million. So you’re looking at 
it being up a bit this ’88-89 over the year before, but about 13, 
14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — In the annual report for ’87-88, I note that 
under the revenue side of figures, the top of page 25, the 
provincial government grant for general purpose and for 
employment assistance programs are non-existent. Can you 
explain why that is? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The first one there, Mr. Chairman, 
the employment assistance program, that was for grads and 
university — an assistance type of program which was phased 
out. It was initially, I understand, a two-year program. It was 
phased out and that would have . . . The employment assistance 
program of ’87, the figure that you see there, would have been 
the last year of the program. And as far as the second one, the 
36,000, there was no interest earned for 1988. So those were the 
two that were affected. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — The 36,000, you say there was no interest 
earned. That doesn’t make sense in that it’s opposite the 
employment assistance programs. Could you explain that? 
Perhaps I just am not following. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — If you line them up there you’ll see 
that the interest line is $36,434. The one above that is the 
employment assistance program. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you very much. I see and I’ve got it 
now. 
 
And the employment assistance . . . Yes the employment 
assistance program is because, you say, of the . . . not graduates 
in university, I believe you said, but students in industry, 
graduates in industry program. Is that not correct? 
 
Yes. And I think it’s very important to note, Mr. Minister, that 
this is one of the most important programs, in my view, that the 
research council could be engaged in, is namely supporting 
students in industry, and graduate students in industry over the 
summer term or over a longer term basis. I say this particularly 
when it’s a known fact, at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), that 75 to 80 per cent of the engineering and the 
science graduates from the University of Saskatchewan, have to 
leave this province to find employment. 
 
Therein is the logic for a program such as the one that you had 
at the research council, and was slashed in the spring of ’87 
with all the other cut-backs to the drug program and the dental 
program and everything else. 
 
And I urge you to reconsider instituting this program. I know 
it’s expensive. In the Public Accounts for 1985-86, the last year 
for which we find figures, it indicates that some $1.8 million 
was spent on the students in industry, graduates in industry 
program. But you’d be hard pressed, in my view, to find a better 
use for that kind of money than to employ it in the service of 
science and technology with young students. And I’m 
wondering if you’ve given any thought to reinstituting that kind 
of program in the 

research council. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well in the first case, Mr. Chairman, 
I wouldn’t agree with the member’s figures on 75 per cent of 
those people have to leave the province to get jobs. I think that 
there’s lots of opportunity in this province as far as our 
graduates from university, particularly in the advanced 
technology sector. 
 
With regard to the programs, there’s no doubt about it, the 
member makes a good point that it is a valuable program. But I 
would also add that the Department of Science and Technology 
has, as you know, picked up on the SHAD Valley program and 
we are putting more money into that; we’ve got $40,000 
designated to that this year. We would expect to have about 20 
students in that program in the province this year, about 10 of 
which we’re sponsoring; the other 10 being sponsored by 
industry. And the SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) is 
sponsoring one of those students again this year. They’ve been 
in the program for two or three years. 
 
And another thing: you can’t overlook the fact that the research 
council does employ in the neighbourhood of 15 students, 
summer students, from university then, to work there from 
when they finish university in April on until classes start in the 
fall. 
 
So they still have students involved in the program, and Science 
and Tech has picked up in the other area and certainly will 
continue on that. We expect to expand on that program each 
year, not only our own involvement, but also the involvement 
of more companies, so that within the next couple of years we 
can get it up to 30 so that we can offer that right here in 
Saskatchewan at the University of Saskatchewan. Right now we 
have to rely on the University of Calgary or the University of 
Manitoba to do the theoretical part. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I still maintain that you had a valuable 
program right in your own backyard at the University of 
Saskatchewan at the Saskatchewan Research Council, and you 
let it go. And now you ship people down to Ontario for the 
SHAD program. And that’s good, but I don’t think it’s nearly as 
good as the kind of program you allowed to slip away in the 
research council. 
 
And you say it is a valuable program; I say it was a valuable 
program, because it’s past tense. It is no longer; it doesn’t exist. 
You cut it. I would urge you to reinstate it. 
 
I’m wondering, also looking at the figures on the expenditure 
side of the annual report, page 25, why payments for research 
grants have continued to tumble since they reached a high of 
$117,000 in 1983. How do you justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Okay. Mr. Chairman, the reason for 
that, the member opposite tries to tell something that isn’t really 
the case at all, that the grants on research are being cut back. 
Actually there is a change that’s being made here and that if you 
look at a figure above that, under the category of supplies and 
technical services, the SRC are changing from a policy whereby 
they gave research grants to now contracting services  



 
June 19, 1989 

2015 
 

with the university. 
 
So you, in going down through those columns, didn’t make any 
mention of the fact that the amount of money for supplies and 
technical services is increased by $500,000. So there is a 
substantial amount of money that’s been added in there, and 
that’s because of the change of the way in which programs are 
being delivered. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And one wonders how they’re being 
delivered, Mr. Minister: what percentage is being spent on 
supplies; what is being spent on technical services; what kinds 
of technical services? When one sees research grants, ordinarily 
one understands that to mean that grants are made to individuals 
to pursue research. You may well be right, but I don’t trust you, 
and I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan trust you with 
your numbers. 
 
So I’ll just leave it at that. I’ll ask you another question about 
numbers and why your grants in aid have remained frozen the 
last two years now at $110,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I don’t know where the 
member is getting the figures for grants in aid. That’s what 
we’re talking about here with research grants. It’s gone from 
97,940 to 96,069. And I find it just a little bit appalling some of 
the comments that you make about some of the figures here and 
the fact that the officials from the research council and all of the 
staff at the research council, I think, are doing a tremendous 
job. 
 
If you consider the changes that have taken place at the research 
council over the last five to 10 years, they’ve been tremendous. 
We’ve got a group there that are working as a very valuable 
team providing a lot of support to industry and companies in 
this province. They’re also providing a lot of support, contract 
work for the university and, I think, a very good relationship 
has been developed between our research institutions such as 
the research council, the university, the advanced technology 
sector, and certainly with government. 
 
So I think for you to stand in your place and talk about the fact 
that some of these things are going backwards and that the 
people of the province are not going to believe them is just utter 
nonsense. The people at the research council are providing a 
very valuable service in this province, and as I indicated to you, 
they have upped the amount of money that they’re doing on 
contracts, which again is research based. 
 
We don’t always have to have work being provided on the basis 
of a grant. I mean, you seem to think there’s something wrong 
with people providing service on a type of a contract basis 
where they are paid a fee for the work that they do, instead of 
the idea of always just giving them a grant without really caring 
whether anything is given in return. So unless you have some 
other information there, what you’re talking about, grants in 
aid, is the research grants. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well there appears to be a bit of confusion 
over those numbers. I did wonder why it was listed as being 
96,000 in the annual report and then on page 25, and then on 
page . . . Earlier in the same annual 

report, it’s listed as being 110 . . . No — on page 23 it’s listed 
as being $110,000. We’ll leave that; it’s nit-picking. 
 
I’m wondering if you can tell me what kind of strategic plan the 
Saskatchewan Research Council has for the upcoming years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The last board meeting of the 
research council, not too long ago, where they talked about 
strategy, the main idea was that they would look at something 
that was Saskatchewan sensitive, meeting the needs that were 
out there in the province. And I’d like to just give you an 
example of some of the ones that they are into, and will 
continue to be into. 
 
If you look at the CAD/CAM system, the type of support that 
they’re providing for industry in the province — and I indicated 
that $300,000 has been added to this year’s budget to assist 
them in that, because over the last year somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 122 different Saskatchewan manufacturers 
have been aided by this particular program. 
 
The bovine blood lab, of course, is one that was moved here 
from Ottawa and that’s providing a very valuable service. 
 
But I would also point out a few other areas. The remote 
sensing centre — this is providing valuable service as far as 
different areas are concerned, whether it’s in the area of 
agriculture, forestry, or mineral and exploration. And now that’s 
something that isn’t just happening for this year; that will be 
continuing. 
 
We’ve also got radon testing. This is something that’s very, 
very important today. A service is being provided by the 
research council. So if one were to look at a strategy that 
they’re going to be employing over the next year and beyond 
that, certainly they will continue providing that service, whether 
it be for contractors or home owners. 
 
Another invaluable area, certainly, is helping rural 
municipalities, and their search for gravel and sand that’s 
needed in the construction of roads and asphalting. Now this is 
something of course . . . This is what I mean by something 
that’s Saskatchewan sensitive. 
 
(1930) 
 
There are many needs out there that are being developed all the 
time in an ongoing way. The creation of the Saskatchewan 
fermentation facility, that’s something that’s needed now to go 
along with the research greenhouses that SEDCO is just in the 
process of completing. Because we look at agriculture 
biotechnology as being a very important industry that can 
develop in this particular province, and when you combine 
some of those facilities it’s going to bring in a lot of new 
companies from outside the province and going to provide an 
invaluable service — so, in answer to your question, something 
that is Saskatchewan sensitive. 
 
We know that with drought in the last couple of years there’s 
been a tremendous demand for services in that area, and a 
problem that they’re dealing with, and there’s been a lot of 
publicity about it lately, is work that they’re  



 
June 19, 1989 

2016 
 

doing on the improvement of water supplies in rural 
Saskatchewan by trying to reduce algae in farm dug-outs and 
ponds. Again, that’s the strategy that they’re working on right 
now; that’s the plan to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does there exist a strategic plan, Mr. 
Minister, or is it just the plan that you’ve indicated now 
verbally, off the top of your head? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — There is a very definite strategic 
plan, and some of the things that I’ve just outlined to you would 
be the types of work that you would find within that plan. The 
research council has always had a strategic plan. They spend a 
tremendous amount of time developing it, but these are the 
types of things that they include in their plan; things that are 
Saskatchewan sensitive. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could I secure a copy of the current strategic 
plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — In view of the fact that many of the 
projects that are carried on at the research council are of a very 
sensitive nature, that is something that would have to be cleared 
through the board before you could obtain a copy of the 
strategic plan. But certainly there’s nothing wrong with you 
making that request through the appropriate channels, whether 
it’s through the president, Jim Hutch, or through the chairman 
of the board. But that’s the route that you would have to go. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, in the Speech from the Throne, 
mention was made of your government allocating moneys in 
this most recent budget for water quality management studies. 
Will Sask Research Council be doing any of that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The research council is involved, 
and has been for some time, in the area of water quality. In fact, 
quite a number of people in the council are working in that 
particular area, not only on quality of water but also geologists 
working on the quantity of it, and different sources — working, 
I would presume, with towns and villages, providing data for 
them. There’s been a tremendous call in that particular area, 
certainly in the last couple of years when it’s been so dry. But 
this again is some of the work that the council would be doing 
on a fee for service basis. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And to answer my question, when your 
government’s Speech from the Throne indicated that it would 
be allocating moneys in this most recent budget to implement a 
water quality management system, will Saskatchewan Research 
Council be doing any of that work? We know that it’s involved 
in water management. That’s why I asked the question whether 
it would be doing any of this particular water quality 
management work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The main mandate in so far as water 
in the province is concerned is the water corporation, as the 
member probably knows. And there’s no doubt that the research 
council is involved with contracts with the water corporation 
and also through the Department of the Environment. So 
certainly in answer to 

your question, I’m sure that they are involved probably now and 
certainly will be in the future. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And can the minister tell us how much 
money the government is looking at allocating, has allocated in 
the most recent provincial budget, for water quality 
management system studies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — An answer for that question: you 
would have to direct your question to the Minister of the 
Environment who is responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — One wonders, again, what kind of answer 
we’ll get from that minister when we’ve had no indication to 
date that anything will be done. At this point I have no further 
questions. I do have some more but I’ll turn it over to my 
colleague. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to ask you a few questions regarding the work 
being done by SRC in regards to research and development in 
terms of water management in the province, either under 
contract through the Saskatchewan Water Corporation or to the 
Department of the Environment. 
 
The first area that I’d like to ask you about concerns the 
research done into the aquifers that underlie the southern part of 
Saskatchewan. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, was there any 
work done by the Saskatchewan Research Council prior to the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, with the supposed blessing 
of the Minister of the Environment, for the drilling of a number 
of wells in the Macoun area in order to fill up the boundary 
reservoir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — To our knowledge, we don’t know 
of the contracts that have been done in that particular area or in 
other areas of the province. Again that would come under the 
jurisdiction of the water corporation. The work that is done on a 
fee for service basis by the council, as you can well understand, 
in many cases is confidential. And the only way that any of that 
information could be released is if the client gives permission to 
release it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you direct your 
question then to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Sorry, Mr. Minister. I’m directing the question 
to you in charge of the Saskatchewan Research Council. On fee 
for service basis, there are clients that approach the council and 
ask them to undertake certain jobs, and undertaking certain jobs 
the resources of the province, through the research council, are 
expended. So the proper person to answer the questions, I 
would submit, sir, is you. 
 
Once again I will ask you this question: were you, Mr. Minister, 
or are your officials aware of any studies undertaken for the 
province of Saskatchewan, either through the Department of the 
Environment or the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, of any 
studies done regarding the aquifer or hydrology or any of the 
problems that are emerging in terms of tapping into ground 
water sources in southern Saskatchewan? Has the SRC 
undertaken any contract studies for that, and particularly  



 
June 19, 1989 

2017 
 

with relation to the Macoun well drilling project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — With regard to the member’s 
question, Mr. Chairman, you’ve got to keep in mind that the 
research council works probably in the neighbourhood of 4,000 
different clients. A lot of the work which is done by the 
research council is of a confidential nature. You indicate that 
certainly the government is involved. We pay about 25 per cent 
of their total operating costs; the rest of the money they get 
from other sources, basically through fee for service. 
 
As I indicated earlier, for the most part, that’s the information 
that you can ask the minister responsible for the water 
corporation. But what I will do for you in this regard, is that we 
would have to go back and talk to some of the scientists that are 
involved in that particular area to see if in fact that they have 
done work in the Macoun area. But the people here don’t have 
that information tonight, and we would have to question the 
scientists, and then in fact see whether or not they can release 
any of that information. But we’ll check into it for you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, but I find it rather 
incredulous is that you are standing here tonight saying that 
officials that are coming here to the legislature to answer 
questions concerning the work that is done through you don’t 
have a list of the projects that were undertaken by the 
Saskatchewan Research Council over the past year. I find that 
incredible. I also find it incredulous, sir, and quite fact, I don’t 
. . . quite frankly don’t believe what I’m hearing when you say 
that. 
 
Are you saying the SRC does not have a list of projects that it 
undertook and during the past year on behalf of whatever 
clients, particularly the province of Saskatchewan? And I don’t 
think that your attempt to hide behind the mask of 
confidentiality when it comes to that Minister of the 
Environment or that minister, the same minister in charge of the 
water corporation, is going to hold, quite frankly — no pun 
intended — any water around here. 
 
You, I submit, Mr. Minister, have perfect access to the list of 
projects undertaken by the SRC. And will you tell us, referring 
to that list, precisely whether or not the work that I asked earlier 
on was done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my comment 
to the member opposite, if he knew much about research, and I 
presume that he does, the majority of research that is done is of 
a confidential nature. And when we’re talking about 4,000 
different clients, there is no way that a list is going to be 
provided to you of the clients that the research council is doing 
work for; that is of a confidential nature. Can you imagine the 
difficult time that the research council would have getting 
contracts from anybody if they knew that the list was going to 
be made public? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, is absolutely . . . That 
answer holds no water whatsoever. That answer holds no water. 
I asked you in particular regarding the Minister of the 
Environment, that same minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 

Now if you’re engaged in the same kind of cover-up operation 
that he was engaged in, in regards to the whole question of 
ground water in southern Saskatchewan in which he 
deliberately suppressed information regarding the pumping of 
ground water to fill the proposed Rafferty dam, thereby 
endangering the water supply for farmers and stock growers in 
that area . . . Are you saying that you’re engaged in that same 
kind of cover-up? 
 
There is no way that you can stand here in the House and try to 
submit that there’s . . . or try to put forward the proposition that 
there’s confidentiality in regard to that particular project. 
 
I ask you specifically whether or not the SRC engaged in that 
kind of research prior to the drilling of the wells which, I may 
say, Mr. Minister, has caused hardships for farmers in the 
Estevan-Hitchcock area, in particular, and are you telling us 
here tonight that you’re going to continue some kind of charade 
and cover-up under the guise of confidentiality? Either answer 
the question or just admit to the House that you either don’t 
know what the heck you’re about, or you’re trying to pull the 
blinds over the activities of the Government of Saskatchewan 
— an activity, sir, that you and the other members of the front 
bench of this government are well known for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t seem 
. . . or I don’t think that I need anyone with the lack of 
credibility that that member has, standing up in this legislature 
and lecturing me what I should be doing and what I shouldn’t 
be doing. 
 
You’re opposed to the Rafferty project and have been from day 
one. But if you think that there’s a research council across this 
country or anywhere else that is going divulge all of the 
information with regard to research projects that they are 
carrying on, then you are really out in left field. 
 
So your question is out of order. I’ve indicated to you that we 
can check with some of the scientists and find out the specific 
type of information if you’re really interested in it. But I very 
much doubt that anybody is going to provide that information. 
 
So some of the remarks that you make are really just a little bit 
ridiculous. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you also announced in your 
most recent provincial budget that the government will 
undertake a research study of the impact of the greenhouse 
effect on Saskatchewan in order to develop a plan of action to 
mitigate against any negative effects. Will the Saskatchewan 
Research Council be undertaking any of that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, there is a lot of work 
being done there by one Elaine Wheaton. She’s a member of 
the task force, I believe it’s on water, land, and soil 
conservation. She’s also going to be involved with projects, I 
believe, with the Department of the Environment, some of the 
areas to do with remote sensing with regard to crops, surface 
water, forestry, and range  



 
June 19, 1989 

2018 
 

land. So we do have some very good experts at the SRC that are 
involved in that area. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’m not questioning whether you have very 
good experts; I know you have that. That’s why I’m asking, Mr. 
Minister, if the experts or the staff at the Saskatchewan 
Research Council will be doing some of this work. Can you tell 
me how much you’ve allocated in this most recent budget for 
your studies of the greenhouse effect on Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well it’s not a matter of money 
that’s being allocated in the research council. The money is 
going to come here probably through the Department of the 
Environment, and that will be on a fee for service basis. So I 
certainly can’t say at this particular time how many contracts 
that this particular group are going to be involved with. We 
certainly don’t allocate money from our budget in SRC to do 
that. It comes through fee for service. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’m a little bit surprised, Mr. Minister, 
tonight, that you can’t tell me essentially anything about some 
of the scientific activities that your government has proposed in 
its budget. 
 
You have a water quality management study announced in the 
most recent provincial budget and you can’t tell me anything 
about that. You can’t tell me how much money has even been 
allocated for it. You refer it to the Minister of the Environment. 
 
You have another study, announced in the same budget, of the 
greenhouse effect, and you’ve indicated that funds have been 
allocated for that study in this most recent budget. And yet you 
don’t know anything about that. You can’t tell us how much has 
been allocated. 
 
You can sure go to great lengths and produce documents like 
Challenges and Opportunities, which are supplementary 
information booklets to the provincial budget, and propagandize 
the Saskatchewan people on all of the wonderful things you’re 
going to do, but when it comes to telling us what it’s going to 
cost or who’s going to do it, you can’t even tell us that. And 
you’re the Minister of Science and Technology. Now how do 
you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well really, some of your questions 
are good but some of them are just a little bit ridiculous as well. 
Are you suggesting that the research council would be putting 
money in their budget for a fee for service basis that they’re 
going to be working on the greenhouse effect? These are 
contracts that they’re going to do for the Department of the 
Environment. 
 
If you take a look at the annual report, which you’ve been 
referring to, there’s a good outline in there in each case. If you 
look under aquatic biology, R&D (research and development) 
highlights, some of the type of work that’s being done there, 
and I would point out that during the past year, up to the end of 
March ’89, that about $1.8 million was spent in that particular 
area, whether it was aquatic biology, terrestrial ecology, 
archaeology, remote sensing, atmospheric processes, 
sedimentary resources — these all come into the very area that 
you’re talking 

about. 
 
So if you think there’s a specific figure in SRC’s budget for 
looking at the greenhouse effect, again, when you get to the 
Department of the Environment, maybe you need to ask the 
minister how much money is in the Department of the 
Environment this year for looking into the greenhouse effect 
and ways in which we can be countering some of the problems 
that are created by the changing greenhouse effect. We haven’t 
heard a heck of a lot about the greenhouse effect in the last 
while since it started raining. So I don’t know whether it’s not 
as important now or what, but . . . 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well you wouldn’t know whether it was 
important, Mr. Minister, given your past performance. I simply 
leave it at this, that I think it behoves you, as the Minister of 
Science and Technology, the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, to be able to tell us what kind 
of plan your government has with respect to its study of water 
quality management systems and the greenhouse effect, without 
having to defer it to the Minister of the Environment. Certainly 
he has something to do with it, but it sounds to me that you 
have absolutely no understanding, or interest in understanding 
or relating to, some of these questions that are very, very 
pertinent to Science and Technology and the research council. 
 
I only raise this because it’s the chairman of your board of 
directors for the Saskatchewan Research Council who, in this 
most recent annual report for ’87-88, indicates that one of the 
thrusts of the Saskatchewan Research Council activities has 
been directed to addressing the problems arising from the 
greenhouse effect and their influence on Saskatchewan 
agriculture. When it comes from your director, your chairman 
of the board of directors, and you can’t tell us anything about 
your plan, announced in your government’s budget, to study the 
greenhouse effect, I say, Mr. Minister, this is more hype from 
your Premier and your government, and you don’t have any 
plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I indicated that 
about 2, $1.8 million was in that particular area last year, but it 
covers a whole, wide range of areas. And I would think that 
probably this year there would be at least that amount of money 
spent there. 
 
But again I would remind the member that the amount of 
money that’s going to be spent in any particular area, out of a 
total budget of $16 million, is going to be determined by the 
number of contracts that SRC is going to have. So some of them 
are certainly dealing with the greenhouse effect, but again the 
Department of the Environment, in all probability, has money in 
its budget where they are going to be contracting with the 
research council to carry out some of this work for them. 
 
So we’ll be spending, at least, I’m sure, as much money or more 
than we did last year, but again the final figure depends on the 
contracts. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’d just like to say that some of 
the questioning that I’ve asked tonight gives me reason to be a 
little bit more concerned than I was about the research council 
than when we started. I don’t think you  



 
June 19, 1989 

2019 
 

appear to have a grasp of what’s going on there as it relates to 
your government’s larger plans, and I simply say, I find that 
very disappointing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — You may find it disappointing, but I 
have every confidence in the officials and the staff at the 
research council to carry on the good work that they’ve been 
doing in the past. And I’m sure that they will be dealing in an 
effective way with greenhouse effect, water quality, and other 
concerns that are raised throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Research Council 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 35 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council — Vote 66 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too 
would like to thank my officials for the work that they’ve done 
in preparing for these estimates, and I wish them continued 
success in the coming year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials for 
their time here tonight in helping to answer questions, and I’d 
like to express a particular thanks to the staff of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
I happen to believe that the Saskatchewan Research Council is 
one of the most efficient and effective agencies of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And I think that with some of 
the trends that we’ve seen in the past years with regard to core 
funding for the council since 1982, have not done justice to the 
staff that are at the council. And I’d simply want to assure them 
that when the government changes, Saskatchewan Research 
Council will be a very, very high priority of a New Democratic 
Government. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before we go into the 
adjourned debates, I would seek leave of the Assembly to move 
a number of motions into the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee. All these Bills have been agreed to between myself 
and the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 

Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of the following Bill be 
discharged and the Bill would be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills — Bill No. 17, An 
Act to amend The Change of Name Act. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kindersley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the the order for second reading of the following will 
be discharged and the Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills — Bill No. 26, An 
Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kindersley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of the following Bill be 
discharged and the Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills — Bill No. 28, An 
Act to amend The Psychiatric Nurses Act. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kindersley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of the following Bill be 
discharged and the Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills — Bill No. 36, An 
Act to incorporate The Wanuskewin Heritage Park. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kindersley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of the following Bill be 
discharged and the Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills — Bill No. 39, An 
Act to amend The Statute Law. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kindersley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of the following Bill be 
discharged and the Bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills — Bill No. 40, An 
Act to amend The Public Utilities  



 
June 19, 1989 

2020 
 

Easements Act. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you 
just sit there and listen now, Jack — it’ll be good. Thank you. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to take part in Bill No. 20, An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan — Mr. Deputy Speaker, reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, one of the best assets that 
we have in this province, and not just reorganization, but I say 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a privatization and the sell-off 
of this great asset. 
 
I want to address my remarks tonight, and my argument, to the 
members opposite. And I sincerely hope that some of the 
information that I present here tonight will convince them to 
change their mind and to pull Bill 20 as they did to pull the Bill 
to sell off Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I sincerely hope 
that you will do that. 
 
I want to, first of all, give you some history about the potash 
and just how important potash is to the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . If the member from Weyburn will sit down and be quiet, I 
will just give him a little bit of history as to how important this 
asset really is. Potash was first discovered in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in 1943. And in 1943 they were drilling for oil 
in this province and they discovered the large deposits of potash 
that we have underneath Saskatchewan, the richest potash 
reserves of any place in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are you reading from, Fred? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — This is coming from a book that you put 
out, the mining . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Good. What year? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And it’s up to date. Not only is potash used 
for fertilizer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but this great asset that we 
are sitting on top of in Saskatchewan is also used and 
experiments are taking place to develop and combine potash 
with sodium sulphate to produce potassium sulphate, which is a 
fertilizer utilized on fluoride sensitive crops. That is another big 
industry that’s involved in the potash industry, and they are also 
using it for water softeners, and I might add, in a big way. 
 
To show just how the citizens of Saskatchewan are opposed to 
this reorganization of the potash corporation and the 
privatization, one just has to take a look at the individuals who 
signed the petitions against privatization 

in this province. And we on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the last month have tabled in this House over 
100,000 names of Saskatchewan citizens who are opposed to 
the sell-off of SaskPower and the privatization of our assets in 
this province. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one just has to take a look 
at the rally that we had here in Regina yesterday with 
approximately 5 to 6,000 people that came in here. When you 
take a look at that backlash — 5 to 6,000 people that came out 
yesterday on the steps of the legislature and the legislative 
grounds, over 100,000 individuals who have signed petitions 
against privatization in this province — I say to the members 
opposite that they should take a different look and create a 
different attitude, and especially when you take a look at what 
the polls are saying today in Saskatchewan regarding 
privatization. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to show you just how important this 
asset is, in 1976 all of Saskatchewan’s potash industry was 
owned outside of the province, and 85 per cent was owned 
outside of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And now what do the 
Conservatives opposite want to do? They want to sell off this 
asset. They want to sell this asset, and they want to sell it 
outside of Saskatchewan — 45 per cent which would go outside 
of Canada, and 55 per cent which would go into Canada, 
probably into Ontario and Quebec where all the money is. And 
I say to the members opposite: here you are wanting to sell off 
this asset, an asset that we own 100 per cent of — 100 per cent. 
The citizens of Saskatchewan own 100 per cent of the potash 
industry in this province, and now you want to sell off that 
asset. 
 
I intend to tell the member for Weyburn, and other members 
across there, why you should not sell off this asset; why you 
should hold Bill 20; and why we should get on with the 
business of this legislature and not worrying about selling off 
our assets and going into the debt to the tune that we are today. 
 
In 1982, for the information of the member from Weyburn, this 
province was in debt to the tune of $3 billion. That’s the 
operating debt and the long-term debt. Now due to your 
privatization, I say to the member from Weyburn, we now have 
a total accumulated debt in this province of $13 billion, and 
that’s what privatization has done to this province. 
 
And as I was indicating, I wanted to start off by giving you the 
history. And I know that the member from Regina South is 
interested in what I’m saying, and I sincerely hope that he will 
be one that will stand up in that caucus and take on the two or 
three members opposite of cabinet who are making those 
decisions, who are making these decisions that is destroying the 
political lives of just about all those members across the way 
when, at the same time, destroying the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1975, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1975, the Blakeney 
government decided that it was time that we took control of this 
great industry, and it is a great industry. We have potash 
reserves in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would last, 
at the present rate of development, for approximately 5,000 
years — 5,000 years of potash that  



 
June 19, 1989 

2021 
 

we’re sitting on top of. And you take a look at the profits that 
we’ve made over the years. Just take a look at the last year — 
$106 million. 
 
I tell you, and I say to the member from Regina South, build a 
lot of highways, and you build a lot of hospitals and schools, 
and you pay for a lot of social programs in this province with 
the profits that we have, that we own 100 per cent of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I’ll get on to just what the profits were 
up through the years. And the $106 million that the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan made this year is very small, I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, compared to the profits that were 
made between 1975, 1976, and 1982, and that was under Allan 
Blakeney and the NDP government. 
 
And then I will go on as I speak tonight, and just show you how 
things have deteriorated and how privatization and especially 
the loss of the revenue from the potash corporation has put 
Saskatchewan in the debt that it is today, a debt of $13 billion. 
 
In 1975, the potash corporation was established. And at that 
time, and at the same time today we still have nine potash 
corporations in Saskatchewan, both publicly and privately. And 
it was decided that the government would take over 50 per cent 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s what took place. 
 
The Blakeney government in its wisdom . . . And I will go on in 
my speech tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to indicate to you and 
to prove to you just how smart a move that was, and the money 
that was derived from the potash industry. 
 
The large corporations at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
And I might add that their head offices were all outside of 
Saskatchewan. None of them were in Saskatchewan. They were 
Pittsburgh paint and glass — they had their headquarters in the 
United States; Potash Company of America, headquartered in 
New Mexico; International Minerals and Chemical Corporation, 
head office, New York; Kalium, that was 100 per cent owned 
by Pittsburgh paint and glass. And I might add just to indicate 
just how important this industry is, and if one looks at the paper 
today, and you’ll see that Kalium, just between Regina and 
Moose Jaw, has enough potash there, just where they’re mining, 
to last for 400 years — for 400 years at the present extraction 
rate that they’re using. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I say to the 
members opposite, when we take a look at $106 million profit 
this year, and we take that one mine . . . And I know that 
boggles the mind of the member from Pelly, but I know he’ll be 
up here; he’ll be speaking on this here Bill. He thinks it’s 
important that we sell this important asset off, so he’ll be up 
there and he’ll be speaking. But when you take a look at that 
mine, that one mine which has enough potash in a life span of 
400 years, let me tell you, that is an asset that we have, that we 
want to keep. 

Now we don’t own Kalium, but the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan has far greater reserves than Kalium has. Kalium, 
as I indicated, has 400 years of minerals under there. And the 
other ones that the Saskatchewan citizens own, we have 5,000 
years at the present day extraction rate. 
 
And just think what that can do to Saskatchewan. That can 
make Saskatchewan what Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, 
and Quebec are today, that’s what that can do. That’s what the 
potash industry of Saskatchewan can do. It can make us a have 
province and not a have-not province that we are today. And we 
can do that with potash. Over the years, there’s enough potash 
there that the outlook looks bright so that we can have a future 
in Saskatchewan, and we will not be a have-not province; we 
will be a have province. 
 
(2015) 
 
And as I indicated, a large amount of those potash corporations 
and their head offices were in the United States. In 1975 the 
decision was made, and in 1976 legislation was passed in this 
legislature to create the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, to 
purchase, through negotiated agreements with the companies, 
50 per cent of the potash industry in this province. That’s what 
we own right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We own 50 per cent, 
and we don’t see the head offices that . . . Duval used to have 
their head offices in Houston, Texas. That no longer is the case. 
 
And you take a look at most of these companies. They’re in 
Chicago, New York, Houston, Texas; Anglo-American 
Corporation, South Africa. Those companies were in other 
countries other than the United States. And the decision was 
made to go ahead and to privatize and to bring that revenue and 
that resource under the control of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and bring the head offices to Saskatchewan 
where we could control it. 
 
By owning 50 per cent of all the potash industry in this 
province, it gave this province a window on the industry — and 
I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an industry that is one of the 
brightest spots that we have in this province. It will take 10 
years before any other resource in this province will ever create 
the type of income or the type of interest that we would get 
from any other of our resources, including farming and all. It 
would be 10 years at the present rate before another mineral 
would come in and take over it. 
 
And what does this mean? Figures indicate that there’s over 
3,000 potash workers working in Saskatchewan at the nine 
mines that we have in this province — over 3,000 individuals 
who are working. Fifty per cent of those workers belong to the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; $350 million are spent 
every year in goods and services. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s over $100 million every year, 
well over $100 million every year spent on wages alone for 
potash workers. And let’s break that down. What does that 
mean when you have an industry that the workers are creating 
over $100 million in wages, over $350 million in goods and 
services? And I say, in all  



 
June 19, 1989 

2022 
 

sincerity, to the members opposite, you want to take a look at 
what that means to the success of this province. It just means 
either being successful or not being successful. And the way 
we’re going . . . And we’ve watched how privatization, what 
it’s done for this province. We’ve watched the privatization of 
the coal-mines. And has that improved anything? Where do we 
stand financially in the province? 
 
We’ve watched the privatization of the dental therapists and the 
dental nurses. And have we got a better dental care program in 
this province? No, we haven’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I’m just saying to the members opposite that the 
privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is 
something that should never happen. What is going to take 
place is that 45 per cent of the potash corporation can be sold 
outside of Canada; 55 per cent under this reorganization can be 
sold in Canada, which would go down East. 
 
Now I ask the members, and I ask the member for Pelly, why 
would we want to sell 45 per cent of the potash corporation to 
India and Asian countries, and 55 per cent to other parts of the 
country, when we own 100 per cent of it? We own 100 per cent 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The $106 million profit that we got this year, that’s all ours. We 
don’t have to share that with anybody in China or Japan or 
India or some other country, or the big money markets in 
eastern Canada. That $106 million that we received this year in 
profits is something that belongs to every citizen of this 
province and it contributes to the welfare of this province. 
 
I want to now turn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to just what it means 
in profits since 1976 when the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan was first given the go-ahead here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And before I do that, I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and to the members opposite, that the potash industry 
in the world is one of the bright stars — it’s one of the bright 
stars in the world industry. It’s something . . . It’s fertilizer, and 
it’s something that we need all over this world. And when we 
talk about the greenhouse effect and how we have to plant more 
trees and we have to get more vegetation, it’s going to be potash 
that’s going to contribute to that. It’s potash that’s going to 
make those trees grow and the plants grow and bring the 
greenery out so that we can fight the effects of the greenhouse 
effect that we have in this planet that we’re living on. 
 
So I say to you and I say to the members opposite, potash is 
very important. It’s an asset that we have and it’s an asset that 
we should protect; one that we should not allow to get in the 
hands of other nations and other countries. 
 
In 1976 when the potash corporation first started to produce, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it paid taxes and royalties to this province 
of $100 million, and the corporate earnings and the profits were 
$540,000. That’s just in the first year of operation. And when 
you take a look at the type of money that we’re dealing with 
there, for a 

corporation that was just starting up, I think that’s pretty nice. 
 
And why, as I indicated before — we own 100 per cent — why 
would we want to sell it? The Premier, he keeps standing up in 
the House; some of his members stand up in the House and they 
talk about diversifying the economy of this province. And if we 
want to diversify this province, then I say that what we have to 
do is we have to build on assets like the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Those are the types of assets that will create 
diversification in this province and that will make 
diversification successful — not selling off those type of assets. 
 
And I ask the members across there to take a serious look 
before you allow the few cabinet ministers that I say are making 
those decisions. I sincerely believe that there are members over 
there, private members, members in cabinet, who do not believe 
that we should continue down this road of destruction and 
privatization of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
the Silver Lake farm at Green Lake, and many other of our 
assets that I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are putting us 
deeper and deeper in debt and no way of getting out. And I 
sincerely say to those members, take a look at that. 
 
You talk about diversification, and I think that that’s what has 
to take place, and that’s what we started in 1975 and ’76, and it 
was successful. 
 
As I indicated, privatization hasn’t helped this province at all; it 
hasn’t helped this province in any way, shape, or form. We are 
losing more and more control of our resources; we are losing 
more and more control of our important assets. 
 
And as I indicated . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Member from 
Weyburn, he’s talking from his seat again, but I sincerely hope, 
I sincerely hope that when you have your caucus meeting 
tomorrow, that you will stand up, that you will listen to what 
I’m saying tonight — that you will stand up and stop the 
sell-off of Saskatchewan assets, stop the destruction of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I think it’s time for the member for 
Weyburn, I think it’s time for the member from Weyburn to 
stand up and be heard. And if you feel that it’s important to sell 
off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and if you feel it’s 
important to have an unemployment rate of around 8 per cent, 
and if you feel it’s important to have the type of a debt load that 
we’re carried in this province, then stand up and speak in favour 
of the selling off of the potash corporation. Don’t speak from 
your seat. I say stand up and speak. 
 
And I can tell you this much. If you continue down the road 
you’re going, the next election that’s called — but there’s about 
23, 24 members that’ll never seek re-election again anyway — I 
can tell you that you will be defeated so badly that it’ll be 
another repetition of 1934 all over again, because that’s exactly 
what’s happening. 
 
The member of privatization who wants to sell off . . . He  



 
June 19, 1989 

2023 
 

sold off the peat moss and he sold off the Silver Lake farm. 
He’ll sell anything that he can get his hands on. And these are 
assets, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that were built up by every man, 
woman, and child in this province. And we have a right to those 
assets, and I don’t believe that the member of privatization has 
that right to go out and sell them off. 
 
And as I said, are we any further ahead? Well let’s take a look. 
Let’s take a look at where we are today and where we were in 
1982. As I just indicated, we had an unemployment rate of less 
than 4 per cent in 1982. We had balanced budgets. We had 
long-term debt of less than $3 billion. Today we have an 
unemployment rate of over 8 per cent. We have an accumulated 
debt in this province of $13 billion, and then you say that 
privatization is a good thing. 
 
That’s why I’m standing up here tonight, trying to convince 
those members over there that this is wrong-headed. Surely you 
can see what’s taken place in this province. Surely you can take 
a look at the out-migration of the young men and women who 
are leaving this province to seek employment in other provinces 
— going to the have provinces when we have a province here 
that should be a have province and not a have-not province. 
 
So I just say to the member of privatization, he knows full well 
that right now he shouldn’t be selling off that farm at Silver 
Lake, because there is a caveat against that. And I sincerely 
hope that he will take a serious look at that caveat by Green 
Lake, and not sell that Silver Lake farm. That is another asset, 
just like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, that should 
be retained in this province for the benefit of every man, 
woman, and child in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But when I was talking about those figures, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was talking about the debt load that 
we’re carrying, and I was talking about what privatization has 
done to this province. I talked about a balanced budget and the 
unemployment rate, the way it was. I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that potash was a major contributor to those figures. It 
was a major contributor. I will proceed to prove that potash was 
a major contributor to balanced budgets under the NDP 
government — and you’ll see what I’m speaking about. 
 
As I said, in 1976, the first year that we had the potash 
corporation, taxes and royalties paid to this province was $100 
million. In 1977, a year later, taxes and royalties to this 
province were $16 million from the potash corporation. And 
this continued to go up. The long-term debt of the potash 
corporation in 1977 was only $75 million, so you can see that 
the potash corporation was making big money and we didn’t 
have a large debt. 
 
Plus you have to take into consideration the spin-off from all 
the individuals that are working in this province in the potash 
industry, and you have to take a look at the goods and services 
that are purchased in this province; and the spin-off to all these 
communities and in the communities such as Biggar and those 
places; to the restaurants; to the 

small hotel owners. That spin-off meant success or unsuccess. 
And now we see, under the Conservative philosophy of selling 
off everything, that that is not successful any more, and we see 
more and more small businesses who relied on the spin-off 
from PCS, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, are now 
going under. And the debt in this province continues to grow 
and grow. 
 
(2030) 
 
So in 1978, Mr. Deputy Speaker, taxes and royalties paid to this 
province, $58 million; 1980, $167.450 million was paid to this 
province in taxes and royalties and $50,000 was paid as 
dividends. Now it’s starting to really pay off. We’re getting all 
this here money in 1980 — we got 90,000 from royalties, 
$167,000 from the corporate profit and earnings, and $50,000 
dividends. 
 
And I want to go on to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, just what 
that meant. And that meant to this province the difference 
between being a have province and being a have-not province. 
 
The potash . . . And you just have to look at the figures. The 
six-year figures are there. And it goes to show you that the 
potash industry can survive in this country, publicly and 
privately owned, and that’s what happened. We now have a 
corporation that’s 50 per cent owned by the public and 50 per 
cent owned by the private firms. 
 
And as I indicated, during the first six years of PCS, we see the 
profits going from a million dollars in 1976, to 1981, the last 
year of the NDP government, where taxes and royalties paid to 
the province were 71 million, and the corporate earnings and 
their profit was 141.721 million; and another $50 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was paid in dividends. 
 
So here we see, in the first five, six years of the potash 
corporation under an NDP government, we had taxes and 
royalties paid to this province of close to $300 million. And we 
had the corporate earnings and their profits of 413 million, and 
$100 million was paid in dividends. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as I try to explain 
that to the members opposite, those types of profits is what we 
used to keep the unemployment figures down, to keep balanced 
budgets, and to keep the long-term debt down. 
 
Now we go into the period of ’82 to the present date and we just 
see what we have in this province — and I indicated before, the 
unemployment rate is up, no more balanced budgets, long-term 
debt that . . . not less than 3 billion but up to 13 billion, and that 
was in the first six years. 
 
And in those six years, and the potash industry was stagnating. 
Pittsburgh paint and glass, they owned . . . Two per cent of their 
corporation was potash. They didn’t really care whether they 
sold potash or not. They didn’t go out and try to sell it because 
it didn’t matter on their profit sheets. So that’s why the potash 
corporation was created, and that’s why today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s  



 
June 19, 1989 

2024 
 

why today . . . or in 1982, that’s why we had the balanced 
budgets. 
 
But the members opposite, in their wisdom, think that we 
should sell this asset. They think that an asset that has paid to 
this province in total in five years, six years, 271 million in 
royalties, in taxes; 413,510 million in corporate earnings and 
profit; and 100 million in dividends. They want to sell that off. 
 
That’s the Bill we’re debating here tonight, the reorganization 
of the potash corporation so that this Conservative government 
can go out and sell off this asset — sell it off to other countries, 
45 per cent to other countries and 55 per cent in Canada. That’s 
what we’re debating. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something that we 
have to put a stop to. That’s what the citizens of this province 
are saying: you’ve got to put a stop to this government’s 
madness in the privatization scheme that they’re implementing 
in this province. 
 
And the member of privatization knows full well that it’s the 
wrong thing to do. He knows full well because he’s smart 
enough to know what the figures have shown from 
privatization. It has shown a tremendous debt load in this 
province. There’s no good times left in Saskatchewan. He 
knows that the out-migration of our young men and women in 
this province are contributed directly to privatization, and 
specifically to the Bill we’re dealing with tonight, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, another asset that we’re debating 
in here whether we should sell or keep. 
 
And I think that there’s a lot of members on that side of the 
House that will get up before this debate is over, unless the Bill 
is pulled, and that they will, I sincerely hope, will get up and 
either say that they’re for the sell-off of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan or give us the reasons why they want to sell it. 
 
And if that is the case, you’re going to continue down this road, 
you’re continuing down the road of destruction for this province 
and for the political lives of a lot of those new members who 
were just elected for the first term, because they’ll never have a 
chance of getting back. And the polls indicate that very clearly. 
The polls indicate that very clearly in this province that the 
citizens are opposed to the sell-off of our assets, and you have 
to start listening to those polls because they’re not that wrong. 
Even if they’re out 5 or 10 per cent, you’re still facing another 
1934 all over again. 
 
And I think it’s time for those members over there to stand up 
and put a stop to this privatization. Stand up and put a stop to 
the out-migration of the young men and women who are 
leaving this province to seek employment and opportunities in 
other provinces. They shouldn’t have to do that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They should be able to get jobs, and the opportunities 
should be right here in this province. 
 
But that’s not taking place under this blind Conservative 
ideology, a blind ideology that they want to destroy everything 
that was built up by a CCF and NDP 

governments. That’s what it is, blind ideology — not by the 
total group over there. I say that there’s some members over 
there that have a lot of common sense. A lot of those members 
were elected for the first time. 
 
But the Premier, when he spoke about privatization and the 
selling off of PCS, he indicated that this was great times for 
Saskatchewan; that everybody was gung-ho; and that because 
of this policy, you were going to see some interesting 
nominations this spring. 
 
Since this Bill has been introduced, and the SaskPower Bills, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s been no talk of any nominations 
over that side. And there is a good reason, because there’s about 
24 — or 23 to 24 that’s never going to run again. 
 
And in those seats they can’t even get anybody to run for the 
Conservatives. Nobody wants to take a Conservative banner. 
Nobody in their right mind would take a Conservative banner 
and expect to be elected in this province when you take a look 
at the path of destruction that has been created by privatization, 
and I say created by members who will never seek nomination 
in this province again, never will seek nomination. 
 
So I say to those members opposite, especially in the back 
benches, if you want to continue your political careers, it’s time 
to stand up and be counted. It’s time to stand up and put a stop 
to this out-migration of the young men and women in this 
province, the destruction of our province, and the total debt that 
we’ll never get out of if we continue down this road. And I ask 
those members to stand up and be counted. 
 
As I indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on every privatization that 
has taken place since 1982, Saskatchewan people have been the 
losers. They have been the losers. And this privatization of the 
potash corporation is going to be no different than the 
privatization of the highways. And you know what happened 
there, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in one sweep of a pen, 230 
families destroyed. And that’s what’s going to happen with the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. It will be no different 
than the highways. And I say, are we any better off? Do we 
have better highways? Do we have more young men and 
women working in the summer on the Department of 
Highways? No, we don’t. No, we don’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we sure don’t. 
 
You don’t see any highways and roads being built to the potash 
mines. You don’t see them being improved. You don’t see any 
engineers and young men and women who pound the stakes in 
and work with the engineers. That’s not taking place. Some of 
those roads out to those potash mines are completely in 
disarray, like the rest of the province. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has things improved 
under privatization? I say, no, they have not improved. They are 
getting worse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I could continue on. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in order for me to make my argument, I  



 
June 19, 1989 

2025 
 

am going to have to give you some examples, because the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has not been privatized 
yet. There is still hope in this province that it will not take 
place. There’s still hope that those members, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will stand up for the citizens of this province and stop 
this privatization. There’s still hope. 
 
And in order for me to present my argument to show you what 
has happened through the privatization and reorganization of 
departments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to have to give 
you examples of other privatizations that have taken place. 
That’s the only way that I can do it. And I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there’s no other way that I can stand up here 
and make an argument to have the privatization of this 
corporation and this asset stopped if I am not going to be 
allowed to give comparisons of other privatizations that’s taken 
place in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And as I indicated to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are we any better off because of the privatization of 
the Department of Highways? No, we’re not. Has the debt load 
lessened? No, it’s not. The debt load has gone up in this 
province. And has the unemployment rate gone down? No, it 
sure hasn’t; it’s gone up. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have a great asset in 
potash. It is an asset that we have and we have an abundance of. 
We have enough potash underneath us right now for 5,000 
years. Just think of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker; just think of that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s what you said 20 minutes ago, 
Fred. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I say to the member from Regina 
South, yes, I said that 20 minutes ago and it still applies 20 
minutes later. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — No different . . . It hasn’t changed at all. 
But we just take a look at what’s taken place. It’s just a 
continual privatization and sell-off of Saskatchewan assets, and 
we continually go farther in debt and the unemployment rate 
rises and the out-migration. They’re just fleeing the province, 
getting out of the province and looking for opportunity; 
opportunities they should have had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
we had the Highways department working; opportunities that 
they should have had, and as you see now privatization in 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) 
which is now Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy Corporation). 
That is another good example of privatization that’s not 
working. 
 
And look at the lay-offs, over a hundred lay-offs up in northern 
Saskatchewan already. Look at the lay-offs in La Ronge. They 
cleaned out the whole SMDC office — all Northerners, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That’s privatization; that’s privatization. 
 
And I see it in Saskatoon. You just take a look at what’s 
happening in Saskatoon, what the privatization of SMDC

has done. You already see the lay-offs. I predicted that over a 
year ago that those head offices that we had up there were going 
to be amalgamated and you were going to see massive lay-offs, 
and it’s taken place. 
 
And that’s the argument that I’m using, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That’s the argument that I’m trying to put to you, to those 
members opposite, that to take a look at what has happened in 
privatization — take a look right close to home. You don’t have 
to go too far from Biggar to Saskatoon to look at what’s 
happened to SMDC. You know that it’s not working. You know 
that individuals who had careers are losing those jobs. Men and 
women, families are losing their jobs, losing their careers, and 
they’re losing hope. 
 
And as they migrate to other provinces, and they go to the 
“have” provinces, and they benefit from our loss and we lose. 
And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we lose the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, as I indicated to the member 
from Regina South, we are losing an asset . . . 
 
(2045) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t pick on me. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well you’re the one, you were the one that 
accused me of using the figures twice. And I’ll use those figures 
because they’re important figures. We have an abundance of 
potash. We own 100 per cent of it. That’s what we should be 
using to balance our budgets. That’s what we should be using to 
build our highways and our hospitals and our schools. That’s 
where those profits should be going. They should not be going 
to other countries and to central Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s where the decisions are going to be made. They’re not 
going to be made in Saskatchewan any more. They’re going to 
be made in Houston, Texas, and Chicago, and Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania. That’s where the decisions are going to be made. 
And if they have their way, the Asian countries of China, Japan, 
India, those countries will be making those decisions. That’s 
where the profits will be going. 
 
And as I indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to take this 
argument to those individuals, and I have to use real examples. I 
have to use real examples. I say that because I sincerely hope 
that through this debate they may pull that potash Bill. They 
may not sell it off. They know what the backlash is, and I think 
that there’s members over there who are smart enough to know 
that their political careers are on the line here. They know. They 
know full well if they continue to sell off the assets of this 
province that their political careers are gone. They’re totally 
gone. 
 
And I say to the members who want to continue their political 
careers, not to the members who are not going to run again, not 
to the three or four who are making the decisions to destroy 
your political lives, I say it to the ones who want to make a 
political career — I say to the members opposite who believe in 
Saskatchewan that they should stand up and fight for 
Saskatchewan, protect  



 
June 19, 1989 

2026 
 

the people in this province, protect our assets. Don’t allow this 
blind ideology of a few members over there to destroy our 
province and to destroy your political lives. 
 
I want to give you another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
privatization that did not help this province, that destroyed the 
lives of over 400 young women in this province, and that was 
when they decided that they were not going to have a 
child-based dental program. That’s privatization, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — destroy the lives of 400 young women who had put 
their careers on the line and had worked many years to get to 
that position. 
 
And I hear some rumbling from the Minister of the 
Environment when he talks about the pulp mill in Meadow 
Lake — and that’s another privatization. I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this is the second one that’s been 
promised, and the folks up in Meadow Lake are still waiting for 
the first one. That did not take place, and the second one hasn’t 
taken place. 
 
So I say when you open that pulp mill up there, Mr. Minister of 
the Environment, then I’ll believe it — I’ll believe that. But I 
just want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And he talks about 
the saw mill. Well that’s fine. You want to go up and take a 
look at the saw mill and take a look at the inventory in the yards 
where it’s empty, and you want to listen to the rumour mill that 
there’s going to be a massive lay-off in that there saw mill. So I 
wouldn’t sit there and chirp from my seat until you had the 
facts, because I think you’re going to see a big change up there 
and you might not be chirping in your seat. 
 
I just want to continue and I can say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the Minister of the Environment will not be 
seeking re-election again, either. 
 
But I want to give you more examples . . . And I think the 
Minister of Highways is smart enough not to seek re-election 
again; he knows full well what’s going to happen. 
 
But to give you examples, and I indicated that I was going to 
bring forward my argument on two examples, which I did with 
the Highways and SMDC, and the dental program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Then we can take a look at privatization, the real, glory 
privatization of the Conservatives. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
know that’s close to home for yourself, and that’s 
Weyerhaeuser. And there we gave away, without one cent 
down, over 800 million acres of the best and the prime forest in 
this province. And where did it go? To an American firm. 
That’s privatization; that’s privatization, let me tell you, at its 
best. 
 
And one can say, well is that a success story? Well I just say, go 
up to the individuals who are working in the bush; go to the 
individuals who signed petitions to the Minister of Highways to 
try and get roads that are in terrible shape, to try to get a piece 
of road from Canoe Narrows to 155, where school children are 
transported every day, back and forth, on a caribou road. And I 
say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to have this to bring my 
argument forward that privatization is not working. 

Because Weyerhaeuser, they can get all the roads they want 
built; we’re paying for it. We build roads for Weyerhaeuser and 
they even send out the tenders. The Minister of Highways 
doesn’t even send out those tenders. That’s privatization. But 
the citizens at Canoe Narrows who request a road from him — 
nothing, nothing, nothing even planned for. That’s the type of 
privatization that the member from Melfort agrees with. 
 
And I just say that that’s not the way to go in this province. I 
say, if Weyerhaeuser wants to build roads, let them build it and 
pay for it themselves. They’re extracting our assets, so why 
can’t they do that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I’ve allowed the 
member a lot of latitude. The debate before the . . . Order. The 
debate before the Assembly is Bill No. 20, An Act respecting 
the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
And I would ask the member to keep his comments relative to 
the . . . Order, the member for Regina Centre. I’d ask the 
member to keep his comments in relation to the Bill that’s 
before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As I indicated, I wanted to try and put forward 
examples of real privatization deals that have taken place in this 
province. I’m trying to keep on the narrow road. And I respect 
the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was giving figures 
before of the profits of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
under an NDP government. And as I indicated to you, in 1976 
there was $1 million dollars profits the first year. And then that 
continued: 16 million; 1978, 35 million, and just continued 
down through those years of NDP governments. And as I 
indicated, not only were there large amounts of money that 
were paid in royalties and taxes, but it also paid dividends. 
 
I now want to turn to the Conservative years, and let’s take a 
look at what we’ve accomplished under the Conservative 
government. Well let’s look at when they first took over — 
1982, that’s when the first report came out. The last year, in 
1981, under an NDP government, there was taxes and royalties 
that were paid totalling $71 million. And what happened under 
a Conservative government? 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the figure I’m going to 
give you indicates just why we are $13 billion in debt and that 
we’ve never had a balanced budget since this government took 
over. This is why. And the potash corporation has played a big 
part of that, because in 1981, instead of receiving $71 million in 
taxes and royalties, what did we receive? — $15 million; $15 
million, we received. Now that’s a big change. And there was a 
dividend paid that year of $50 million, once again paid back to 
the general revenue. 
 
And as we go down through the Conservative years, you’d see 
what’s happened. Our last year, under an NDP government, $71 
million profits in taxes and royalties. Then you go down — $15 
million, under the  



 
June 19, 1989 

2027 
 

Conservatives, 1982; ’83, $10 million; ’84, 17 million; ’85, 10 
million. That’s something. That says something for the business 
philosophy of the Conservative government opposite. It just 
backs up the argument that they are poor business operators. 
 
When you take a look at the budget of this province, they 
haven’t been able to balance a budget once since 1982. In 11 
years prior to that, under the Allan Blakeney government, they 
were balanced budgets. And so you can see why they are such 
poor business men and women, just by looking at these figures 
— 1986, 13 million under a Conservative government. This is 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it goes down to $19 million. 
 
Then last year, in their wisdom, they decided that they wanted 
to sell the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. So they transfer 
some of the long-term debt over to the province. We still have 
that debt. It’s still part of the $13 billion that we’re in debt — 
still there, hasn’t changed. But the international markets for 
potash has been increasing, and lo and behold! this year, the 
year that they want to push through Bill 20 to reorganize and 
sell off the potash corporation, there was a profit of $106 
million. I wonder if that wasn’t well planned. 
 
But I can say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that $106 
million profits also indicates the strength of the potash industry. 
It’s improving, and it’s going to continue to expand and 
continue to grow. And $106 million profits, if we were to take 
that every year, guaranteed — and let me tell you, under our 
administration it would be a lot higher than that — we could 
start building highways again; we could start building schools 
and hospitals that are well needed. 
 
And another thing I can tell you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right. And my colleague, the member from Elphinstone, 
talks about the food subsidy in northern Saskatchewan. Holy 
smokes, with the amount of money that we’re making in potash 
we could have a food subsidy up there for the next 100 years. 
 
But what do they do? They cut that off; they cut that off. And 
they’re not building any hospitals. Our health care is the worst 
that it’s ever been in in this province, and that’s because there’s 
a shortage of money — that’s because there’s a shortage of 
money. 
 
They talk about their . . . You know, what are we going to do 
with all this money . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I can 
tell the member from Regina Wascana that if you don’t sell off 
the potash corporation, we take that $106 million profit, we can 
build a lot of hospitals; we can reimplement the drug program 
— we can reimplement the drug program for our senior citizens 
in this province. And we can also bring back and put to work 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order! All members will get an 
opportunity to get into the debate so I would ask members — 
order! — to stop interrupting the member that’s on his feet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(2100) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I say 
to the member from Wascana, if we took that $106 million 
profit that the potash corporation had this year we could put the 
400 dental nurses back to work, we could reimplement that 
program, and it wouldn’t even take a dent out of it. 
 
That’s what the potash corporation of Saskatchewan meant to 
this province. It meant that we had money to carry out the types 
of programs and services that are required to run this province. 
Those profits would keep those young women working. Those 
profits would create the type of a program that we need for the 
young people in this province, that dental program, have them 
all back working. That $106 million would reimplement the 
drug program, which has been so hard, especially on our senior 
citizens and low income families. We could reimplement that. 
 
So I say to the member from Wascana, we could do a lot, and 
we did a lot when we were making those profits with the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. We did a lot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We had a “have” province, we had a 
“have” province. Now due to the Conservative blundering, we 
now live in a “have-not” province. And I say this with all 
sincerity. 
 
And just to close off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate 
. . . What are we really giving up here, what are we really giving 
up? Well let’s start off with the head office. First of all, as I 
indicated, PCS head offices, they’re not going to be in 
Saskatoon any more. Those decisions are not going to be made 
in Saskatoon. They’re going to be made over in Japan and 
China and other Asian countries. That’s where the decisions are 
going to be made. Or they’re going to be made in the big 
boardrooms down east. That’s where they’re going to be made. 
That’s what we’re giving up. 
 
We’re giving up a resource that’s paid us hundreds and 
hundreds of millions of dollars. We’re giving up a resource that 
will continue to pay this province hundreds and hundreds of 
millions of dollars in order to carry out those types of programs, 
in order to reimplement the dental program. That’s what we’re 
giving up when we lose the right to this asset, when we give the 
decision making powers to other countries and other provinces. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Bill 20 is a dangerous Bill. 
It’s so dangerous. When you take a look at the magnitude of the 
assets of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan . . . and here 
you see a Conservative government that is going to pass a Bill 
that will allow them to sell off 45 per cent of it to a foreign 
country and 55 per cent to the rest of Canada. I ask the other 
members over there to take a look at this very closely and ask 
yourself, what are we giving up? What are we doing here when 
we know for sure that we have 5,000 years’ reserves of potash 
in the ground — 5,000 years of reserves in the ground — and 
making hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars in profits 
for this province to carry out  



 
June 19, 1989 

2028 
 

the types of programs that you as individuals would like to see 
brought in to pay for nursing homes, to pay for new homes, to 
pay for highways and hospitals, and to pay for schools. 
 
That’s what we’re giving up if you on the other side of this 
House stand up and implement and pass Bill No. 20, a Bill to 
reorganize and give this government the right to sell off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the assets that belong 
to every one of us. 
 
You own 100 per cent of it — each and every one of you. Every 
man, woman, and child in this province owns 100 per cent of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Every dollar that we 
get out of that ground, every dollar that we get when we sell 
potash, comes back to each and every one of us. It keeps the 
taxes down. It keeps the debt of this province down. And I say 
to you, as private members, and other members of cabinet who 
are not making these decisions, to think closely at what we’re 
giving up when we sell off this great asset that we have in the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I just say that we just cannot allow this Bill to go through. 
It is a Bill that was tailor-made by this Conservative 
government to be privatized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And one could predict that. As soon as the Conservative 
government took over, what did they do? They brought in 
Chuck Childers, an American potash expert, to come in here 
and run the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. He was 
involved with International Minerals, IMC Corporation, in the 
United States. 
 
One could almost predict when they brought him in to head up 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan that that’s what was 
going to take place — and that’s exactly what he was here for. 
He was here to set up the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and he’s selling it off to his friends — he’s got 
his daughter working in there. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this has to be 
stopped. We cannot allow an individual to come in here and run 
our potash corporation and set it up to be sold to outside 
interests. Just imagine bringing in somebody to sell off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to outside interests when 
we own 100 per cent of it. Why would we want to sell it? 
 
Just take a look at the profits that we’re making, the profits that 
we will continue to make, and I ask the members to take a look 
at Mr. Chuck Childers and ask yourself, why was he brought in 
here? And I say he was brought in here for the same reason the 
we’re here tonight debating Bill No. 20. He was brought in 
here, and he probably drafted this Bill. I would suggest that he 
had a large part of drafting this Bill to reorganize the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And where does he get these figures? Ask yourself, why does 
he want to use 45 per cent foreign? Ask yourself, why does he 
want to do that? Why, if it’s a Canadian asset, in particular 
belonging to Saskatchewan, would you want to put a clause in a 
Bill that states clearly that 45 per cent 

shall be sold to outside interests outside of Canada? 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to the members 
opposite, when they brought Mr. Childers in here, they brought 
him in here for one reason, and that was to reorganize the 
potash corporation so they could set it up to sell it off. And 
that’s what’s happening. That’s what’s taking place right today, 
and this has to come to a stop. 
 
I just ask those back-benchers or private members on the other 
side, and I ask you sincerely, to take a serious look, go back 
into your constituencies and ask your constituents, send out 
newsletters and tell them what the potash corporation and what 
potash means to this province. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s up to those members to go 
out and tell their constituents what’s taking place and say to 
them, what do you want me to do? Do you want me to continue 
to sit in here, not stand up in debate? Do you want me to 
continue to allow three, four members of the front bench, who 
will never seek re-election in this province again, to sell off all 
our assets? 
 
And I say to you as members, you got to stand up and fight for 
what you think is right. It’s time that you stood up to the few 
members who are making those decisions. You can’t 
continually sit it back. You’re elected to come in here and to 
protect the citizens of Saskatchewan, and by protecting the 
assets of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan you’re 
protecting every man, woman, and child in this province. That’s 
your duty, and I ask you to do that. 
 
And I say, in all sincerity, when you take a look at the figures, 
they’re there. Under an NDP government, when we were 
making hundreds of millions of dollars, the balanced budgets, 
the low unemployment rate, the debt in this province was nil; 
balanced budgets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then you look at 
the Conservative government years. You look at privatization 
and what has taken place, and I can say, in all honesty, that it’s 
time for the private members to stand up, to stand up and be 
heard. 
 
And I think that the member for Wascana should be able to 
stand up in his seat, he should stand up in his seat and he should 
say whether he’s in favour of selling off this great asset or 
whether he’s in favour of keeping it. Stand up and let your 
constituents know what you’re doing because they want to 
know. Your time is running short, Mr. Member from Wascana. 
You’re going to have to make a decision whether you want to 
seek re-election again. And I’ll tell you, if you want to continue 
down this path of destruction, there’s no sense in you ever 
seeking a nomination because you’ll never be elected again as a 
Tory. It can’t happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It just can’t happen. You can’t continually 
sell off all our assets, drive this province in the hole, drive our 
young men and women out of this province to look for work. 
You can’t continue down that path of destruction and expect to 
get re-elected in the next election — it just can’t happen. And I 
say, you better  



 
June 19, 1989 

2029 
 

believe it. 
 
And that’s the view of 90 per cent of the people in this province 
— 90 per cent of the people in this province have been polled 
and they . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Ninety per cent of the citizens in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have indicated that they are 
opposed to the privatization of our assets. But that member 
says, no, let’s just wait and let the people decide. I say yes. But 
I say that that should be done right now. In 1986 the member 
from Wascana did not go out around this province, and he did 
not go into his constituency and tell them: you elect me and I’ll 
sell off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. He never said 
that. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there wasn’t one member on 
that side that campaigned on the fact that they were going to 
sell PCS off. They never said anything about it. And they never 
mentioned SaskPower. They never mentioned the drug program 
that’s being paid from the profits of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. They never said they were going to get rid of 
400 dental therapists and dental nurses. That program came 
from the profits of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
They never said that. 
 
So I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all fairness to those members, 
if this is the road that you want to go down, then get your 
Premier to call an election and tell them what you’re going to 
do. Let’s go out and test the voters in this province and we’ll 
find out if they want to sell off the SaskPower and if they want 
to sell off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And we’ll 
find out whether they were in favour of the highways and the 
dental program and the drug program and the increase in the 
taxes. These are programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we kept 
under control. 
 
Let me give you another example, for the member from 
Wascana. The education tax which we kept down at 5 per cent 
because we were making the type of profits that we were 
making with the potash corporation — they were coming in so 
that we could run this province, and we could hold up that 
sound, that five per cent. 
 
What did the member from Wascana say? He was out 
campaigning and he said that he was going to eliminate the 
sales tax in the first term of office. He didn’t do that; he didn’t 
do that. And now what do you see? A hundred . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if I could just have the attention of the member from 
Wascana. We now see where we have a profit this year of $106 
million in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and where 
are the sales tax? They haven’t eliminated them, they’ve 
increased them to seven per cent. 
 
But I . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I’d ask the 
member for Wascana to allow the member for Athabasca to 
continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Mr. Thompson: — I want to thank the member from Wascana, 
because it gives me a chance to have a drink of water and to 
look over my notes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But in my closing remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ve tried to put forward an argument to convince the 
members opposite that they should pull this Bill, that they 
should not go ahead with the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
there is a good argument there to not go ahead with this Bill. 
 
And I say, why don’t you pull the Bill, go out to your 
constituency this summer and talk to your constituents and just 
see what they think. Go out and talk to them, hold some public 
meetings and ask them what they think. 
 
(2115) 
 
You’re going to hold annual meetings; the Premier said you’re 
going to hold some interesting nominations. Then ask the 
citizens out there what they want you to do. But I think, in all 
fairness to the citizens of this province, that you should pull this 
Bill and not bring it back. As far as I’m concerned you should 
never bring it back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But I say to the member from Wascana that 
when you have your caucus meeting tomorrow, you should 
stand up and say, let’s hold off here. Let’s take another look at 
this great asset that we’re selling off, an asset that we own 100 
per cent of; an asset that has paid for the types — and has been 
a major contributor for the types of programs that we had in this 
program, like the dental program, and the drug program. 
 
These are programs that were paid out of the profits from the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. These are profits that we 
will never, ever have again if this Bill goes through and the 
sell-off of this Crown corporation is gone. We will never have 
these profits again to continue to build this province. We will 
continue on the downward trend that we’re going. If we don’t 
have potash to sell and to continue to sell, and the profits that 
we get from the potash industry, then I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we are going to continue to go down and down. 
 
The debt is going to continue to rise; unemployment rates are 
going to rise. And as every member knows full well, the 
population of this province is well below 1 million now, well 
below 1 million. And that’s what’s come through privatization. 
That is what’s contributing. 
 
So I say to the members opposite, I say to the members opposite 
in my closing remarks, I think you’d better take another look at 
what you’re doing. I say to you that your political careers, along 
with the future of Saskatchewan, are on the line with this Bill. If 
you continue on this trail, if you want to sell off this great asset 
that we have — an asset that we could have for ourselves, for 
our children and our grandchildren and our great grandchildren 
for years and years; an asset that will always be needed on the 
planet  



 
June 19, 1989 

2030 
 

earth, the fertilizer that we have and that we own. 
 
And I say that you should take a serious look at pulling this 
Bill. And I ask all members, in closing off, Mr. Speaker, I ask 
all members across there to reassess what is taking place in this 
province. 
 
You can see the masses that are coming out opposed. You see 
the petitions that are being signed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’re opposed to the selling off of our assets — assets that 
we own 100 per cent. We own them, our children own them, 
and our grandchildren own them. And I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in all sincerity, that this is an asset that we have to 
keep and protect. 
 
And in closing I say to the members opposite, stand up and be 
counted. Don’t allow the destruction of your political careers 
along with the destruction of this province. And let’s stop this 
silly ideology that you have, that you want to sell off all the 
assets that we have and assets that can make this province what 
it is — a good province; a province that we can all be proud of; 
a province that can bring back the young men and women who 
have left this province for other provinces. 
 
I say, in all sincerity, take a look at this. You’re going down the 
wrong road; it’s a road of destruction. And it’s not too late. You 
can still turn around. You did it with SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy — you can do it with potash. And I sincerely urge 
that you will do that. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter 
the debate on Bill 20, which is the privatization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
In regards to my presentation, I will be going through a general 
summation of the major points that I would like to make at the 
conclusion, and also I would like to do a bit of historical 
overview of potash. 
 
I guess, being from northern Saskatchewan, I never really did 
know that much about potash till I was at the University of 
Saskatchewan back in ’65. And at that time everybody was 
starting to get a bit excited about the potash development in 
Saskatchewan, and there was various samples of this pink 
crystalline substance. 
 
And as I went about and moved to Ontario, I came back one 
year in ’68 and I also got a chance to work in one of the potash 
mines. I worked in Colonsay for a few months during the 
construction phase of that mine, and so I got a chance to see the 
operation of the potash construction situation at the personal 
level. 
 
As I went about my research, it became very clear of course that 
there was not only the aspect of potash itself as a world 
commodity, but also of the distinct strategy of public 
corporation and public ventures and public ownership in world 
development. 
 
And it became very clear, as I looked at the debate in the early 
days, that the very first point that the people made 

was that they wanted democratic control and democratic say on 
resources. And this has not been a major issue only since the 
’40s; it was a major issue right after the formation of 
Saskatchewan from 1905 to the period of 1930. 
 
And the reason it was an issue is because the resources were not 
under the control of the people of Saskatchewan during that 
period. It was only after the natural resources transfer 
agreement of 1930 that we finally did have a control, and I say, 
in the resources that were right here in our province. 
 
And many people, at that time of the ’30s, recognized the 
tremendous and disastrous boom and bust strategy of private 
industry, and many had started talking about public enterprise. 
And a lot of the debates in the early ’30s talked about having 
not only private enterprise, but co-operatives and also the public 
corporations. 
 
But it wasn’t until the ’40s that a greater strategy on public 
control came to be put in place. Although public corporations 
had already been established in Canada, in different places, it 
wasn’t until the election of the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) that the public corporation, not 
only practice but theory became to be developed more fully, 
and the call for a mixed economy approach became more 
explicitly defined. 
 
As we look at Bill 20, one therefore looks at the overall need 
for people having a democratic control over their resources. 
Many of the people had felt that the private foreign ownership 
in their provinces, you know, throughout Canada, was not 
providing the proper returns, and the small-scale returns that 
they had were never really brought up to a proper level 
basically because private corporations had a virtual monopoly 
control over the society at large in the economic sphere. 
 
So one of the very first things that is part of the debate is the 
whole aspect of public control — public control in the sense of 
having a fair a return for the people in the province, and public 
control also in determining what direction the resource needs to 
grow as far as the future is concerned. So there was the whole 
question of expansion and/or stabilization at particular times in 
historical development. 
 
The other aspects that were very clear as I enter into this debate 
is the whole question of not only a return in investments from a 
material resource level in regards to returns on taxation and rent 
and royalties, but also a greater control so that people from our 
province could have the jobs and we could develop the skills 
right here in this province. We didn’t have to rely on the 
work-force completely from Europe or the United States or, in 
these days, Japan or elsewhere. 
 
The people said that we needed to develop the work-force right 
here in Saskatchewan, that we indeed could stand up alongside 
any government in the world and say, yes, we could have a 
work-force that can be matched with anybody else in the world. 
So there was a great concern during the debates, that issue of 
jobs and building the skilled work-force right here in the 
province as a central way of providing the public ownership  



 
June 19, 1989 

2031 
 

strategy. 
 
It was only in this way then that the people could say, yes, this 
is a good idea. It’s not only a question of numbers of jobs. We 
know that we can get more jobs through greater public 
democratic control of our economy. We already have 
democratic political control of our systems, but we needed to do 
it also in the economic sphere. So a lot of people said that the 
only way that it could be done was to make sure that we went 
into public ownership of major resources. 
 
So the second clear aspect is therefore the aspects of jobs. Just a 
quick overview: from 1981 to 1987, when the NDP, with a 
philosophy of democratic public ownership, there was about 
2,200 jobs in the potash industry. And at the time the Tories 
entered the management of the potash industry, we lost 800 
jobs, you know, as introductory comments. 
 
The other aspect of the democratic public ownership of our 
resources was the fact that we had to keep pace with world 
development. We knew that technological advances were taking 
place throughout the world at a rapid pace during the ’50s, ’60s, 
and ’70s, and that by that time it became to be recognized that 
we were lagging behind in technological advances and research 
and development in this province. 
 
(2130) 
 
And it became very clear that the only way that we could have a 
certain amount of control on research and development was to 
have public ownership of the resources, and in that way then, 
the direct investments and the returns could be redirected into a 
challenging mould for the future; that indeed we could have a 
basis for not only having one of the best work-forces in the 
world, and having the best rates of returns, but that we were 
progressing in the scientific and technological development of 
this world and we were taking a world-class leadership in all 
these spheres as the debate went on, you know, from the ’40s, 
right up to the ’80s. 
 
As I also looked at a more modern issue, it becomes very clear 
that the world strategy has to consider the aspects of 
environment and that we have to move to sustainable economic 
development. But unless we have firm control and planned 
systems, there is no way that environmental concerns can be 
taken care of. 
 
When the almighty dollar is the only thing that looms forward 
in the horizon, we know that the environmental consideration 
always takes a back seat. We recognize that very clearly from 
recently, from the Exxon spill in the B.C. coast, because the 
almighty dollar controls American corporations and because 
they only believe in privatized schemes of development that 
they would not dare challenge Exxon. 
 
And it becomes very clear as we look at future development 
that environmental and sustainable economic development 
strategies become part and parcel of this development. And we 
were moving in that direction in many of the spheres of publicly 
controlled institutions and corporations in this province. 

The other aspect that we have to look at in regards to the debate 
on Bill 20 is the fact of managing our resources. We well know 
the record of mismanagement that the PC government has put 
forth since 1981. Everybody has heard already about the $4 
billion that we are in the hole, over a million dollars a day in 
regards to interest payments. We well know the degree of 
mismanagement and even corruption in regards to such things 
as GigaText and many other situations that will arise from time 
to time. 
 
And also, just in the past while, we can look back at the 
mismanagement of our public accounting. We cannot even 
account for our money through our public accounting system 
that we are . . . Our government today will break the law in 
regards to the public . . . of not following the public account 
regulations and laws. 
 
So when we look at the whole question of Bill 20, we also have 
to look at the question of mismanagement and corruption. 
 
When I looked at the debates in regards to the issue of the 
members from the . . . as I read the paper and so on, in many 
cases when the issue of public ownership comes in, I often hear 
the Premier talking about the late T.C. Douglas, and saying that 
Mr. Douglas would have agreed with the policies of the Devine 
Government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members are not to refer to 
other members by name, but by constituency or position. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards to comments on T.C. Douglas, I 
decided I’d do a little bit of research myself as to what T.C. 
Douglas actually said in regards to public corporations and 
mixed economy approaches. And I looked at the book, The 
Making of a Socialist: The Recollections of T.C. Douglas, 
edited by Louis H. Thomas, and this book was published by the 
University of Alberta Press in 1982. 
 
His whole strategy, of course, had been talked about for many 
years, and in a more recent interview in the late ’70s, I guess, 
and early ’80s, this is what he had to say when a lot of people 
were saying that he was only dealing with moving into the area 
of private ownership. He said on page 100: 
 

 In the speech from this particular debate in 1936, in one of 
the last speeches I made in the federal Parliament in 1944, 
and also in the very first speech I made in the 
Saskatchewan Legislature in October 1944, I stressed the 
fact that we believe in a mixed economy. Public ownership, 
co-operative ownership, and private ownership should each 
operate in their respective fields. 
 

As we looked at that strategy, the government — and especially 
the Premier — has always said, well, that is just a radical 
strategy — it’s just a bunch of radicals that are making these 
demands, you know, from the opposition party. These demands 
are just a group of radicals controlling the show. 
 
And in many situations, of course, the late Tommy  



 
June 19, 1989 

2032 
 

Douglas was confronted with that same issue. And this is what 
he has to say in that regard, and this is on page 168 of the book, 
The Making of a Socialist: 
 

When people say, “You have become more mellow, less 
socialistic now, than before you took office,” this is 
absolute nonsense. I’m more of a radical than when I took 
office for one very obvious reason. In 1944 I thought these 
things could be done, and today I know they can be done. 
I’ve seen health insurance become a reality. I’ve seen 
public ownership of power and natural gas. I’ve seen a bus 
transportation system. I’ve seen compulsory car insurance. 
All these things are now accepted as part of our way of life 
in this province. We’ve become convinced that these 
things, which were once thought to be radical, aren’t 
radical at all; they’re just plain common sense applied to 
the economic and social problems of our time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In further statements by the late Mr. Douglas, 
he said that the founding of the Crown corporations were based 
on three primary purposes. And on page 175, he states: 
 

One was to process our primary products, the second was 
to create employment, and the third was to raise the wealth 
production of the province, and consequently the 
provincial revenue of the province. 
 

It becomes very clear that the late Tommy Douglas recognized 
that you had to control our resources in order to get towards the 
goal of full employment, and that we need to be able to look at 
the returns and the fair returns that accrue from that 
development. And I think he stated it very clearly in that regard 
in this particular text. 
 
The other thing that is always mentioned about the late Tommy 
Douglas was the relationship and what he had to say about the 
large-scale corporations. And many people thought that he had 
become mellow on that point in his latter years, but this is what 
he again says in that regard. On page 301 he says — this is on 
300 and 301, and I think I might as well read the whole quote: 
 

. . . the co-operatives and small independent producers 
have prevented the oil resources of Saskatchewan from 
being held by half a dozen big companies who can form a 
cartel. They represent an effective balance wheel. This is 
important in a mixed economy: the public and private 
segments of the economy must, in my opinion, represent at 
least twenty to twenty-five per cent of the total economy if 
they’re to be an effective balance wheel against the big 
monopolies. Big monopolies can only throttle the economy 
when they have ninety or a hundred per cent of the control. 
Monopolies must be compelled by competition to keep 
their prices down and not to exploit the public. 
 

In other words, as I look at the argumentation of the 

members from across in trying to utilize the idea that T. C. 
Douglas was siding with them in the goal of privatization, it 
becomes very clear from the actual records of T. C. Douglas 
that that is simply not the case. He recognized the need for 
public ownership which you, the members of the government, 
are trying to destroy. You’re trying to destroy an important part 
of the heritage that Tommy Douglas had built in this province. 
You’re trying to dismantle the very basis of economic strategy 
that Tommy Douglas had outlined for our children and the 
future of our province. 
 
It becomes very clear that . . . he said that public ownership 
required at the same time a joint plan for job development, and 
that job development would come alongside public ownership. 
And also it becomes very clear that the late Tommy Douglas 
recognized that it is only because you have a certain amount of 
democratic control, in not only politics but in economic 
development as well, can you effectively say that you have a 
control of your resources. 
 
I wanted to start that out because I have seen that debate go on 
for some time. And being new to the legislature and being new 
to the writings, I decided to do a bit of research in the past week 
in preparation for the potash debate. And as I looked at the 
potash debate, I also examined the more recent statements by 
other leaders in regards to the need for Crown corporations. 
 
And before I get into that, I would like to first of all go into the 
history a bit on potash development and the need for utilizing 
fertilizers in regards to agricultural production. 
 
(2145) 
 
Of course, the use of fertilizers in agricultural development is 
not a new development; it’s been going on for centuries. It has 
been recognized already, even when the European came to 
North America, that a lot of the North American Indians were 
using fertilizers in regards to their agricultural production. 
 
Many had recognized the utilization of wood ash for fertilizer. 
And a lot of the general concepts of fertilizer and the utilization 
of the ash and the formation of potassium chloride on a natural 
level and the long-term geological development of it is an 
indirect relationship, I guess, on a more short-term scale, of 
looking at the historical level of the history of fertilizers. 
 
And I think that the utilization of fertilizers, in the modern 
sense, in the 1800s when potassium was used, at that time it 
was recognized that it could be developed through large-scale 
pots, and that the ash and the remnants of the ash in there 
developed the potassium for fertilizers. And in that sense, that’s 
where the word potash really comes from. It comes from the 
two separate words, the iron pot and also the ash — and the 
word potash was come. And potassium was simply a 
latinization of potash. And that’s where the word potassium and 
potash have come about. 
 
As I looked at the history of potash in Saskatchewan, I looked 
at the aspect of when it would first start. And from my research, 
I looked at it, and it said the first potash was discovered in 
around Radville back in 1943. And it was  



 
June 19, 1989 

2033 
 

only in 1946 that the first exploratory oil well near . . . See, 
there was an exploratory oil well near Unity where potash was 
discovered. At that time the core sample was at the depth of 
about 3,000 feet, and so on. And a lot of the oil exploration 
process then helped to develop the early discoveries of potash 
development. 
 
The actual first attempt at the commercial production occurred 
at Unity in 1951, and an effort was made to mine the potash but 
this failed. And by 1960, the method used was bringing in 
flooding, so they abandoned that development at that time. 
 
The privatization . . . the private interests in potash started their 
modern development in 1956 when the Potash Company of 
America, which also owns many mines in New Mexico, began 
sinking a shaft at Patience Lake near Saskatoon, and it began 
production in November of 1958. The development occurred 
right till the ’60s. 
 
Another major company which did development in potash was 
the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation, or IMC 
for short, and they began sinking a shaft in Esterhazy back in 
1957. And it was IMC that first developed the . . . to overcome 
the problems that were initially . . . that they initially 
encountered during the ’50s. 
 
So a lot of the early development kept on going. Another was 
developed in Belle Plaine in ’64, and three more potash mines 
came into production around Allan in ’68, and Cominco’s in 
’69 at Vanscoy, and the central mine near Colonsay, and 
another in 1970 at the Sylvite mine in Rocanville. 
 
So there was a tremendous amount of development, therefore, 
that started with the mid-’50s and on into the ’60s. The basis of 
development during this time, of course, was on a privatized 
basis. 
 
And when I looked at the returns in those years to the province, 
and as the debates quickened during the formation of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan back in 1975, it is important to 
recognize that one of the central points of debate at that time 
was the fact of the returns, and the fact that although new laws 
had been established the companies were not following the 
laws. 
 
And as I delved into the history, I looked at some notes made 
by Allan Blakeney on August 26, ’87, and these are the points 
that he makes in regards to the need for the setting up of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan back in ’75. And he talks 
about the reason why he had set this up. And in quotes this is 
what he says: 
 

In 1976 all of Saskatchewan’s potash industry was owned 
outside the province, and most of it — 85 per cent — was 
owned outside Canada. Our government tried to work with 
industry to develop sound resource policy, and ensure 
orderly expansion of the industry in Saskatchewan, and 
provide for fair taxation levels. 
 
Most of the private potash companies refused to 
co-operate. They refused to provide the information 
required by government regulations. This information was 
necessary to calculate 

royalties. They declined to proceed with orderly expansion 
of the industry in Saskatchewan. They launched a series of 
lawsuits challenging the province’s right to collect fair 
levels of taxation. In 1976, the New Democratic Party took 
action to deal with the private potash companies’ arrogant 
disregard for the public interest. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I looked at this quote, a lot of the central issues 
in relation to our debate on Bill 20 are stated fairly clearly at 
this time, in 1975. It says very clearly, and as I looked at the 
general comments on ownership, we recognize right here that 
85 per cent was owned outside of Canada — it was 85 per cent 
— a significant amount of foreign ownership. 
 
And this is the way that this Tory government wants to go back 
to. It’s going back to the good old days where everything is 
owned from outside this province — and they haven’t learned 
that the tremendous benefits of the public corporation in itself. 
 
The other thing was that Mr. Blakeney mentioned was to have 
sound resource development policy and the orderly expansion 
of the industry in Saskatchewan. And what he means by that is 
that during the time of the Liberal era, not only did we get a 
very low rate of return, Mr. Speaker, we were getting about two 
and a half per cent return. And as . . . When the NDP came in 
during the first stages, they tried to work very closely with the 
potash industry, but the potash industry fought hard, and we 
were able to get about 6 per cent from the companies back in 
’71. 
 
And as we look at the returns, I will be dealing with these in 
greater detail, as we proceed on my speech, but I wanted to deal 
with Mr. Blakeney’s statements, but the member from Weyburn 
keeps interrupting. But I guess I’ll just keep on going. 
 
They also . . . Very interesting — what Mr. Blakeney was 
saying is that the companies were not following the law. 
Although there was improvements on the increase, when we 
tried to get better returns from the big corporations back in ’74, 
and there was a reserve tax policy that was introduced where we 
would get a greater amount of return, what the companies did 
was they hired their best lawyers around and tried to take the 
province of Saskatchewan to court. And as I look at today, 
when we are debating this in the legislature, not only the 
corporations were trying to break the law in those days, today 
it’s the PC Government of Saskatchewan that’s not following 
the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, they don’t follow the law in 
regards to the . . . as we see in the latest auditor’s report, where 
we can’t access 50 per cent of our public accounts, especially as 
it relates to big corporations, especially as it relates to the 
privatization process of the PC government. I’ve tried to get 
information from them during the privatization process of 
SMDC, but you couldn’t get anything. I know the reason why 
the public accounts person just wasn’t able to get anything from 
this government either.  



 
June 19, 1989 

2034 
 

So as I look at Mr. Blakeney’s statements, we will recognize 
that the whole aspect of the province’s right to collect fair levels 
of taxation was challenged by the corporations. The 
corporations tried to disregard Saskatchewan law, but it was 
only after that did they try and form the Crown corporations. 
Blakeney says very clearly that after they blatantly disregarded 
public interest we decided to go on the path of public 
ownership. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because it’s getting close to 10 o’clock, I 
would like to move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


