


















































May 10, 1989 Hansard


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 10, 1989 
 

1051 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present 
a petition to the Legislative Assembly from approximately 600 
residents from all parts of Saskatchewan. These petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, are urging the government not to privatize the utility 
of Saskpower and to leave it in the domain of all the people of 
Saskatchewan rather than just a few rich individuals. These 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are, as I said, from various parts of 
Saskatchewan. They are from Elrose, Humboldt, Lanigan, 
Aberdeen, Nipawin, Dundurn, Kindersley, Saskatoon, 
Martensville, and Allan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
what amounts to a continuing protest by the people of 
Saskatchewan, I rise to present approximately 500 petitions 
from a variety of communities: Moose Jaw, Vanscoy, Delisle, 
Regina, Biggar, Edenwold, Saskatoon, Nipawin, and Milestone. 
These people, Mr. Speaker, from all parts of the province 
recognize that this battle is far from won, and continue to 
petition this government to recognize their rights. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 as 
well, and I have here about 600 petitions, or 600 names on a 
petition, people who are asking the government not to sell off 
the power corporation to a few rich individuals, and keep it 
owned by the people of the province through their government. 
 
The names come from towns like Val Marie, Yorkton, 
Weyburn, Disley, Tisdale, Davidson, and other centres. 
 
The Speaker: — I happened to hear some members suggesting 
that we move to introduction of guests and come back to 
petitions later. Is leave granted for that suggestion? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my honour to present to you, and to the members of the 
legislature, 23 students from the Pelly School who are seated in 
your gallery. They are from grades 8, 10, and 12. They are 
accompanied by Murray Bruce and Gwyn Shankowsky, and it 
is my honour on behalf of my seat mate and colleague, the 
member from Pelly, to do this introduction. 
 
I see that they have toured the legislature and are now attending 
question period, and I would tell them that it’ll be my pleasure 
to meet with them for pictures and refreshments at 
approximately 2:30. And I would now ask all members of the 
legislature to welcome them to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure to introduce to you, and to members of this Assembly, 
20 grade 5 students from Craik School, Craik, Saskatchewan. 
They’re sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is an utmost pleasure today, especially. This is the school that 
I attended from 1937 to 1949. And I wish to say that these 
classes, Mr. Speaker, are in trailers right now because we 
demolished the old school, and we are now building a $2 
million school in Craik, and they’ll have a brand-new school. 
 
I’ll be meeting with the students which are accompanied by 
their teacher, Mrs. Murphy, and chaperon, Mrs. Fitzsimmons; 
and a bus driver, Mrs. Meshke. I’ll be meeting with them at 3 
o’clock for questions and drinks. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 
welcoming the students from my old school, Craik, into the 
legislature today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
through you, and to the legislature, some 15 grade 9 students 
from Lake Lenore High School. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Marilee Sterner, and parents, Mr. Steve and Lois 
Yeager, Florence Pronych, and Donna Nosbush. 
 
I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of meeting with this group 
this morning. They subsequently went to the RCMP, and they 
were very interested in what they saw here in their tour, and 
they arranged to come back for question period. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me to welcome the students 
and their chaperons and teacher, and wish them a safe trip 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Quill Lakes in welcoming the students from 
Lake Lenore. As the member from Quill Lakes will well know, 
that was my home town, and I attended school there and lived 
there for my first 16 years of life. And I’d just like to say it’s a 
pleasure seeing some familiar faces again. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of 
the Assembly, two gentlemen seated in your Speaker’s gallery. 
They are Vince Folk and Blaine Coleman, both from 
Whitewood. I had the pleasure of spending a fair portion of the 
morning with them, and indeed I hope to spend a bit of the 
afternoon with them afterwards. I hope they enjoy the 
proceedings, and I ask all members to welcome Vince and 
Blaine to the Assembly. 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1052 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present these petitions to the Assembly on behalf 
of some 800 residents of Saskatchewan. They are, as my 
colleagues have indicated, urging the government not to 
privatize Saskatchewan Power Corporation but to keep this 
major public utility in the service of all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a list of names, Mr. Speaker, that are from communities 
such as Lipton, Moose Jaw, Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, McLean, 
White City, Wadena, Swift Current, Elstow, Watrous, 
Saskatoon, Biggar, Melville, Killaly, Lemberg. I am pleased on 
their behalf to present these names, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present some 600 petitions of residents of 
Saskatchewan who are opposed to the government’s move to 
privatize SaskPower. 
 
The signatures are from a variety of communities: Leroy, 
Preeceville, Muenster, Watson, Raymore, Leoville, Christopher 
Lake, Domremy, Prince Albert, Kendal, Earl Grey, Strasbourg, 
and Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present petitions to the Assembly, containing 600 
names of Saskatchewan residents who are opposed to the 
privatization of SaskPower. 
 
These petitioners are from such places as Manitou Beach, 
Watrous, Meadow Lake, Shaunavon, Rapid View, Pilger, 
Biggar, Humboldt, Young, Saskatoon, and Lake Lenore. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 11 to add 
to the names that have already been submitted with regard to 
the petition of the people of Saskatchewan which begins: “That 
the privatization of SaskPower is not in the public interest . . .” I 
have 600 names on this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, and 
they come from such varied communities in Saskatchewan as 
Canwood, Hoey, Albertville, Prince Albert, Colonsay, Allan, 
Shipman, Arelee, Sonningdale, Perdue, Hafford, Biggar, 
Shellbrook, Holbein, and my own city of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to rise 
to present, pursuant to rule 11, the signatures of over 600 
signators to the same petition objecting to the piratization of 
SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, these signators come from 
communities such as Central Butte, Midale, Bienfait, Hudson 
Bay, Bradwell, Indian Head, Saskatoon, Rosthern, Regina, 
Moose Jaw, and others. And it is my honour to present them to 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I rise under rule 11, Mr. Speaker, and 
pursuant to rule 11 I’d like to present a petition concerning the 
privatization of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. These 
signatories, who are residents of the  

province of Saskatchewan, do not wish the privatization of 
SaskPower to take place. And the signatories come from Moose 
Jaw, Saskatoon, Unity, Humboldt, Lanigan, Rosthern, Duck 
Lake, Laird, Aberdeen, and Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this brings to total 2,700 petitions that I have 
personally presented in this Legislative Assembly, and I hope to 
present more to you, sir. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present a petition signed by over 600 people who 
are residents of the province of Saskatchewan. These people are 
opposed to the privatization of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, and they have signed a petition outlining their 
opposition to the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities including 
Kinistino, North Battleford, Dalmeny, Regina, Allan, Biggar, 
Prince Albert, Hanley, Lintlaw. Many of the people who have 
signed the petition are residents of my own constituency, 
Saskatoon Nutana 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to this Assembly for 
over 600 residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging the Government of Saskatchewan not to privatize 
SaskPower but to keep this major public utility in the service of 
all Saskatchewan people rather than the hands of a few wealthy 
outside of the province. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities, Mr. 
Speaker, including Moose Jaw, Tuxford, Drinkwater, Rouleau, 
Bateman, Silton, Shamrock, Gravelbourg, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Swift Current, Kronau, and my home community of Regina. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11 I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of 600-some people from the 
districts of Biggar, Milden, Wakaw, La Ronge, Aberdeen, 
Perdue, Allan, Dundurn, Hague, Plunkett, Asquith, Leoville, 
Marcelin, Delisle, and Warman. Each one of them has signed to 
voice their opposition to the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to file a petition with the Legislative Assembly 
protesting the privatization of SaskPower. There are 
approximately 600 names on this petition and they come from 
communities such as Dorintosh, Meadow Lake, Codette, Duval, 
Landis, Wilkie, Killaly, Fort Qu’Appelle, Glenavon, Unity, 
Chitek Lake, Leroy, Cupar, and Avonlea. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of approximately 600 
people who are adding their name to the tens of thousands of 
people who are opposed to the government’s plan to privatize 
SaskPower. These people come from areas such as Humboldt, 
Lanigan, Hoey, Bruno, Perdue, Rosthern, Birch Hills, and 
Gronlid. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise also pursuant to rule 11 to 
present petitions signed by approximately 600 citizens of the 
province, all of whom are urging the provincial government to 
stop the privatization of  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1053 
 

SaskPower. The people who have signed this petition are from 
communities such as Borden, Medstead, Strasbourg, Lucky 
Lake, Lestock, Weldon, Fort Qu’Appelle, Prince Albert, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
honoured to once again rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition to the Assembly of approximately 600 names of 
Saskatchewan residents. As you know, the right to petition is at 
the heart of our parliamentary system; therefore, I compliment 
the citizens of Saskatchewan for overwhelmingly taking part in 
such a fundamental, democratic process. 
 
These 600 residents are from communities of Landis, Biggar, 
Rosetown, Allan, Borden, Young, Watrous, and Saskatoon. 
They asked the provincial government not to privatize 
SaskPower as it is not in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 
residents. Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I table these 
names today. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present to 
you, to the Assembly, 600 petitioners of those who oppose the 
privatization of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, who 
oppose the selling off of a public utility to wealthy 
out-of-province investors. These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come 
from such communities as Saskatoon, Allan, Clavet, Gronlid, 
Codette, Wilkie, Landis, Bengough, Willow Bunch, and 
represents over 3,100 petitions which I’ve had the honour to 
present to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, under rule 11 I rise to present yet 
another 600 names of Saskatchewan residents. These people 
make their homes in the communities of Endeavour, Ponteix, 
Parkbeg, Bateman, Hodgeville, Gravelbourg, Liberty, Crane 
Valley, Swift Current, and my home community of Moose Jaw, 
and they are unanimous in opposing the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of over 600 
Saskatchewan residents who are opposed to the privatization of 
the Sask Power Corporation and are exercising their democratic 
right to display their opposition. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m again honoured to 
rise pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions. Today I have a list 
of over 600 signators to the petition of people opposing the 
sell-off of SaskPower. These people understand that SaskPower 
is there for the benefit of all Saskatchewan people and therefore 
are urging the government not to privatize it. 
 
These 600 people are from places such as Lestock, Punnichy, 
Dysart, Radville, Bankend, Outlook, the James Smith Reserve, 
Silton, Regina, Fillmore, Odessa, Moose Jaw, Pennant, Kyle, 
Hodgeville, Stockholm, Killaly, Melville, and Kinistino. And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, the good folks of Punnichy ran out of 
paper. Obviously if we made a mistake, it was we sent too small 
a petition out. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am honoured to 
rise pursuant to rule 11 to present to this Assembly a  

petition signed by a number of people in different communities 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
This petition is addressed to all of the members of the 
Assembly, including the members opposite, urging them to urge 
the provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower. The people who have signed this petition 
understand very clearly that the privatization of SaskPower will 
lead to higher utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will 
benefit only the wealthy investors. They’re opposing the 
privatization of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And among the approximate 600 signatures, only a few of the 
many communities represented include Cando, Battleford, 
Martensville, Landis, Rosetown, Perdue, Arelee, Allan, Spruce 
Home, Eston, and many signatures from my constituency of 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly for several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging the 
government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major 
public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities including 
Eston, Loreburn, Moosomin, Kamsack, Rosetown, Regina, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition from the communities of Ogema, Creighton, 
Aberdeen, Hafford, Kipling, and many others, all of whom are 
opposing the sale of SaskPower. There are some 600 names or 
48 sheets of paper here. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join my colleagues, pursuant to rule no. 11, and 
table additional petitions with respect to this important issue. 
 
Before taking my place I would just simply advise, Mr. 
Speaker, that today, by today’s petitioning process, we have 
tabled the names of approximately 16,000 additional signators 
to the petitions of 50,000-plus that we tabled yesterday. 
 
I simply want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in the days ahead 
we do not anticipate this to be the last of the petitions, but a 
continuation of the people’s desire that the government opposite 
listen and drop totally, finally, and completely, the SaskEnergy 
Bills. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — I would like to ask leave to introduce some 
guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to draw 
your attention to your gallery where I have 14 students in  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1054 
 

from the Elfros School in Elfros, Saskatchewan. They are going 
to be joining me later for a small question period, I hope, and 
some refreshments in the members’ dining room. Their teachers 
are Patricia Hack, Wendy Wilkinson, and their bus driver is 
Doug Ford. I’d like all members to join me in welcoming them 
here today and wishing them a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Acting Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7) I have examined the 
following petitions and found them to be in order: 
 

Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 
urge the provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal-Provincial Drought Payment 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is to the Minister of Agriculture, the hon. the Premier, and it 
concerns the federal-provincial drought payment announcement 
back in November of 1988, and it deals with my puzzlement 
about the way this matter has been handled by the governments 
in Regina and Ottawa. 
 
First an announcement in November of 1988, which we now 
find out apparently did not have the ground rules clear as to 
who pays what. Secondly, during the period running up to the 
federal budget, the silence of our Premier and our government 
in advocating the necessity of the federal government 
complying with the promise. And now, thirdly, that the federal 
Wilson budget is down and the numbers are written and farmers 
are clearly out about 400 to $500 million. Now the Premier, 
you’re going to Ottawa on Friday to fight for the drought 
payments. 
 
This surely is a bizarre way to fight for drought payments for 
rural Saskatchewan. My question to you, sir, is simple and very 
clear-cut: how in the world do you justify this kind of political 
negligence and leaving the farmers out their in the wind — the 
dry wind — and not insisting that those drought payments are 
made and having been made in January of this year when they 
should have been? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of our lobby with 
the federal government, we have been able to deliver hundreds 
of millions and indeed billions of dollars of cash to farmers in 
western Canada and certainly in the province of Saskatchewan 
like they’ve never received before. 
 
I will say to the hon. member, as I have on earlier occasions, 
this drought payment is to be made during the crop year 
1988-89, and it will be, Mr. Speaker. We will  

see that. And as they explained, the initial payment will go out 
for seeding, and the final payment will be out before the end of 
the crop year. Well, Mr. Speaker, as you know, if you had a 
crop you’d be marketing it as the quotas come along, and you 
market it throughout the crop year. 
 
So if this amounts to something like 840 or $850 million, most 
of it, or at least half of it, coming to the province of 
Saskatchewan, it will, Mr. Speaker, amount to in the 
neighbourhood of 25 to $40 an acre, which on a thousand acres 
would be $40,000, Mr. Speaker, to members and residents in 
the province of Saskatchewan who suffered drought. And I 
fully expect that to be the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Premier. The promise made by the Prime Minister, Mr. 
Mulroney, and by yourself in November to the people of this 
province, the farmers, was a drought payment of $45 per acre. 
Some several months have gone by; we’re in the spring seeding 
period. This money ought to have been, should have been in the 
hands of the farmers long before this time, especially in the 
light of their crisis. 
 
I am asking this question to you, Mr. Premier. How in the world 
is it that you can justify this inordinate delay of time in the 
development and the announcement and the implementation of 
this policy in the face of your election promise? What in the 
world has preoccupied you? What’s the reason for the delay? 
Are you so preoccupied with your privatization mania that you 
have forgotten this very important sector, the farming 
community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
this is a federal program, and the federal government was 
re-elected because, Mr. Speaker, they have listened and 
provided a great deal of support to farmers all across western 
Canada. And we said, Mr. Speaker, that this will be made in 
two payments in the crop year. Well the first payment is out, 
and the second payment will be there before the end of the crop 
year, and I’m going to hold them to the fact that it’s 40 to $45 
an acre, as they said, Mr. Speaker. So we will see when the final 
payment comes out. 
 
Now I would like more money faster, even more money than 
this, but I can honestly say, and I’m sure the hon. member 
knows, that when farmers have faced difficulty before we’ve 
never seen this kind of support, ever. This is the most they’ve 
ever received against high interest rates, drought payments, 
deficiency payments, lots of payments, Mr. Speaker — over 
$100,000 per farmer in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
pretty significant, Mr. Speaker, and I think, in due fairness to 
the federal government, when they said that they’re going to 
pay it in two payments, initial and final, we should let them 
make their initial and final payment in the crop year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1055 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
hon. the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. There are some 
reports out of Ottawa that the July payment itself is going to be 
delayed and that the announcement is going to be made fairly 
soon, perhaps even at your ministers’ meeting on Friday. 
 
I wonder if the Premier would be able to tell us whether or not 
he has information to that effect, that even that July is a 
possibility of further postponement. And secondly, will the 
Premier undertake to assure the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan that, come hell or high water, whether it’s your 
twisting the arm of Mr. Mulroney until it virtually almost comes 
off, or whether it’s your arguments, or whether it’s the 
provincial purse, you’re not going to come back from Ottawa 
until the farmers of this province are guaranteed that that 
promise is fulfilled, namely $45 per acre, because they need it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, maybe I can . . . (inaudible) 
. . . I’ll certainly give the hon. member the assurance that I will 
fight very hard for Saskatchewan farmers, and we will work, 
Mr. Speaker, to deliver as we have in the past. I could maybe 
invite him . . . He wanted to twist the Prime Minister’s arm. 
Maybe we could both go down there and we could ring the 
bells, Mr. Speaker, or we could do some unparliamentary 
function that we could go down and he could get a little 
national attention along with some of his colleagues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Look, I fully support the farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and work extremely hard and long hours to deliver programs 
and support, financial support and protection against high 
interest rates and drought and flood and international fairness of 
unfair subsidies that we have dealt, Mr. Speaker, and dealt with. 
And we’ll continue to do that to the very best of our ability. 
And I believe that farmers know that we’re trying very hard on 
their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Premier. I don’t have my travel bags packed, but if he wants to 
invite me, I’ll come down and join him in this cause. He can 
sing the Hallelujah Chorus; I’ll fight for the $45 per acre, but 
I’m not going to leave Ottawa until they come back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — How about it? How about it? And more 
importantly than that, if you don’t accept the request, then I 
want to put this question to you very succinctly. I want to put 
this question to you succinctly. Please, if I could have your 
attention. The Minister of Finance is giving you an answer. If 
you won’t take me down, I want to ask you this question and I 
want a clear answer to this legislature. 
 
Not that you’re not going to fight hard, because I don’t think 
you’re capable of it, totally; I want you to come back to this 
legislature and make the commitment today that you’re not 
coming back until that election promise  

that you and Mr. Mulroney made is in your pocket and to be 
delivered, and delivered before July 31. There’s no reason for 
the delay. Give us that commitment and your promise today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just have just a little 
bit of a hesitation in inviting the hon. member along. I don’t 
think Allan Blakeney ever took him to defend agriculture in the 
history of the time when he was deputy premier because it 
never . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . We looked at 21 per cent interest 
rates, Mr. Speaker, and nobody over there had any smack at all, 
and it took a new government to do that. Look, I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the hon. member knows that he didn’t defend 
anybody in agriculture, and to take him along right now 
wouldn’t do the farmers of this province any good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, a good part of the 
problem in agriculture today in the province of Saskatchewan is 
the result of the fact that the hon. member, when he had a 
chance to protect farmers, didn’t do it, and they’ve suffered 
from that ever since. And they often remember that, and I’m 
sure they do in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and other places. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that, as I said at the outset, we’ve 
worked very hard to make sure farmers received deficiency 
payments and drought payments, and we will be holding the 
federal government to this payment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Removal of Oats from Canadian Wheat Board Jurisdiction 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a question 
for the Minister of Agriculture and it concerns another 
privatization supported by this privatization-mad government, 
and that, of course, is the decision to remove oats from the 
jurisdiction of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. I’m 
having great difficulty hearing the member from Humboldt, so 
I’ll give him an opportunity to repeat his question. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is obvious when a 
government is slipping and suffering, they are very sensitive on 
these issues. And this is a case of the privatization of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, supported by the Premier, the Minister 
of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the poll released by Decima Research 
this week, conducted by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, which 
shows that 72 per cent of Saskatchewan producers feel the 
federal government should reconsider the move to remove oats 
from the jurisdiction of the board, will you stand in your place 
now, Mr. Minister, stand in your place and reverse your  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1056 
 

decision to go on blindly supporting the Mulroney federal 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I only said that I would 
observe and monitor the situation to see if it in fact it worked as 
a result of the fact that only 1 per cent of the oats . . . or the 
wheat board sales were associated with oats, and in fact the 
domestic livestock industry wanted to have access to a market 
here and the processors. 
 
And particularly as a result of, I believe, the recent research, 
Mr. Speaker, on breakfast cereal that says that oats is very good 
for you and they want more of it to go in there, and there are 
many of these niche markets throughout North America and 
indeed the world, that people are looking at selling to, so I said, 
I’ll examine it and see how it goes. 
 
It didn’t, as some forecast, seem to hurt the price, Mr. Speaker. 
The price for seed oats has gone up. The price of oats have 
generally gone up, and certainly, if I’m not mistaken, even more 
than some of the other commodities. So we just want to 
examine it and see how farmers look at this. 
 
The majority of Saskatchewan farmers don’t grow oats. They 
can use it, and obviously the livestock sector certainly needs 
some support as well as the grain sector. And that balance 
between the livestock and the grain sectors is a good one to 
have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, people of Saskatchewan, the farmers in particular, 
are getting quite sick of your arrogance when it comes to the 
issues of agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — We know that the government consulted with 
the Alberta Sheep and Wool Commission, and it consulted with 
the Manitoba Farm Business Association, but what about the 
farmers of this province? Eighty-two per cent, 82 per cent of the 
Saskatchewan producers thought that there was inadequate 
consultation. To quote from the report by your polling firm, 
Decima, I quote: 
 

Clearly, much of the disapproval surrounding the 
government’s decision is driven by a sense of alienation 
felt by farmers.” 
 

Mr. Minister, what drives you to blindly support the Mulroney 
government and your big-business friends instead of the 
overwhelming number of farmers who disapprove of this 
action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that this is a 
question with respect to oats as it is with respect to loyalty. And 
the hon. member says, why do I support the Prime Minister. I 
know that the members opposite continued to support Tommy 
Douglas when he was on  

the board of directors of Husky Oil. And they did, and they 
said, well that’s fine for a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) premier to be on that, and I know that they 
supported Allan Blakeney when he had his plan to sell shares in 
natural gas and uranium and potash. And they continue to 
support him today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just point out, if it’s all right for you to support Tommy 
Douglas on the board of directors of a major oil company with a 
pretty big expense account, if it’s all right for them to support 
Allan Blakeney putting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It has a 
lot to do with the question, it has to do with loyalty. And you 
supported Blakeney with respect to selling shares in everything 
from aspen to ammonia to potash, uranium, and natural gas. 
 
Now if it’s all right for the NDP to support an NDP or CCF 
premier on an oil company board of directors and a premier 
here of the NDP wanting to sell shares in natural gas, then I 
think it’s quite appropriate for Grant Devine, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, to support a Conservative prime minister if in 
fact he’s delivered $100,000 apiece to the farmers in 
Saskatchewan and help protect them against high interest rates, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I realize the hon. member was using his own 
name; however, it’s still not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure whether 
the member is becoming unravelled, but when it comes to ducks 
and Douglas, I think he’s going a little bit quackers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I would like to have another 
quote, another quote, and this is the essence of this whole issue. 
I quote: 
 

It would appear that these farmers recognize that the 
removal of oats is a larger issue and that there are 
implications for the ongoing viability of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 

The farmers recognize this for what it is, the first step to 
privatize the grain marketing and the end of the wheat board. 
They can see through that charade. 
 
Since 94 per cent of the Saskatchewan producers want the 
wheat board as their marketing agency, Mr. Minister, I ask you 
this: why are you still attempting to deceive them with your 
double talk? I give you a chance now to stand up in your place, 
support the Canadian Wheat Board by showing some action of 
reversing your decision to remove oats from the jurisdiction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it would be at 
least fair to put the hon. member’s question in perspective, and 
for the public and for the media, that we’re sitting in this 
Legislative Assembly after several years of drought and 
grasshoppers and $2 wheat, and  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1057 
 

today there’s 85 kilometre winds and the dust is blowing. It’s 
very difficult for farmers. And the hon. member’s standing up 
and talking about oats, whether it should be in the Canadian 
Wheat Board or whether it shouldn’t. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s fair to ask legitimate 
questions about drought and ask legitimate questions about 
what we can do for irrigation and help drought-proof the 
province of Saskatchewan, about new crop insurance 
mechanisms, about what we can do to have water for people in 
towns and villages and all kinds of things that are possible to 
help farmers now. And he skates right over that, Mr. Speaker, in 
the face of what’s going on today in this province and says, well 
what about oats? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, in 1981 and ’82 when interest 
rates were 20 per cent, when the government of the day, the 
NDP, were buying land bank, you could do polls all across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t have to have one. All 
you had to know was that they didn’t stick up for the farmers, 
they never have, they haven’t today, and they don’t in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the relevant issue today is how farmers can get 
their crop in under these conditions and expect some support 
from a government as they’ve seen in the past. That’s the 
relevant question for question period — not oats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Placing of Priorities 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Agriculture, and it has to do with priorities, it has to 
do with priorities. The Premier of this province got up and he 
said “loyalty.” And he said the loyalty was, as far as he was 
concerned, Brian Mulroney, the leader of the party. 
 
I ask the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan on priorities: 
to whom is your loyalty, first loyalty to — to Brian Mulroney 
and the Conservatives, or to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? Where’s your first loyalty? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will go back and 
remind the hon. member that I’m sure that he supported Allan 
Blakeney, the former premier of this province, when he planned 
to sell shares in everything. Right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Including natural gas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Including natural gas. Where was your 
loyalty? Was it there? 
 
The premier, the premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the 
NDP premier said, we will sell shares in potash mines, uranium 
mines, and natural gas. That was the share program, and for 
people all across the province including on the Canadian stock 
exchanges, and you supported him. 
 

Where are you today? Where are you today? Where’s your 
loyalty? Where’s your loyalty when it comes down to the 
question of supporting a former CCF premier, okay? On the 
board of directors of Husky Oil to expand . . . did you support 
him? Who were you concerned about? Who were you 
concerned about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to farmers, when it comes to 
interest rates, when it comes to diversification, when it comes to 
expansion and processing and manufacturing, there’s no 
concern over there, Mr. Speaker. It’s all rhetoric, all rhetoric, 
and they don’t know what loyalty is, let alone economic 
development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Given the quality of some of the Minister 
of Agriculture’s answers, one must wonder if you haven’t been 
standing in the sun too long, perhaps intrigued by the subject of 
ducks and their activities in south-east Saskatchewan. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, at another time when there are fewer 
school children in the gallery, we may want to indeed question 
the Minister of Agriculture about what he knows and, more 
importantly, how he came to know it, but not now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the member get on with his 
question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question directed to the Minister of 
Agriculture concerns not the subject of peeping Toms, but the 
subject of your comments, made apparently in Vancouver, that 
farmers are not doing their share to help bring the federal deficit 
under control. It’s a sign of how blind and unquestioning your 
allegiance is to your friend, Brian Mulroney, that you’d make 
such a comment, and not as well give voice to their concerns 
that fuel prices are going up on January 1, that they’ll be paying 
interest rates on cash advances, and that the federal budget 
provides massive cuts in programs from Agriculture Canada. 
You said none of those things, and instead you suggested that 
farmers should be doing more than their fair share. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, is: will farm families ever be able 
to depend upon you to voice their concerns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member and I grew 
up not too far apart from each other on farms. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t spend my time being . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well at least I grew up; I don’t know 
about the hon. member. 
 
An Hon. Member: — At least one of you grew up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — At least one of us grew up. 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1058 
 

I can say to the hon. member that his family and the neighbours 
where we farm, Mr. Speaker, have received a great deal of 
money from the Prime Minister’s government and from this 
administration — a great deal of money — and he knows that. 
And I’m sure his relatives can attest to the tens of thousands of 
dollars that they have received in drought payments, deficiency 
payments, and other programs to help people, as well as the 
cash advances for the livestock industry that weren’t there 
before. 
 
I will say that your relatives, the same as mine and others that 
farm in agriculture, are always worried about interest rates, and 
my comments in Vancouver with the ministers of Agriculture 
saying we have a part to play in reducing interest rates, and that 
can only be done if we can get the national debt down. Now 
that just seems reasonable. 
 
If you look at some interest on cash advances at the elevator, 
Mr. Speaker, it might run into, on average, 2 or $300 a year. 
The average farmer will receive about $25,000 a year, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the payments that have been coming 
forward on drought and deficiency. And he doesn’t have to. I 
mean, it’s obviously an option that they can use. 
 
I’ve said it’s not unreasonable for everybody to participate in 
the process of reducing interest rates and balancing the budget 
at the national level. And I think your own constituents would 
say that. Those that have more income pay higher tax; those 
that have less income pay less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly from the urban markets we have heard over and 
over again that, well, the farmers are getting too much, 
therefore we should be careful with them. Well I think, Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition just said we should go 
give more money to the farmers, and the leader . . . or the 
member from Regina Centre standing up and say, well I’m not 
sure that that should be the case because in fact they can’t 
afford it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Your 
comments, Mr. Minister, were made in the context of the need 
to bring the federal deficit under control. In light of the fact that 
the federal deficit has doubled since that administration took 
office, and the provincial deficit, the highest per capita in 
Canada, is entirely your own creation, the question which farm 
families are asking: is it really fair that they have to bear the 
burden of your mismanagement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve just finished asking 
for more money from the taxpayers to farmers, and they want 
more from governments. They want more from this government 
and from the federal government and they want it out there. 
And then they say, well, for Heaven’s sakes, you’re going to 
have a deficit as the result of drought and the result of 
grasshoppers and international subsidies, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, now, come on, you’ve got to 
be  

fair; you’ve got to be fair. 
 
I mean, the former premier, Mr. Speaker, the former premier, 
Allan Blakeney, stood in this legislature and he said on many 
occasions, look, under these circumstances I’d have a debt as 
well. He said, I wouldn’t have as big a debt. Well that’s fair 
enough; that’s a little politics. But the fact is, somebody had to 
put their shoulder to the wheel and help farmers, and we have, 
at the national level and at the local level, Mr. Speaker, and that 
costs some money. 
 
I said I would defend Saskatchewan farmers with the very 
treasury of this province. I have, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
continue to do that for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Rebate of Income Tax 

Payments to Public Utility Companies 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Rebate of Income Tax Payments to Public 
Utility Companies. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Planning and 
Development Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Mineral Resources Act, 

1985 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Mineral Resources Act, 1985. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Psychiatric Nurses Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Psychiatric Nurses Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1059 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 31 — An Act respecting Certain Adults Requiring 

Guardianship 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Certain Adults Requiring Guardianship. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act respecting certain Consequential 
Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of the Dependent Adults Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting certain Consequential Amendments to certain 
Acts resulting from the enactment of the Dependent Adults Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act to amend The Regional Parks Act, 
1979 

 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Regional Parks Act, 1979. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Parks Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Parks Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 35 — An Act respecting the Implementation of the 

Grasslands National Park Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Implementation of the Grasslands National 
Park Agreement. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to incorporate the Wanuskewin  

Heritage Park 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to incorporate the Wanuskewin Heritage Park. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — One of the questions that I undertook to 
answer was the per diems on the commission, and they were 
450 for the chairman, 350 for the commissioners. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to ask the minister a couple of 
questions regarding the per diem. What expenses would be on 
top of that, or would the 450 include expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There’s no stated. We’re assuming that it’s 
the normal PSC (Public Service Commission) expenses on that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I just want to be clear on this, that it 
would be $450 per day plus expenses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s right. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well is there any number of days 
specified in the agreement or the contract that has been 
obviously signed or agreed to by the members of the panel and 
the chairperson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, they’re to report by, I believe, October 
1. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today I would like 
to get into a little bit of a discussion about the drought payment 
and how it’s going to break down as far as federal-provincial 
relations are concerned. As you will know, this drought 
payment is a very, very important aspect in relationship to the 
economy of Saskatchewan. It’s an investment in the 
continuation of an industry that we have to have maintained in 
this province in order that we see our small towns and our 
communities survive and maintain a good, healthy way of life. 
 
Before the last federal election, Mr. Chairman, the drought 
payment was promised, promised to be a one-time payment at 
40 to $45 an acre. It was promised to come shortly after the 
New Year and be in the hands of the farmers so that they could 
put forward some of their projections for the year to come, 
because they had crops to seed and they had a lot of input costs 
that they had to deal with. 
 
Now this announcement was then . . . all of a sudden it started 
to change. First of all there were delays in that it was going to 
be two payments instead of one. And then  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1060 
 

there was a confrontation between the federal and the provincial 
governments. And I say it’s a confrontation, but I’d like to 
outline to you what I think happened. Before the election, the 
provincial government, I believe, made a commitment to the 
federal government that it would put in a portion of that drought 
payment. I believe it also made a commitment — I’m just 
speculating here — but I think it also had a commitment to 
administer the program, and then after the election was over we 
saw a withdrawal of that commitment. And that is the reason 
why we have seen the delay continually going on, on this 
drought payment. 
 
So in this interim supply Bill, because the leader of this 
government has said that there may be some money coming 
now, it is important that we know what portion, how much, and 
from where it’s going to come. It is very unfortunate that it has 
taken a long time; in fact, many of the farmers today still do not 
have their initial payment. 
 
When they were promised 40 to $45 an acre from a drought 
payment in the hardest hit areas — and that covers about 50 per 
cent or more of this province — first of all, the need was 
identified to be twice what was coming out of Ottawa and the 
government in Regina. But we had to settle for a somewhat 
inadequate figure, and even now that figure, which is 
supposedly $427 million for Saskatchewan, is being put in 
jeopardy. They’re trying to whittle away at it again by stalling, 
by not coming forward and saying, yes, we’re going to support 
the farmers of this province. 
 
And for a government who, with this interim supply Bill, is 
supposedly supporting the farmers of this province to be 
delaying in such a manner is hypocritical and it’s evil, because I 
do not believe that any commitment made during federal 
elections should be withdrawn and reneged upon after that 
election’s over. And this Minister of Finance and the Premier of 
this province have a commitment through things like this 
interim supply Bill. They have a commitment to put forward a 
position that is clear, concise and adequate to cover the needs of 
the rural communities out there. 
 
I say that, Mr. Chairman, because of the desperation in rural 
Saskatchewan. When I look out that window today and see the 
clouds, dust clouds rolling in, I get a little bit sick, because there 
is such a tremendous need for stability of income in the rural 
areas of this province that we need this minister to tell us 
through this interim supply Bill how much of that is going to be 
allocated to the drought payment; how much of that is going to 
be put forward to alleviate some of the concerns that the rural 
people, the farmers of this province have, when they look out 
their window today and see their land drifting away. 
 
They went through it last year. This is the irony, the hypocrisy 
of this whole thing. They went through it last year, day after 
day, watching the sun beat down and the wind blow and the 
government saying yes, maybe; yes, no, maybe so. And again 
we’re starting this year. 
 
And I hate to have a negative attitude, but as a farmer, when I 
sit back and see that wind blowing away my land, I can’t help 
but wonder if this is going to be a repeat of last year. And if it is 
going to be a repeat of last year, why  

would this government, when they see what’s happening this 
year, why would they not establish clearly what they are going 
to put into a drought payment, if any, if they’re going to 
administer. What decision has been made between them and the 
federal government? What portion of the interim supply Bill is 
going to be put forward to cover off part of that drought 
payment? 
 
Because we see in the federal budget $425 million budgeted for 
a drought payment — $425 million, which is half of the $850 
million that was promised — half of what was promised. 
 
And when I wrote a letter to Don Mazankowski, the Minister of 
Agriculture in Ottawa, he said they were in negotiations with 
the province, negotiating who was going to pay what share. 
 
But what’s happening in the meantime? What’s happening to a 
farmer who got $12 an acre when he was promised 40 or 45, 
and he has to put in, you know, $50 an acre of input costs? How 
far does that $12 go? It doesn’t go very far. That’s why it is 
incumbent upon this minister and his Premier to outline to us 
the exact rules. 
 
And now we see the Premier going down to Ottawa where he’s 
still going to be negotiating, still going to be negotiating what 
the portion of the provincial share will be . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, is the hon. member in the 
debate, Mr. Chairman? If he isn’t, I would ask you to ask him to 
be quiet please. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Chairman, we see a promise made of 850 
million, and the farmers thought 40 to $45 an acre from a 
drought payment. But what’s happened? We see all of a sudden 
a promise made and a promise broken, because now the Premier 
is saying, well we’re going to add crop insurance onto that, and 
we’re going to add any production you got on top of that. And 
with all that, that’s going to add up to $45 an acre. 
 
Well that just is not acceptable when the impression left by this 
government and the government in Ottawa was that the farmers 
were going to get 40 to $45 an acre through a drought disaster 
payment. And they have not told the truth on this. 
 
And now we have to find out. After we’ve gone through this 
whole process of promises, dragging out the commitment, we 
see another drought coming upon us, possibly. We see farmers 
who, some of them have not received even their initial payment, 
and won’t get the final payment until hopefully July if not later. 
 
In this whole scenario, where is the government of 
Saskatchewan and why are they not standing up for the farmers 
of this province? It is absolutely insanity, after looking at what 
happened last year and knowing the need. When you talk to 
farmers, they do not know what to do; they’re changing their 
minds every day. They’re going through the motions of seeding 
and hoping that it rains. They’re having difficulty getting 
advances, operating capital. 
 
And where is this government? It’s busy negotiating how much 
they’re going to put in, trying to hold on to as little  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1061 
 

as possible with the federal government while the farmers out 
there are going broke — at the same time they’re foreclosing 
upon them. And we could get into that here too, Mr. Chairman. 
How much of this money is going to be used to pay the lawyers 
to foreclose upon the thousands of Saskatchewan farmers? I 
mean, those kinds of questions have to be answered. 
 
And I just don’t know why any government would act in such a 
matter when there is a crisis out in rural Saskatchewan. I mean, 
the Premier says he’s putting the treasury behind and he’s put in 
billions of dollars. Well I tell you, that is not true. He’s taking 
claim for every ounce of money that comes out of Ottawa, 
saying that he did it. But when it comes down to taking blame 
for something, he says, it’s not my fault, not my fault. I mean, 
you can’t have it both ways. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I would ask the Minister of Finance: what 
portion . . . or what commitment has been made by your 
government? What amount of money is going to be put forward 
from your treasury into the drought assistance program that was 
announced before the federal election last year? What portion 
will you be paying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Premier has indicated, that the drought program announced by 
the federal government is a federal government program. We 
certainly indicated that there would be some assistance in terms 
of a new crop insurance program, designed to get away from 
the ad hoc approach in the past. 
 
Those negotiations are going on. The federal government has 
indicated its response in the budget; we discussed it last night. I 
don’t know if the hon. member heard the discussion or not, but 
there are negotiations going on. 
 
Today the Premier and Minister of Agriculture indicated that he 
would be having further meetings this week and I would have 
thought that, given the severity of the problem if we do have 
another drought, that the hon. member would have been 
wishing the Premier good luck in further deliberations and 
assistance on behalf of the Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
You’re right — you have taken a very negative attitude. You’ve 
admitted that. We don’t minimize the problem; we never have. 
And this government has tried to respond and we will respond. 
And you know as well as I do the political debate will be that 
it’s . . . you will say it’s never enough. I believe you said that in 
1986, that that’s not enough. That’s obviously your prerogative, 
your right, your privilege. 
 
But it strikes me that at one time all political parties in this 
province had talked about trying to find a system so that we get 
away from the ad hoc, case-by-case approach of trying to deal 
with the natural climatic difficulties, either drought or 
difficulties such as grasshoppers, and to have some type of 
system in place so that the farmers know that we have one 
uniform system that they can all participate in. 
 
(1515) 
 

We are moving that way. We’re very much moving that way, 
and I indicated that last night. Are we there yet? No we’re not, 
but negotiations are going on. They will continue, and that’s 
what I’m telling the hon. member. There’ll be meetings this 
week, and the Premier will be there on behalf of Saskatchewan 
farmers to express the concerns, the difficulties that 
Saskatchewan farmers make, and we will be in consultation 
with Saskatchewan farmers as well, to assess their needs. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister, if 
he says the negotiations are ongoing, first of all I would ask 
him: does he have a preliminary agreement with the federal 
government after the portion that will be put in by the 
provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve indicated that negotiations are 
going on, and there will be many draft options put forward by 
all parties. And we should remember that we are looking at a 
national scheme. I would be optimistic that we would have 
certainly something this year that will be at least acceptable to 
most Saskatchewan farmers, if not all of them. 
 
It’s a rather complex issue of trying to get a national scheme to 
give comfort to farmers all across Canada. We’ve been working 
on that. This government has been leading that direction. We 
believe it’s the right way to go, and we are optimistic that we 
will have a plan and a proposal that will be accepted to the vast 
majority of Saskatchewan farmers and will be of assistance to 
them. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I’d ask you: could you give me a 
specific answer as to when your government made a 
commitment to the federal government to partake in this 
drought program? When did you make your commitment that 
you would partake in this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think what I already indicated to you, that 
we view the drought program as a federal program, but we have 
always indicated that we are prepared to co-operate and assist if 
we can get some type of system out there so that the farmers 
will have either an insurance or whatever form it’s going to 
take, knowing that it will be one scheme that will deal with 
drought or flooding or grasshoppers, the different factors that 
can cause serious difficulties for agriculture. So we’re looking 
at a comprehensive scheme, and I can’t tell you when 
negotiations will be finalized. I hope that something can be 
done this year. We’re trying to get it done as soon as possible, 
keeping in mind that we want it to be acceptable to at least a 
substantial percentage of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — We’ve heard that song and dance before. 
Unfortunately, seven years after your government took office, 
we still hear you saying that you want to have an 
all-encompassing program, but we’ve seen no evidence of that. 
We’ve seen 1985 when there was a commitment from your 
government and the federal government to have a long-term 
program in place, and I mean, we’re still hearing that rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Minister, specifically, when did you begin negotiating your 
share of the federal-provincial drought deal? 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1062 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. This is interim supply Bill, 
it’s one-twelfth of the budget. There’s no money from this 
Appropriation Bill going towards the federal program. It may 
be a debate that’s relevant at some other time. But I feel that at 
this time that it’s irrelevant to the Bill that’s before the 
committee, and I would ask the member to . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address some 
remarks to that. You do not know any more than . . . If you 
know what’s going to be spent on drought in the next month or 
so, then I’d like the Minister of Finance to take that chair; you 
can take his chair because you know something he apparently 
doesn’t. He has refused to answer those questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I didn’t mean to be aggressive with the Chair. 
But we have the right to address questions to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There’s nothing going to be spent 
out of this Appropriation Bill on drought. It’s one-twelfth of the 
budget. It is not relevant to the federal plan. The minister has 
said the federal plan . . . that we have no part in it, and I would 
ask the members to direct their questions according to the Bill 
that’s before the committee. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Obviously the 
minister has admitted there are negotiations going on. That 
means that there is currently being expenditures made on the 
drought payment. There’s expenditures from going to Ottawa, 
negotiating, the staff, negotiating what portion that this 
government is going to be putting into this program. 
 
So I would ask the minister, during these negotiations, Mr. 
Minister, during these negotiations that you say are going on, I 
ask you again: because part of the money from this interim 
supply Bill obviously has to go to pay staff that you have 
negotiating this deal, when did you commit to the federal 
government that you would negotiate with them a portion of 
this money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated now three times to the hon. 
member that we view the federal drought program as a federal 
program. But I have said now on three occasions, and I would 
ask you to listen, please, that we have been prepared, have 
talked for some time with the federal government about trying 
to find a comprehensive plan that will be acceptable to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
The federal government wants to see it from a national 
perspective, obviously. And when trying to get the 10 provinces 
plus the federal government to come up with a scheme 
acceptable to the farmers of Canada, it’s difficult, and I’m not 
going to minimize the difficulties. 
 
Now if your question is, what are the details of the travel of the 
officials in the Department of Agriculture to go to Ottawa to 
work and try and negotiate a scheme? I will suggest to you that 
that is an inappropriate question for that, and a rather silly one, 
and that your appropriate question is to the Minister of 
Agriculture during his estimates. 
 

Now having said that, having said that, what I have now said on 
three occasions this afternoon to you is that we are trying to 
negotiate a national scheme that will get away from the ad hoc 
programs for drought or grasshoppers or flooding. 
 
Have we completed negotiations? No, we have not. I have 
indicated that I am optimistic that we will have some plan this 
year. My optimism may be misplaced, but we are trying to get 
one. I believe that most farmers in Saskatchewan would like to 
see one plan or one scheme, be it through crop insurance which 
I think we can all assume will be the likely place. But to ask me 
in interim supply what the travel costs are for an official to go 
to Ottawa, which is what you’ve just asked, quite frankly is an 
inappropriate place to ask it, and I’m being polite. 
 
So what stage negotiations are, I think in fairness your question 
would be better placed to the Minister of Agriculture upon his 
return from Ottawa. He’s going down on, what? meetings for 
Friday, I believe. It would be more than fair and proper to ask 
the results of that upon his return, and he’ll be able to give you 
a much more updated position than I could give you today. 
 
All I can tell you is that negotiations are ongoing. We would 
like to have a plan; that’s our objective. I can’t tell you whether 
negotiations will be completed this year; I’m optimistic that 
they are. And before any plan is finalized, the only assurance is 
that we will go out and talk with the farmers and their 
representatives in this province. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, isn’t this fantastic. A 
promise made in November, before November of 1988 for a 
drought that took place in 1988, and we’re into nearly the 
middle of May 1989 when farmers are already putting their 
crop in the ground, and this minister is saying that they’re still 
negotiating. I mean, isn’t that a lovely scenario for a minister of 
this government to admit, that they are so far behind the 
problem that the money that’s being spent here will not even go 
towards a commitment that was made by the governments to 
help farmers from a severe drought of last year. What a sorry 
statement. 
 
And I was not asking what it was going to cost, but I think it’s 
very important that the farmers and the people of this province 
know why . . . or what portion of the moneys going to the 
drought program will come from this provincial government. 
And it’s important because they are negotiating with the 
provincial government. And we have to know, as farmers and 
people of this province, if what they’re doing is going to do us 
any good. 
 
I mean, they can use all the excuses, he can give me every 
excuse in the book and use the rules to get around this question, 
but it isn’t going to work, because I tell you we have to know, 
the farmers are entitled to know what portion and how much 
they’re going to get from this provincial government. 
 
And I want to ask one more question. In light of your 
negotiations — and I’m sorry to say that you will not answer 
my question as to when the negotiations started, and I think I 
know why, because there’s been feet dragging and there’s been 
dealing going on between the  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1063 
 

federal and the provincial government as just a delaying tactic 
so that they don’t have to . . . They’re each trying to hold on to 
their own purse strings. But who’s suffering? The farmers of 
this province are suffering. 
 
Mr. Minister, during your negotiations, are you taking the 
position that $45 an acre is the bottom line for payment to those 
farmers in the most severely affected drought areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t understand how 
questions on a federal program are appropriate to this 
Assembly. Now surely the hon. member knows that in Canada 
we have different levels of government. We have a national 
government that sits in Ottawa, debates before parliament and 
passes legislation; we have a constitution which gives them 
certain powers and they can debate and they can act; we have a 
provincial legislature in each of the 10 provinces which can 
debate their issues. 
 
But for you to get up and ask me what the details of the federal 
program, the Saskatchewan legislation, is what you’re asking. 
Now I’ve now said it four times. I’ve now said it four times 
today that this government’s position is that the federal, i.e., 
Canadian, i.e., Government of Canada, i.e., Government of 
Canada in Ottawa in Ontario, Canada — okay? — has a 
drought program, and it is their program. And it is our position 
that the drought program that they announced is their program. 
Okay? And I’ve now said that four or five times. 
 
What I have said now, I believe, five times is that certainly we 
have been negotiating with the Government of Canada in 
Ottawa to try and get a comprehensive plan so that the farmers 
can have some income security against things like drought and 
grasshoppers and flooding. And I have said now, five times, do 
we have that plan yet? No. Negotiations have been going on for 
some time, and I think the Minister of Agriculture said that now 
for some time. 
 
So I can’t get up and tell you what the federal program details 
are, and I don’t think this is the appropriate Assembly for it. If 
you want to ask, you know the proper procedure. If not, I’ll be 
glad to help you, and we will get you the phone number. But I 
mean, it’s fair questions to ask what agriculture may be trying 
to accomplish in a comprehensive plan. I don’t have those 
details, but the Minister of Agriculture will certainly be able to 
tell you the objectives of the province’s position. Fair question. 
 
(1530) 
 
You can judge then, once you ask him whether we’ve met the 
objectives ultimately. But I’ve said — and I think we all 
understand the ultimate objective is to have a plan acceptable to 
the vast majority of Saskatchewan farmers, and I’ve indicated 
when some agreement is reached that we will be taking that to 
the farmers and their representatives in this province. But I 
can’t tell you more than that. And it’s not the appropriate place 
to be asking for more than that, with respect. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that if you want to know the 
status of negotiations, that the appropriate time would be to ask 
the Minister of Agriculture on his return from meetings this 
Friday. There may be a breakthrough; I  

don’t know. But certainly you should be able to ask upon his 
return what the status of the negotiation or development of an 
acceptable plan, so that Saskatchewan farmers don’t have to 
worry about the political vagaries of drought or grasshoppers or 
whatever it may be. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t need a lecture from the 
hon. member as to what questions I should be asking and I 
don’t doubt that he wants to get off this issue. But we can’t let 
him off because he said — he said, and I heard him say, this is a 
federal program, this is a federal program. 
 
Well I just want to quote to you an article from the Leader-Post, 
May 10, where the Premier is saying that he is prepared to pay 
some of the cost. And the hon. minister over there says that he 
is negotiating. So when I start thinking about this, first of all 
he’s saying it’s strictly a federal program, and if that’s the case, 
then all they’re doing is putting money into a federal program. 
 
But the fact that the Premier says he’s prepared to pay part of 
the cost, the fact that he admits that they are negotiating, tells 
me that this is not strictly a federal program, this is a 
cost-shared provincial-federal venture. 
 
And that is why it is, in my estimation, very legitimate for me to 
ask, because his people are working on this federal-provincial 
cost-shared program, to have some detail as to what amount of 
money will be spent. And I will repeat my question, and he 
totally ignored my question: is $45 an acre the bottom line in 
your negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated now for five times to the 
hon. member that the drought program announced by the 
federal government is a federal program, and we are negotiating 
with the federal government for a comprehensive program so 
that Saskatchewan farmers are protected as much as possible 
from things like drought or flooding or grasshoppers or 
whatever other pestilence is out. 
 
So the negotiations are going on. I’ve now said that five times. 
Negotiations are complex. I’ve now said that a few times. 
Because it’s not just between Saskatchewan and the 
Government of Canada; all the provinces are involved in this. 
And I can’t tell you any more than negotiations are going on. 
 
Our ultimate objective, I have said, is to have a plan acceptable 
to a significant number of Saskatchewan farmers. I don’t think 
anyone believes that you can have a plan that satisfies 
everybody in Canada, but we’re going to try and have a plan 
that’s seen as fair and reasonable to the vast majority of farmers 
of this province. And I’ve also indicated that if and when 
negotiations are completed, that we’ll go back and talk to the 
farmers to get their views. So I can’t tell you more than that. 
 
And I’ve now indicated on several occasions, if you want to get 
the status of negotiations, you obviously don’t take my advice, 
but you would be best able to ask the Minister of Agriculture 
when he comes from further meetings, which are this Friday, 
and ask him on Monday. 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1064 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to get it 
specifically clear here, Mr. Minister. On the one hand you say 
you’re carrying on negotiations, which will have an impact on 
the budget if there’s an involvement by the provincial 
government. I want to know in respect to the financial affairs of 
the province — and the interim supply is a portion of that 
budget — I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, and I want to be 
specific: in respect to the drought program which you say is a 
federal government program, is there any obligation or 
commitment by the provincial government to make a 
contribution in respect to that drought program. Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already indicated on several occasions, 
it is our position that that is a federal program. But we have also 
made it clear that we are prepared to co-operate in a national 
program or a comprehensive program that’s designed to give 
some comfort to Saskatchewan farmers from things like 
drought and grasshoppers, flooding, whatever it may be. 
 
As I indicated to questions last night about the reduction in the 
federal contribution to crop insurance, that will have some 
impact on our budget, but it will depend as part of this 
comprehensive program, and those negotiations are going on at 
this time. So we have indicated we’re prepared to contribute to 
a comprehensive program. The Minister of Agriculture has said 
that on numerous occasions in this Assembly. We are prepared 
to do that. 
 
But I can’t tell you what that cost will be. Once it is determined, 
will it have an impact on our expenditures? Of course it will. 
But I can’t tell you the amount until negotiations are complete. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, have you set 
aside in this budget, have you set aside any funds to cover your 
anticipated contribution to the drought program of the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well this is the same questions they’d 
asked when the budget came down, and I said no then, that we 
view it as a federal program. Okay? 
 
For now, how many weeks since the budget? Six weeks? Six 
weeks since the budget, and I said it, and I think the questions 
came from yourself at that time, that no, we don’t have any 
money in there because we view it as a federal program. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right. I want to ask you whether or not you 
are aware as the provincial Finance minister, the impact of the 
request of the federal government in respect to the provincial 
contribution to the drought program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I mean the federal government has made it 
clear, certainly they wanted provinces to participate. We made 
it clear that our position was that it’s a federal program. We also 
made it clear that we are prepared to contribute to a 
comprehensive plan. Now I’ve now repeated that several times 
— I think we’re up to eight times today. 
 
The hon. member asked how many times I’ve repeated it,  

so I can repeat it all day, that the federal drought program is a 
federal program, but that we have made it clear that we are 
prepared to contribute to a more comprehensive program so that 
we get away from the ad hoc programs as problems that have 
developed over the last few years that have come up as major 
problems have arisen. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister then, what we have 
before us, the budget, including the Department of Agriculture 
and your projected deficit, really does not in fact cover your 
provincial government’s commitment to what you’re terming 
now as a comprehensive agricultural policy. Have you got any 
idea of estimate as to the increase in the overall deficit of the 
province, if in fact this comes to be what you are saying it is? 
Surely to heavens you have some idea as to what you’re looking 
at in a comprehensive program and the contribution to the 
drought program. 
 
The Premier, in his release here, indicates that Saskatchewan 
won’t pay one-half of the 417 million to Saskatchewan, but will 
be prepared to make some contribution. Are you saying to us 
then that there could be a very additional sizeable increase of 
expenditures in respect to this, and that you have made no 
budget allocation whatsoever, and that you are not in a position 
at this time in any way to indicate the additional expenditures 
that may be forthcoming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Of course I can’t make that indication 
because negotiations are going on, but this is not . . . well I’m 
surprised that the hon. member from the Quill Lakes would find 
this surprising, because historically in this province when 
negotiations are going on, including employee contracts or 
collective bargaining agreements between the government and 
employees, when negotiations are going on and they are not 
completed by budget preparation, that they are dealt with after 
the budget by special warrants. That happened under the NDP. 
It’s been a long-standing practice, so that you did not give out 
your negotiating position during the course of budget 
presentation. And that’s been a long-standing practice here and 
it’s not new. It well pre-dates this government. 
 
So to find it surprising, as a former Finance critic, I find it 
somewhat shocking that he wouldn’t know the historical 
practice in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One final comment, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
indicate to the minister, to the people and the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, that it’s clear here what the minister is saying, 
that the delay in the payments of the drought payments is hung 
up in the Department of Finance and the Minister of 
Agriculture. And the reason that the payments have not been 
received as committed is that the provincial government will 
not divvy up, as they indicated during the last federal election. 
And the people of Saskatchewan might just as well know that 
that’s why they didn’t get their full payment under the drought 
payments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think we all welcome the hon. 
member’s comment that that was his final comment. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister,  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1065 
 

as was indicated earlier this month, the federal government is 
going to be reducing their share of the crop insurance from 50 
to 25 per cent. Have you allocated anything in your budget to 
cover off that cost, or is that cost going to be transferred into the 
premiums the farmers pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, as I indicated last night on a similar 
question from one of your colleagues, that that is part of the 
negotiations on the comprehensive scheme. And depending 
what comes down, and I acknowledged it last night, that we 
may have an additional expenditure as a result, for a 
comprehensive scheme for the farmers, but we don’t know what 
that will be. We don’t know whether negotiations will be 
completed this year. 
 
So I simply can’t give that answer to the hon. member. But 
again, you may be able to get a better update as to the status of 
negotiations when the Minister of Agriculture returns. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you’re 
asking for a considerable portion of the annual budget. I want to 
address some questions to you in relation to SaskTel and some 
of your financial jiggery-pokery that you have done in relation 
to SaskTel and in relation to this annual budget. 
 
SaskTel is a monopoly utility owned by all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. SaskTel dates back to 1908, as you are well 
aware, when it was set up as the department of railways, 
telegraphs and telephones. And then later, in 1947, under 
Tommy Douglas’s stewardship, SaskTel became a Crown 
corporation, in fact the Crown corporation much as we know it 
today. 
 
On page 3 of the 1988 SaskTel report, you spoke of the 
earnings that SaskTel has had, and I just want to quote one 
paragraph, Minister: 
 

SaskTel’s net earnings have exceeded $35 million for five 
consecutive years. This represents a return to the people of 
the province of more than $229 million from 1984 to 1988. 
 

Historically, Minister, you are I’m sure well aware SaskTel has 
paid to the Consolidated Fund one-half of its annual net 
earnings — one-half. Yet in the 1988 SaskTel report, you 
declared a dividend of $237,721,000 to the Crown investments 
corporation, then had Crown investments corporation turn 
around and pay you, the Consolidated Fund, a sum of $250 
million. 
 
Why on earth would you gut, financially gut SaskTel, and why 
is it that you’re setting SaskTel up to be yet the next victim of 
your privatization schemes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as we indicated, and we had the 
debate during the budget debate, certainly SaskTel has had 
some rather successful years over the last few years. We’ve 
made some major changes in the telecommunication system in 
this province, I believe to the betterment of the people of this 
province. And we will have some major new announcements in 
the not too  

distant future. 
 
But SaskTel had a significant amount of retained earnings on 
the 50-50 dividend because of some very successful years, and 
those went in in the form of a dividend to the Crown 
Management Board. To say that there’s any direct relationship 
is not accurate if you do your calculations. 
 
Again, it has been the practice from time to time of CMB 
(Crown Management Board) to make a dividend payment. It’s 
done it in different years under previous administrations, for 
example. So the practice is not new. And when the retained 
earnings of SaskTel got to the level they were at, given the fact 
that the government guarantees the debt, it didn’t make much 
difference, if any, to the operations of SaskTel. As a matter of 
fact, it didn’t make any difference to the operation of SaskTel. 
So all I can tell you is that retained earnings had increased 
because of some very successful years, and we changed the 
dividend policy. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Minister, I can appreciate that SaskTel, and 
you the minister responsible — and I use that somewhat loosely 
— but I appreciate that SaskTel is going to have some major 
new announcements in the next coming days, one of which is 
going to be that nearly 100 jobs in Regina are going to be lost 
due to your ineptness, due to your decisions to transfer those 
100 jobs — you’re going to be eliminating a fair number of 
them — and a few will be transferred to Saskatoon and perhaps 
some other centres. 
 
The other major announcement that you’re going to be making 
is the deregulation of the long distance telephone calls is in fact 
happening — deregulation and privatization Tory style. It will 
be the worst example of Conservative administrations run 
amok. It will be costing SaskTel . . . The deregulation of long 
distance telephone calls will cost SaskTel more than any other 
telephone company in Canada. SaskTel is the biggest loser 
under deregulation. 
 
SaskTel is going to be negatively impacted financially because 
of that very deregulation. At a time when SaskTel is going to be 
clearly heading into some financial constraints, you snafu $238 
million from SaskTel. Your argument that the debt is 
guaranteed by the Government of Saskatchewan is . . . that part 
is accurate, but that’s where any semblance of meaningful 
remarks end. 
 
SaskTel, if it has $238 million in accumulated surplus, should 
be using that money to buy down its long-term debt rather than 
paying a dividend, a one-time dividend, to the Crown 
investments corporation simply so that CIC could turn around 
and hide your deficit, reduce your Consolidated Fund deficit by 
a quarter of a billion dollars. 
 
You’re siphoning off money, clearly, from SaskTel into your 
black hole of a deficit. And it just doesn’t seem to get any 
better. How in the world can you stand in the legislature or 
anywhere else and justify to the people of Saskatchewan that 
you have made the first-ever grab of all the retained earnings of 
SaskTel in its history since 1908? All of the retained earnings 
that SaskTel had, you have snafued it in one quick cash grab to 
hide your deficit, a quarter of a billion dollars hidden deficit 
that  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1066 
 

will be hidden until after the next election. How do you justify 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suppose that talking to the hon. member 
about finance is like talking to a brick wall because . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It wasn’t . . . well it wasn’t because 
the hon. member should know full well that it was an equity 
swap and that CMB put more equity back into SaskTel, so it has 
no effect on SaskTel. So your argument is a foolish one. 
 
Secondly, I will say that the hon. member’s statement that 
SaskTel will be the most affected if there is deregulation of the 
long distance is an accurate one. And I’ll tell you why it’s an 
accurate statement, because it came from me, as minister 
responsible of SaskTel. And it came from me in a press release 
in a statement that I’ve written to the federal Minister of 
Communications and the Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission to complain and criticize and 
oppose the deregulation of the long distance. And this 
government has been consistent in its position of opposing such 
deregulation. 
 
Now if the hon. member wants to get into a long, lengthy 
argument, I suggest he do his homework, because what you 
have said about lay-offs is an absolute falsehood, an absolute 
falsehood. And you’re going to have to correct the record, 
because there have been no lay-offs at SaskTel. The only 
lay-offs at SaskTel have been through exactly the same policy 
that has been there, where if it was for cause or competence, not 
because of any government policy. And there hasn’t been any 
since 1982. And so for you to say that there were, as I said, is 
an absolute falsehood, and I can tell you that that’s why so 
many employees in SaskTel are no longer buying the line. 
 
Now when we established DirectWEST, employees were given 
the option. Employees did not have to go to DirectWEST, and 
employees have the option. Same thing with WESTBRIDGE; 
the employees were given the option. They may have to take 
retraining; that’s not unfair. But they didn’t have to go. So to 
suggest that there have been lay-offs again is absolutely untrue 
and is absolutely false. 
 
Now you can speculate what you think the announcements are 
going to be, and that’s fine. But I can give you a long, lengthy 
dissertation of the accomplishments of this government and 
SaskTel since 1982, and I think that the hon. member will 
recognize that the people of this province are more than 
satisfied with the telephone system, the telecommunications 
system that they have. 
 
And have we made adjustments away from the absolute 
constrictive monopoly that was there prior to 1982? Yes, we 
have. And can people go out and buy their telephones and have 
a choice? Yes, they can. And do we recognize that some large 
corporations, like Co-operators or others, may, because of the 
volume of data that they decide, set up their own transmission 
system? We recognize that, given the changes in technology, it 
would be absolutely foolish, impossible, and probably unwise 
for Saskatchewan businesses to say that you have to use 
transmission lines, and ignoring the technological changes. And 
we’ve made those adjustments,  

recognizing the changes in technology. 
 
And have we made adjustments in improving service? We’ve 
already announced and more than half completed individual 
line service to Saskatchewan; we’ve now announced it for 
northern Saskatchewan. And the switching equipment that 
we’re putting in for individual line service is the state of the art 
computer switching so that people that are hooked up to 
individual line service can get the most modern equipment 
available on the market. 
 
And have we announced the switch modernization for the 
cities? We did that a year ago so that over the next five years all 
the switches in the cities will be fully computerized as well . . . 
five or six, I’m sorry if I’m out a year on that one. But that 
program has started already, and it’s the state of the art, 
computerized switching equipment so that at the end of that 
implementation period everybody in this province will know 
that the people in this province will have in their homes the 
most modern telecommunication system of any jurisdiction 
anywhere in the world. 
 
And there’s been no lay-offs, and we’ve made some practical 
changes, and you and your ilk were the ones that said, oh, don’t 
sell off the cable television. And you oppose that and you still 
think it’s wrong, even though Saskatchewan has got more as a 
result of that move, more small communities with access to 
cable television than any other jurisdiction in North America. 
 
We made the change, and was there lay-offs because of that? 
No, there was no lay-off. Did service improve? Yes, service 
improved and it accelerated the development of cable television 
into rural Saskatchewan with the changes that we’ve made. 
 
So you oppose the DirectWEST. That’s your choice, but don’t 
stand up and say that there were lay-offs because of that, 
because there wasn’t. And you may oppose the establishment of 
WESTBRIDGE. Most fair-minded observers recognize that 
there was a natural synergy between the data terminals division 
of SaskTel, the Crown corporation SaskCOMP and its computer 
business, a national computer leasing company with an 
expertise in marketing in the access and the disposition of 
computers, and Saskatchewan’s largest laser printing company 
with international markets, that it was the right thing to do, to 
give those entities an opportunity to break into not only the 
western Canadian but national and soon-to-be international 
markets. 
 
(1600) 
 
Were there any lay-offs in SaskTel as a result of that? No there 
wasn’t, and what you said is not right. So you can take your 
position — and I assume that you’re standing up here today to 
reaffirm the pre-1982 position, which was an absolute 
monopoly — and if you think that an absolute monopoly in 
telecommunications so that people couldn’t get their phones 
anywhere else and didn’t have access to new equipment 
because you had to get it from SaskTel — if you think you 
could go back and impose that system in today with the 
technological changes, you’re in effect a 1980 Luddite is what 
you are, because it’s not realistic. 
 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1067 
 

But through all of that and with the changes — and I’ll tell you 
the benefits of letting people get their telephones from their 
choice — we recognize that SaskTel’s credibility was going to 
keep a major part of that market, and it has, 70 per cent, but it 
certainly cut the inventory costs down of SaskTel that it 
couldn’t carry every type of phone that everybody wanted. 
 
And the same thing with the telephone equipment, 
telecommunication equipment that’s available to the business 
community, and particularly the small-business community, 
SaskTel couldn’t carry the inventory to satisfy every type of 
demand out there. But SaskTel can carry the basic lines of good 
equipment so that the business community that has unique 
needs, that it cost SaskTel more to carry the inventory than try 
and carry that type of equipment, it gave the flexibility to the 
small-business community to have some choices. 
 
But has there been a job loss? No there hasn’t. So to get up and 
say that there was, is not true. 
 
So yes, we’ve taken a very strong position against deregulation 
of long distance, and I’ll tell you why — a very practical, 
realistic reason. Couple of them: one, obviously we have a 
cross-subsidization of the revenues, but secondly, if you take a 
look at any study on deregulation of the telecommunications 
long distance, here’s what happens, is that less than 2 per cent 
of the businesses actually end up benefitting. And in our view it 
is foolish to scrap a system that is highly workable for 2 per 
cent of some very large businesses that do such tremendous 
volume that they want to bypass. 
 
And what is forgotten in the whole argument when we talk 
about deregulation is that you may have some lower long 
distance costs, but your local rates go up to compensate, and we 
say that’s not fair. And for small business . . . And I’ve had to 
talk to small business and explain to them when they come to 
me saying, why are you opposed to deregulation of long 
distance? And when I get them to consider the fact that for the 
vast majority of small businesses the majority of their calls are 
local — they’re not long distance — and if they really take a 
look at their costs, their telephone costs, their costs are local, 
not long distance, for the vast majority of them. 
 
So in our view deregulation of the long distance is not the right 
thing to do, it’s not the correct thing to do, and in fact it’s an 
unwise thing to do, and the studies have shown that. But 
throughout all the changes that we’ve made — and we will 
continue to make more — we have protected jobs throughout 
that, and we’ve tried to do it. Now certainly it’s meant 
adjustments, and as the technology changes there will be further 
adjustment. 
 
And I’ll take it a further step, that the other thing we have tried 
to do, tried to do throughout that, is we make adjustments in 
technology. It is nearly feasible, I would think, to put all of 
SaskTel’s switching equipment and operators and all its 
activities, except for service, in one centre. And we don’t think 
that that’s in the best interest of the province. 
 
So the policy is, we make adjustments because of  

technological change. We try and maintain the employment in 
the areas around the province. And there may be an adjustment 
of one or two, and there will be from time to time, but as part of 
that strategy and that adjustment strategy, one of the factors that 
must be taken into account is to try and maintain. 
 
And it may end up meaning that a community, because of 
technological change, loses one type of activity, but we’ll try 
and substitute another in that, so that we can keep the 
employment in the community. And it may mean people 
moving, but this is a dynamic industry and we have consciously 
tried to push and guide SaskTel into having the most modern 
company in North America, and at the same time protecting 
jobs, and at the same time giving the people of this province the 
best telecommunication system anywhere. To say that we’ve 
done that with job loss is false. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Minister, I’d appreciate if you’d let me put 
my own words in my mouth. You are accusing me of lying 
about . . . you are accusing me of lying about the jobs that are 
going to disappear, that are going to disappear from SaskTel 
when you let go. The jobs, nearly 100 operators . . . telephone 
operator jobs will disappear. Those operators will of course be 
given the usual opportunity to retrain and to transfer into other 
jobs within SaskTel, as far as those jobs are available. They 
may also be transferring out of Regina. The point I’m making is 
there is a net loss of more than 100 jobs for Regina. Do you 
deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What I have said is that all the changes that 
we’ve made, there hasn’t been a job lost because of that. I have 
said that people will have to take retraining, and if you think 
that that is unfair, I suggest that you’re wrong, because the 
industry is changing too rapidly and the technology is changing 
too rapidly. And when an activity can be done electronically, 
we will retrain the people to new activities in the corporation, 
okay? And that change will . . . I’m telling you, you can’t go 
back to the absolute controlled monopoly. It’s just not realistic 
and it’s not practical. 
 
But through that whole process there will be changes, there will 
be adjustments, but there haven’t been lay-offs, okay? There 
will be changes and people will have to take retraining. And 
some jobs have become obsolete, and I suspect in the 
telecommunications business that over the next 10 years many 
more will become obsolete. And it’s not government policy 
doing that, it’s the change in technology. 
 
The best we can do and the fairest things for the employees of 
SaskTel is to maintain the policy that we have established, 
which is we’re going to make the changes, make sure that the 
corporation is the most modern, that it’s not held back, that the 
people have the most modern system anywhere in North 
America and try and keep the jobs at the same time. And that’s 
what we’ve done. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Minister. I take that as an admission 
that Regina is going to lose more than a  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1068 
 

hundred operators. Some of those will be transferring into other 
jobs in Regina, others transferring into other jobs, perhaps in 
Saskatoon or other centres. I think you and I both know 
essentially what is going to be happening there. The point I am 
making is that for Regina there’s a net loss of a hundred 
operating jobs. And the jobs that you are moving these people 
into, even if they are here, are jobs that have been filled, and the 
operators may be retrained and step in where somebody elects 
to take a retirement. Then you’re moving the operator into that 
different job. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well what’s wrong with that? 
 
Mr. Trew: — The minister is asking . . . I just want, for the 
record, you saying, what’s wrong with that. I am just simply 
saying there is a hundred jobs lost to Regina. If you think 
there’s nothing wrong with that, fair enough. Why did you put 
in a new switching system for the operators in Regina very, 
very recently, only to do away with those jobs and move 
everything out of Regina? You talk about technology and 
changes. Surely to goodness when the switching equipment was 
put in a short while ago, surely you could see beyond the next 
month. I can’t believe that the minister could be that 
incompetent not to look beyond the next month. 
 
I am very pleased to hear you talking, Minister, about 
deregulation and privatization. And I want to point out to you 
that you can’t have privatization and deregulation. You can’t 
play both sides of the fence like you’re attempting to do on this 
one. You’re saying, privatization is wonderful; we’re going to 
privatize SaskPower; we’re going to privatize potash; we’re 
going to privatize SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), and others, and then in the next breath you’re 
saying, but deregulation, now that’s a different matter; that’s a 
different story. 
 
Well Conservatives, federally and provincially, are all about 
privatization and deregulation. Now how in the world you can 
pretend that you’re for part of it and against the other part of it 
is beyond me, and you cannot have it both ways. You will get 
your turn to answer. 
 
Minister, the people of Saskatchewan have lost faith in your 
administration, and you are exhibiting today every reason why 
they have lost that faith. You have refused to answer the 
questions in a direct manner; you have ignored the major 
question of a quarter of a billion dollars that went into your 
black hole Consolidated Fund to hide the deficit and hide it 
until after the next election. 
 
We see you talking about SaskTel and some of the changes that 
have happened there. You referred to the cable system, which 
you sold. And you’re quite right, New Democrats were opposed 
to that sale, and there’s some very, very good arguments why. 
 
We are saying you could have used the profits from the 
continued ownership of that cable to expand the service into far 
more communities than you can get it into with a profit-oriented 
cable system. Use those profits to provide service rather than 
dividends. 
 
You sold off the very profitable directory assistance . . .  

not directory assistance, the very profitable directories of 
SaskTel, the yellow pages, which have netted somewhere 
between 7 and $12 million in recent years, each of the last three 
or four years. You have privatized that, and that is going to 
mean SaskTel users, the people of Saskatchewan, are going to 
have to make up the difference somehow, the most obvious way 
being making up for it in rate increases, either for the basic 
service, or you may choose to increase the rates you’re charging 
for long distance. That’s not for me to tell you which way to 
make the money up, but the fact is you’re going to have to 
make that money up. 
 
You talked about the sell-off of the computer operations of 
SaskTel. Yes, I think that was a terrible deal. What you have in 
effect done, Minister, is you have tied SaskTel into a five-year 
guaranteed contract with minimum payments. WESTBRIDGE 
is, as I am told, being paid in excess of $20 million a year. You 
sold the computer terminals that SaskTel uses throughout its 
head office and, I suspect, other offices throughout the 
province. You sold those computer terminals also to 
WESTBRIDGE and now you’re leasing them back. 
 
(1615) 
 
Well I’ll suggest to you, Minister, I’d be only too happy to buy 
your house from you, the home you live in, if you guarantee 
that you will rent it back from me for five years. And you know 
as well as I do who’s going to come out on top in that financial 
transaction. 
 
And that’s what Conservatives are all about. That’s what 
Conservatives are all about — sell off the assets, lease it back. 
You won’t have to deal with the problem because, frankly, the 
people of Saskatchewan already know. They have decided the 
next election, and it’s just simply a matter of time — when. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — So the question will be, when are you going to 
screw up the courage? When do we get the election? The people 
have decided. Why not let them go to the polls now so we can 
get on with putting the people of Saskatchewan back to work, 
so we can get on to seriously fighting the deregulation of the 
long distance phone lines, the deregulation that I know the 
minister has made squeaks and noises about. But how can you 
expect to be believable when on one hand you’re all in favour 
of privatization, and on the other hand, but deregulation of 
SaskTel long distance, well that’s a different story? 
 
I ask again about the quarter of a billion dollars. Why is it — 
well I guess I know why — but how can you justify taking a 
quarter of a billion dollars out of the Crowns and moving it into 
your Consolidated Fund? And it will not show up . . . you won’t 
have to borrow that money, that $250 million, from the money 
markets until after the next election’s safely out of the way. 
Then again we’ll see the deficit ballooning. How do you justify 
that quarter of a billion dollars grab? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What I’ve indicated already, and the hon. 
member doesn’t understand that there was an equity injection 
by Crown Management Board into SaskTel in  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1069 
 

return for the payment. So I can’t explain any more than that to 
you. 
 
You may want to go and talk to some of your predecessors 
about what an equity swap is, and they will explain it to you. 
Perhaps the Finance critic can explain it to you. But let me . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve invented a brand-new, a 
brand-new notion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, no. If you go back and take a look at 
some of your transactions in the past, my friend, you’ll find 
exactly what you did — exactly what you did. Exactly what you 
did. You took equity swaps, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But let me go to another fallacy that the hon. member doesn’t 
. . . he can’t understand, and says we cannot argue for realistic 
activity in the telecommunications business and be opposed to 
deregulation of the long distance at the same time. Well the 
fallacy of his argument is that for the longest time in this 
country we had a regulated long distance system, and seven out 
of the 10 telephone companies in this country were private 
companies. So don’t tell me you can’t do it. You don’t 
understand the real world if you say you can’t do it. We 
regulated the long distance with seven out of the 10 telephone 
companies being private companies. So don’t tell me you can’t 
do it. 
 
I’ve told you and I’ve explained to you why we are opposed to 
deregulation of long distance. It’s not the right thing to do; less 
than 2 per cent of the companies benefit. The system works, 
there is a cross-subsidization to the local calls, and we’ve 
opposed deregulation consistently. As a matter of fact, just so 
you know, the communication workers of Canada endorsed the 
actions of this government in its opposition to deregulation of 
long distance in the country. But don’t tell me you can’t have it 
both ways. You can have it both ways, if you understood the 
industry. 
 
Having said that, we cannot in Saskatchewan go back to the old 
ways where people had no choice on their telephones, that you 
opposed — and this may be of great interest to you. But when 
you were the government, you opposed individual line service. 
You objected to that. Yes, you said it couldn’t be done. You 
said it couldn’t be done. And under your beliefs it couldn’t be 
done — it couldn’t be done. 
 
So let me tell the hon. member that we are in the midst of a 
tremendous amount of change in the telecommunications 
industry, tremendous amount of technological change. And 
some of that technological change it is impossible to control, 
some it is unwise to control, and some it’s not realistic to try 
and control. But what we can assure the people of this province 
and deliver to the people of this province is the most modern 
telecommunications system of any jurisdiction, I say anywhere 
in the world — I say anywhere in the world. 
 
And at the same time, we’ve protected jobs, we’ve had change, 
people have had to take retraining. And that’s not easy, and I’m 
not saying it is easy on the employees, but we have tried to 
protect the jobs as we’ve gone through  

this tremendous change, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I have a number of questions, 
and I ask them primarily on behalf of a wide variety group of 
charities in our province, volunteer organizations. And my 
questions will have to do with your proposed tax on lotteries, 
bingos, and casinos. In your budget you announced that there 
would be a 10 per cent tax on the lotteries, the bingos, and the 
casinos run by our exhibition boards. 
 
On March 31 of this year you indicated to me in the House that 
you would be talking to Sask Trust and the charitable 
organizations across the province about the means by which 
you intend to collect the tax. Mr. Minister, could report to the 
House today, have settled on the means by which you intend to 
collect the tax from the bingos, the lotteries, and the casinos? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Consultations have been going on since 
budget. I can’t give you a status report. The minister 
responsible for the Gaming Commission can perhaps better able 
to do that. They’ve been leading discussions. I think it fair to 
say, as I indicated at budget time, that we would be doing it 
with a minimum impact on the charities themselves. There 
seems to be some growing comfort, I gather, in the charities, 
that the discussion’s going on. But I can’t give you a status 
report. It’s still our objective to, one, meet the revenue 
objectives; and secondly, have it in place I believe July 1. 
 
I might suggest to the hon. member, if you do have a particular 
group of organization that didn’t participate in the consultations 
and wish to, if you would give that to the minister responsible 
for the Gaming Commission, they will be contacted, if that’s 
your wish. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then you are assuring the House 
that the consultation process has begun and has been ongoing? I 
see that the minister responsible is here. Perhaps you can check 
with him right now and inform the House of the status report. 
How many charities have you been talking to? Have you talked 
to Sask Trust? The minister’s here. Could you get that 
information from him right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I mean, your proper procedure. I’ve 
indicated to you that the consultation is going on and has been 
going on with the various charities that have expressed an 
interest, and their representatives, and Sask Sport Trust. 
 
I can’t give you a detailed report as to the number. If you do 
have a charity that feels they either weren’t consulted or wish to 
be consulted on it or wish to make further representations, we’ll 
certainly accommodate them. And if you would give that 
information to the minister responsible for the Gaming 
Commission, they will be consulted. They’ve been fairly active 
and aggressive in consultations I’m told, but I can’t give you 
more than a status report of that. And I’m just going to assume, 
because they’re a major player and Sask Sport Trust has been 
very much part of it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Then, Mr. Minister, as the Minister of Finance, 
could you describe to us the proposals that are  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1070 
 

being taken out to the charities and to Sask Trust. What are your 
positions. What are the proposals that you are advancing as the 
Minister of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well just what I indicated in the budget 
speech. The proposals have been taken out. There have been 
suggestions back which are being considered. For example, on 
the casinos, that it be in the form of an admission and licensing 
proposal; that on bingos, for example, it be on paper. And I 
forget several that have come back, and they’re all being 
actively considered. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I asked what are your proposals, 
not the suggestions that may or may not be coming back. What 
are the proposals that you have advanced for the collection of 
the 10 per cent tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as I indicated at the budget, what our 
revenue objectives would be, that we want to see that there will 
be a 10 per cent tax. We envisage the tax on tickets, for 
example, on the lotteries. There are discussions as to where it 
would be applied on the bingos. There are discussions where it 
would be applied on break-opens, and we’re getting different 
views back when I say that. So the views of the charities are not 
uniform, as we’ve gone through the process. At least I am 
advised that there are different suggestions coming back. 
 
I think I indicated paper on bingos and I think I indicated the 
question of the casinos as to where it would be applied. I think 
suggestions being considered include admission or whatever it 
would be so that the revenue objectives are met. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, may I ask if the bingo hall 
operators, have they been included in the consultation process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. I’m told yes. I can’t answer whether 
they have a collective group; I don’t know that. But my 
understanding, if you have some that feel they weren’t 
consulted, if you’d let the minister know, they will be 
consulted. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Yes, I will do that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the groups that you are consulting with — the 
charities, the volunteer organizations, the sporting 
organizations, and so on — if they were to say to your 
government that they didn’t like the idea at all, if they didn’t 
like the notion of having to collect this tax on your behalf at all, 
would you be prepared to withdraw this tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, this government believes that more of 
the gambling money should be dedicated to health care. We 
believe that that is the right thing to do, and we are strong in our 
position, and that will happen. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, there’s a number in the province 
that believe you could allocate some other of your funding to 
the hospitals as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a letter that I will need to respond to, and 
perhaps you can help me respond to this letter. It comes from 
the Churchbridge Ladies Curling Club. This is a copy of the 
letter that was addressed to the minister  

responsible. I will want to respond to their letter as well, since a 
copy was provided to me, and I wonder if you could give me 
some assistance in drafting a response to the questions asked by 
the Churchbridge Ladies Curling Club. 
 
(1630) 
 
I’d like to read some of the letter into the record. They write: 
 

In our small communities we are heavily dependant on this 
source of revenue (referring to bingo) to finance many of 
our local capital and operating expenses. As our annual 
reports will show we have contributed to a great many 
community projects through our bingos. These include 
large donations toward the equipment of an ambulance, 
donations to special equipment for both our local and 
regional hospitals, a new heater for the swimming pool, 
new equipment in the ice arena and curling rink, and many 
other smaller but worthwhile community services. Without 
this kind of help, many of the things we now have we 
would not be able to enjoy. 
 

Then she says, “As we understand the system, the tax will be 
applied to the bingo paper . . .” So apparently the Churchbridge 
Ladies Curling Club feel that the decision has been made and 
that the tax will be applied to the paper in the case of bingo. 
Again: 
 

As we understand the system, the tax will be applied to the 
bingo paper we have to purchase, in such a way that it will 
reduce the profit of our sponsoring bodies or will force 
them to curtail the amount of their prizes. Any reduction in 
prize payout or increase in the price of cards will have a 
serious impact on the number of people who will support a 
bingo. As your own statistics will bear out, most of the 
supporters of bingos and lotteries are people with modest 
incomes, who will not come if the price gets too high or 
the prizes get too shoddy. This will mean a major reduction 
in revenues to the sponsoring organizations, and will have 
a serious impact on their ability to assist worthwhile 
community projects. 
 

Mr. Minister, do you agree with that assessment of the 
Churchbridge Ladies Curling Club? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I understand that a reply has already gone 
to them and that a copy was sent to your office, or to you 
anyway. If you haven’t received the reply yet . . . I’m told that it 
went earlier this week indicating that, I believe, the present 
system requires a licensing at the local level of bingos of less 
than a thousand dollars, I believe, or prizes less than a thousand 
dollars, and that that system wouldn’t be changed. 
 
So I can only indicate to you that the minister has advised me 
that he did respond to that letter with a copy to yourself earlier 
this week. You may wish to check that. If it’s not a satisfactory 
answer, you can raise it again with the minister. But my 
understanding is that it satisfied their concerns in whatever way 
it was expressed, and I don’t  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1071 
 

have that, but you may want to check the reply. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I will want to respond directly to 
this woman. I’m not yet in receipt of a copy of a letter from the 
minister. I will want to write my own letter. I come here asking 
your advice on how I might respond. 
 
Now the point being made in the letter by the ladies curling 
club in Churchbridge, and I might say by many other charitable 
organizations across the province, is that this tax of yours has 
the potential of being detrimental to their revenues. Mr. 
Minister, do you agree with that potential? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . (inaudible) . . . I mean every tax does, 
but again I don’t want to minimize the government’s position 
that we intend to see that more of the revenues from gambling 
go to health care. We are making that statement, and that will 
happen. At the same time we have indicated we’re going to try 
and minimize the impact on the charities themselves. 
 
I am advised that the reply indicates that those bingos that have 
the prizes of less than a thousand, that now get local licensing, 
will not be affected, okay? — which should, to my 
understanding, cover her concerns. 
 
I’m prepared, if you want me to draft a letter for your signature 
after . . . or certainly get the appropriate minister to do that. But 
my suggestion is not meant in any disparaging way that a reply 
is going, that the minister has indicated that it satisfies the 
concerns. Without getting into the details, the advice I would 
give is, take a look at that and if it’s not satisfactory then check 
it up with the minister. But given the overall objectives, they are 
firm. 
 
I’m again advised that their concerns — in whatever detail, I 
can’t answer — should be satisfied. So I can’t tell you more 
than that except to, with respect, take a look at the reply that 
went out. A copy went to you, and it should in no way impair 
your ability to write and communicate with them further. If it 
does, I think I will offer on behalf of the appropriate minister to 
sit down and talk to you so that you are able to reply. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I want to be clear that I 
understand what you’re saying. Are you saying here in the 
House today that when the prize board is less than a thousand 
dollars the tax will not apply in that bingo hall, if the prize 
board is less than a thousand dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It applies to the organization, not to the 
bingo hall. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I understand that it’s not the bingo hall that’s 
licensed to conduct the bingo, it’s the charitable organization. 
Then are you saying that if the prize board offered by the 
charitable organization, if it’s less than a thousand dollars, the 
tax will not apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s right. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, in this same letter, the ladies 
curling club in Churchbridge say the following: 
 

 
We are also concerned with your decision to give  

a monopoly control of bingo paper to one distributor. 
 

That’s been an announcement of your government, that there 
will be one distributor for bingo paper. They go on to say: 
 

Surely this will lead to price gouging and poorer service. 
We have been very pleased with the services we have had 
by our local distributors, and it seems a shame that even 
their small business will be taken away from our rural 
community. 
 

Mr. Minister, this would indicate to me that the Churchbridge 
ladies feel that in fact the tax on the bingo hall is going to be 
charged on the paper, and that your government’s move to a 
common, single distributor is confirmation of that. Mr. 
Minister, have you in fact decided how the tax is going to be, 
and that really the consultation process is not true consultation, 
but the decision is already made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. I mean, I’ve indicated that the 
consultation process is going on. We will make some 
adjustments as a result of the consultation process. Don’t equate 
the position of one or two or a single distributor of bingo cards 
as related to the tax, okay? The sole or single printer — and it 
may be one or two, but let’s, for discussion purposes, say a 
single distributor — comes from other advice, the RCM Police 
particularly, that the government should be able to audit the 
printing of the paper. And it’s their recommendation, for the 
better control of the industry, that there be a single printer. That 
there has been in other jurisdictions — I’ll be very careful in the 
way I phrase this — where scams have resulted where, for 
example, you want to change the odds on a bingo, simply repeat 
when you do your run of 75 with the 75 numbers, repeat one 
number — eliminate one number, in other words. The odds 
change dramatically. 
 
So there have been scams in other jurisdictions through the 
printing of paper that the RCM Police have recommended to us 
that there should be a system in place that they can go in and 
audit. So that the control of the printing of paper is not related 
to the tax, but it’s very much related to the control of gambling 
and the gaming in the province. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I understand that that single 
distributor has not yet been named. I may be wrong. Will that 
be tendered? Will that be up for public tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s up to the gaming commission. I 
don’t have your answer on that. The gaming commission will 
make that decision. I would suspect that there are not many in 
the province that would be capable of doing that type of work. 
But again, that’s a decision of the gaming commission, and . . . 
But I do want you to understand that it’s not related to the tax, 
but is very much related to advice that we get from the policing 
agencies that the government should be able to have a system 
that they can go in and spot-audit and make sure it’s being done 
properly. That’s where that question comes from. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you’ve said a number of times in 
this discussion today, and on March 31, that it  
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1072 
 

was your hope to minimize the impact on the charitable 
organizations. The charitable organizations of the province that 
I’ve been talking to are not confident that it’s going to be a 
minimum impact. And of course, from this side of the House 
we’ll be watching that very carefully. 
 
I want to just leave you with the thought of the Churchbridge 
Ladies Curling Club. You may want to respond to this as well. 
She writes: 
 

Why can’t you leave the small community groups alone? 
We are trying hard to compensate for the substantial 
reductions in funding to our municipal governments who 
used to fund many of our local recreational health services. 
Now you even have your fingers in our till so that we have 
even less money to provide for ourselves. No wonder our 
kids leave home, and our small communities are 
deteriorating! 
 

Mr. Minister, if in fact the charities of across the province come 
to you and say this is a bad idea and it will hurt us, I ask again: 
would you reconsider this tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, no. And I’m surprised, I’m surprised 
to hear that you are opposed to this tax. And you have asked me 
to withdraw the tax, okay? That’s the position of the opposition. 
I think most people will watch the vote when it comes down as 
to what position the opposition takes on the hospitalization tax. 
I mean, but that’s . . . obviously you’re right. I have given you 
what our objectives are. One, more of the money is going to 
health care; and secondly, that we are trying to minimize — I’m 
not saying there will be no impact — I’ve said we’re going to 
try and minimize the impact on the charities. 
 
I have indicated to you today that . . . and I believe a 
representative of that group had in fact met with the people that 
are going out doing the consulting, subsequent to the letter. And 
as I indicated to you earlier, that that exemption now with the 
$1,000 prize, where they get a local licence, and I’m not sure 
how it specifically operates to be honest with you, but that they 
are exempt from the tax. So from what I’m told, that that should 
answer the concerns of the group that you’re referring to. 
 
I also believe that the other . . . re-establishment of the 
recreation and cultural facilities answers another concern, and 
that will be . . . has been announced in the budget as to the 
funding of that program. So I can’t tell you more than that, but I 
gather that there has been some answer to them. 
 
With the greatest respect, I suggest you take a look at the reply. 
If it’s not satisfactory, I believe that you can pursue it further 
with the appropriate minister. But I believe that the reply did 
either ease or eliminate their concern. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $336,400,300  

be granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 1990. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum 
of $53,675,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $53,675,000 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1990. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move that the resolutions be now read the 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 
read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 37, An Act Granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 
Ending March 31, 1990, be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly and under rule 
48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Committees of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I would like to ask for leave from the 
Assembly to move some motions respecting Crown 
corporations and public accounts committees respecting 
members on this side of the House only. 
 
Leave granted. 
  



 
May 10, 1989 

1073 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley, that with leave: 
 

That the name of Mr. Muller be added to the list of 
members comprising the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — The usual wording of such a motion is that 
the name of Mr. Muller, and I will beg the leave of the House to 
use the names, be substituted for the name of Ms. Smith, or 
whoever else was on it. We have no objection to this if you’re 
substituting one for the other. If you are indeed filling in the 
place of Mr. Goodale, then we take very strong exception to it. 
So I would like to know the name of the person who Mr. Muller 
is being substituted for. That’s been the traditional form of such 
motions. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, it is to 
substitute for that of Mr. Goodale that was dropped the other 
day. The government gave a position, not the opposition, to 
accommodate the third party when they were in the House, and 
that position is rightfully in proportion, Mr. Speaker, the 
position of the government, and therefore Mr. Muller is 
nominated to be on the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I say to the government House here, this is 
not going to pass before 5 o’clock. If you want to stand it and 
discuss it, as these things have traditionally been done, we’re 
happy to do that. But if you insist in going ahead I do not see 
this matter coming to a conclusion before 5 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Fine, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just move to a 
different motion, if you like, and this one I’m sure you’ll have 
no problem with. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
adjourn debate first on the motion we were just dealing with. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn debate on 
that motion, I just would like to inform the House that I was in 
attendance at the selection committee, standing committee on 
selection, when we very specifically gave up one of our 
positions, the government positions, one of the government 
positions on the committee in place of the member for the third 
party; and the opposition, the official opposition, would not 
grant him a position at that time. We did, and that’s the position 
we are now trying to fill. But having said that, and I know there 
will be further discussion before we bring the motion back, I 
move that we adjourn debate on that motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move with leave, 
seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the name of Mr. Wolfe be substituted for that of Mr. 
Muller on the list of members composing the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 
 


