


















































March 20, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 20, 1989 
 

243 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to 
introduce to you, and to all members of the House, five students 
from Moose Jaw. These are grades 4 and 6 students, grades 4 to 
6 students from the Seventh Day Adventist (Church) School in 
Moose Jaw. They’re accompanied today by their chaperon and 
teacher, Mr. Jim Martens. I look forward to meeting with the 
students later, answering any questions they might have. And so 
I’d invite all members to help me in welcoming these students 
from the Seventh Day Adventist (Church) School in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consideration of Increase in Gas Tax 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to my friend, the Minister of Finance, and it 
concerns a Leader-Post story, which I have here in front of me 
in today’s paper, where the research division of the NDP, as the 
Minister of Education says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I 
think we’ve got much better research than that, Mr. Minister. 
 
In any event, the story has a headline which says, “Tories 
consider gas-tax increase.” And my question to the Minister of 
Finance is, will he confirm the accuracy of this story; namely, 
are you considering a tax increase on the gas, and if you are, 
how does that jive with the promises that your government and 
the Premier’s government has made since 1982 that not only 
would there not be any tax increases on gas, but that you’d be 
eliminating the gas tax? What’s your answer to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member asked two questions, 
and in answer to the first, I would urge him to cancel any other 
events he may have on March 30 and join us here in the 
Assembly where I will announce in some detail the budget for 
the next fiscal year. 
 
With regard to the second question that the hon. member asked, 
I may remind the hon. member that it is the province of 
Saskatchewan, and only the province of Saskatchewan, that 
rebates to its people the fuel tax for personal use, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What rebate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member says, what rebate. Now 
he may not have put in his own application form, Mr. Speaker, 
but nearly 280,000 Saskatchewan people received farm fuel 
rebates last year, Mr. Speaker, and when they kept their receipts 
they paid no fuel tax in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
question to the Minister of Finance. And I might say by way of 
preface to the Minister of Finance, I actually had intended to 
cancel everything in order to be here on March 30, but the way 
this budget is being leaked out, I don’t think I may have to 
show up on the 30th. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So now I’m considering other pressing 
appointments. But nevertheless, the minister carefully and 
rather skillfully, I think, avoided answering the question 
directly. I shall put the question to the minister again. Mr. 
Minister, is it correct — yes or no — the Leader-Post story 
which says that you’re increasing or considering the increasing 
of the gas tax? And if that is the case, how in the world does the 
government justify that, given your solemn commitment and 
promises that this would not take place? Just give us that 
answer, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as I indicated to the hon. member, 
that he should be here and there will be some surprises for him. 
And I would expect, Mr. Speaker, that the surprises that he gets 
will not be ones that make him too happy or comfortable. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through the debate 
before. And I just remind the hon. member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, of his predecessor’s statement where he said that 
out-of-province highway users should pay the gas tax; 
businesses should pay the gas tax; and that Saskatchewan 
people, for their personal use, should not pay the tax. 
 
Now he would know, he would know that it’s impossible to 
make that segregation at the pump, and that the effective way to 
ensure that Saskatchewan people effectively do not pay the gas 
tax is to have a fuel tax rebate system, Mr. Speaker, much 
opposed by the opposition; much supported by the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Finance. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s plain for all the members of 
the legislature and those watching the proceedings on 
television, that the Minister of Finance has confirmed that 
there’s going to be a large increase in the gas tax in this budget 
on March 30. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — An increase of approximately what? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty cents a gallon. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Twenty cents a gallon, if this story is right. 
That is a major tax increase, but more importantly, it’s a major 
breach of promise by this government. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance is this. He talks  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

244 
 

about the rebate program. Well I have a question about that. 
Here’s another promise. You promised that the rebate program 
would be out early in the new year, and here it is, middle of 
March already, and so far as I know the rebate programs have 
not been mailed out, the applications have not been mailed out. 
People are asking where in the world are their rebate programs. 
Is this delay indicative of the fact, Mr. Minister, that you may 
break yet another promise and do away with the rebates as well 
in this tax increase that you’re planning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I do know that it is the wish of the 
New Democratic Party that there be no rebates, and I do know 
that several NDP have indicated that the rebates would be 
cancelled, and I think at the appropriate time we will indicate to 
the people of this province what the government’s position is. 
 
I do remind the hon. member that over 280,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker, received their rebates last year and they were very 
happy with the program, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Transfer Payments to Provinces 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. A question also to 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, there have been rumours 
for some weeks that there will be cut-backs in the transfer 
payments from the federal to the provincial government. Your 
deputy minister, Mr. Wakabayashi, has now confirmed that 
these are something more than rumours. My question to the 
minister is: what information do you have from the federal 
government which would serve as a basis for his statement — 
and this is a direct quote, “We have to anticipate cut-backs in 
some areas of federal transfers to the provinces.” — what is the 
basis upon which he makes that statement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me commend the NDP research staff on 
the depth of its research. I am advised, Mr. Speaker, having 
seen the article, I did talk to the deputy minister of Finance 
today, who advised me that in his discussions with the 
particular reporter he indicated that we have no indication that 
there would be any cut-backs and that the statement was not 
accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. New question. Mr. Minister, 
your deputy minister is a man with a reputation for both 
accuracy and honesty. In that sense, he’s a good counterfoil for 
his own minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If you don’t mind, Mr. Minister, I’d prefer 
to believe your deputy rather than you in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I guess the next question, Mr. 
Speaker, is: whatever became of the much ballyhooed rapport 
which your Premier claimed to have with Mr. Mulroney? Will 
you confirm that that rapport evaporated  

when five Tory seats vanished in the last election? Is that what 
happened to it? And will you, Mr. Minister, confirm the 
foolishness of your approach over the last four years in acting 
as an apologist for the federal government? You now, Mr. 
Minister, have neither the courage nor the position to act as a 
spokesman, nor do you have the clout to win very much on 
bended knee. Will you confirm the foolishness of that 
approach? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Someone, Mr. Speaker, is going to find out 
what the supplementary question had to have with the original 
question. But I’m sure Hansard and several geniuses will try 
and figure out what the relationship between the two. 
 
I indicated already, Mr. Speaker, that the deputy minister 
indicated to the reporter that there was no indication that there 
would be cuts in transfer payments, which kind of takes away 
the basis of the second question, the diatribe. 
 
I suppose all I can say is that the hon. member, with the greatest 
respect, is falling into the trap of the rest of the caucus of his 
NDP members. He’s as inaccurate in his premise as he is in his 
question and in his understanding of the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I take that evasive answer to 
be a confirmation of the accuracy of the story. After all — new 
question, Mr. Speaker. After all, Mr. Minister, you’re the 
person with the finely tuned precision in dealing with figures. 
You’re the minister who raised the age-old practice of cooking 
the books to a new level, Mr. Minister, in 1986. You’re the one 
who pretended, who continued to pretend, that a deficit of 389 
million was an accurate figure when you knew it was over 1.2 
billion. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: will you confirm that you’re 
bringing down your budget a few days . . . or a couple of weeks 
in advance of the federal budget so that you can continue to 
pretend that you’re going to get equalization payments on the 
old formula, rather than dealing with a formula which you know 
has been changed. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just ask you to confirm that once again on 
March 30, you’ll put on your apron, and you’ll play the role of 
the Madame Benoit of the Finance department of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suppose my first question is who’s 
Madame Benoit, for Heaven’s sake? Madame Benoit is known 
to many people that have any semblance of the idea where the 
kitchen is, but who Madame Benoit is, I can’t speak to whoever 
the source of his information and his facts are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s put the NDP position in its perspective. On the one hand 
they criticize the provincial government if we don’t bring the 
budget in by the end of the fiscal year, and we all heard the 
debate for several months with that criticism.  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

245 
 

Today they stand up and say, you should have a late budget and 
you should wait for the federal budget and bring your budget in 
after, and after the fiscal year, because that is what the Finance 
critic opposite has just said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget is being brought in at the end of our 
fiscal year. That was supported by members opposite until the 
new critic was named. So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 
have consistently, during this session and over the last year, 
taken at least two positions on every issue, both 
incontrovertibly opposed, one to the other, Mr. Speaker. Even a 
change in critic opposite, Mr. Speaker, and the dropping of the 
previous one has not improved their position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Relocation of Joytec 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 
Minister of Science and Technology. Will the minister confirm 
that Joytec is closing shop, moving to Vancouver? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
waiting for some time actually for the member opposite to ask 
this question because I know that he has taken a personal 
interest in Joytec. He raised it on several occasions last year, 
and also his colleague from Saskatoon Centre has raised the 
matter of Joytec. I think it’s rather unfortunate that the Leader 
of the Opposition, in whose constituency this company has been 
located for the last six years, didn’t at least have the decency to 
go and visit this company when he was invited. 
 
However, in answer to the member’s question opposite, I can 
confirm that I discussed this matter with the president of Joytec 
last Monday, and yes, in fact they are moving to Vancouver. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
do have a personal interest in this on behalf of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — People have long smelled that something was 
rotten with Joytec, that there was PC patronage at Joytec, and 
that Joytec would only milk Saskatchewan taxpayers and run. 
And you, two years ago on July 14, could only say: “We have 
reason to think that at this time Joytec are going to provide a lot 
of additional revenues to this province through their golf 
simulators.” Mr. Minister, what revenues? What golf 
simulators? What jobs? What are you going to do to protect 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt about 
it, that over the last several days we’ve heard many examples of 
hypocrisy from the other side of this House. And I would point 
out today, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, very clearly, that the 
member opposite can certainly take a good bit of credit, along 
with some of his colleagues, for  

Joytec being driven out of this province, and at a time when the 
Leader of the Opposition says that he is for small business in 
this province. 
 
Let me just tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that the main reason why 
Joytec is leaving Saskatchewan is purely this: the main reason 
they are leaving, Mr. Speaker, is that since last October they 
have been trying to hire technical staff in the city of Saskatoon, 
and one of the major reasons why they have given for not being 
able to do this is because of negative publicity and negative 
comments such as this that have been put forward by the 
members of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. A 
supplementary question to the minister from Saskatoon 
Mayfair. In the light of his last answer, how in the world does 
he explain the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix story quoting the 
president of Joytec saying that they could not get qualified 
programmers because of a very disappointing response to the 
advertisements, and not a word about that false and spurious 
accusation you’ve made? How do you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
interesting that, at this particular date, that the Leader of the 
Opposition has finally discovered that there is a company such 
as Joytec in his own constituency. 
 
But let me repeat this again, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t like to hear this, but the fact of the matter is 
that the president of Joytec, in discussion with me last Monday, 
indicated this was the very reason why they could not attract 
technical staff to this particular company. And I would point out 
that when we see comments such as we saw in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix on April 22 of last year, where the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland points out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. We’re having great 
difficulty hearing the minister, and I do believe he’s trying to 
answer the question, so I would like to give him the opportunity 
to finish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — When the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland points out, “Joytec assistance bilked taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan.” Now, Mr. Speaker, let me point out to this. 
This company, during the last six years in the province of 
Saskatchewan, have spent in the neighbourhood of 8 millions of 
dollars — 8 millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker — $8 million, the 
most of which has gone to the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 
gone to the province of Saskatchewan in the form of wages, of 
taxes, and also for goods and services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when one considers that over $8 million has 
been spent, most of which has been spent here, that the people 
from Saskatchewan have had a good return on their dollar. In 
actual fact, the amount of money that had been spent by the 
Government of Saskatchewan was $76,000 for research and 
development, plus the fact that they had venture capital fund — 
venture capital fund. And it’s understood by both sides . . . 
 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

246 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, the truth is that Joytec has 
received one and a half million dollars from the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, and if that kind of expenditure can’t stand up to 
public scrutiny, it should never have been given in the first 
place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you, when are 
you going to stop defending Joytec and protecting the interest 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the very reason, 
as just stated by the member opposite, as to why Joytec is 
leaving this province, and I think that’s unfortunate, just at a 
time when they are starting to move ahead. This is a company 
that we’re going to be watching and going to be hearing much 
about in the years ahead. 
 
The member opposite mentions about $1.5 million that this 
government is out. That is clearly not the case at all, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly not the case. This is a company that they have 
driven out of the province. This is a company . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s their attitude to business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That’s their attitude to small 
business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’ll give the minister a 
few seconds to conclude his remarks because he was being 
interrupted. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the only money that 
the Government of Saskatchewan has put into this company that 
will not be recoverable is $76,588. This in view of the fact that 
the company has spent $8 million on this company, and the 
majority of that has been here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Anything to do with venture capital will be repaid by the 
company. 
 
So it’s just another example of the NDP and their opposition to 
small business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you and your Premier have given Joytec every possible benefit 
that it could want, and it still has yet to produce one machine — 
one machine. You have gambled with Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
money, and I want to know when and how you are going to get 
that money back from the venture capital offering that was held 
in conjunction with Joytec. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
knew anything about research and development, he would know 
that there’s no guaranteed  

time on when an idea can be taken to the production stage. It 
may be anywhere from one or two years to 15 years. This is a 
company that has been in operation for the last six years. They 
now have taken . . . They’ve got more movies in regard to more 
programs for the machines. Now unfortunately these jobs are 
going to be provided in the province of British Columbia for the 
market in Japan, and that’s because of this particular party on 
the opposite side of this House driving small business out. 
 
And with regard to the money and how this government is 
probably . . . is going to get it back from this company, I would 
dare say probably that they will be getting a cheque within the 
next few months to take care of it. 
 

Pollution from Pulp Mills 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Minister of the Environment, and it deals with 
the lack of this government’s commitment to protection of the 
environment. 
 
Mr. Minister, your throne speech said that you are going to be 
tough about environmental protection. Just a few days after 
your throne speech you caved in on your commitment to pursue 
the hydrogen sulphide leak at the Co-op upgrader. This 
weekend, Mr. Minister, you caved in to the pulp industry by 
saying that the federal government is moving too quickly to do 
away with the pollution that’s taking place in our waters. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: what possible reason 
do you have for supporting the continued deadly pollution by 
the pulp industry of our waters over a longer period of time than 
the federal government is proposing that it should take place, 
and why don’t you deliver on your commitment to protect the 
environment by putting it into action rather than running away 
from every issue every time it confronts you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for a member such as 
this to lecture me on environment is a little bit of a shock. This 
particular member took no interest in environment at the time 
when he was a member of the front bench of the former 
government. 
 
As far as it relates to the hydrogen sulphide issue at the 
upgrader here in Regina, I haven’t backed up from that issue, 
not one inch. That issue is being dealt with and is being dealt 
with today; it’s being dealt with on a day-by-day basis. Very 
expensive consultants have been brought in to deal with that 
issue so that it never happens again. 
 
If the upgrader . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the upgrader is able to resolve the issue 
so it never reoccurs, then they have met the requirements of the 
Department of Environment. If they don’t, then we will lay a 
charge and that charge will be proceeded with. But the 
important thing in this issue is not the laying of a charge and 
getting a few dollars in for the  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

247 
 

treasury. That’s not the purpose; it’s to resolve the issue. 
 
As it relates to the pulp mills, I think if you were to look at the 
federal report that dealt with the Weyerhaeuser mill in 
Saskatchewan, you would find that this mill is indeed operating 
better than most mills across our country, and the challenge that 
was thrown out by the federal minister really cannot be backed 
up with actualities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, day after day after day you run away from 
environmental issues when they are brought to your attention 
and do nothing about them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Your commitment is no more than a 
paper tiger. In view of the fact that the current regulations have 
been in place since 1971 and the industry has had 18 years to 
make the adjustments that it needs to make, Mr. Minister, and 
in spite of that, 83 out of 122 pulp mills in Canada dump 
pollution into water in such a way that they don’t meet the 
national standards; and in view of the fact that dioxins and 
furans, the most toxic chemicals in the pulp effluent are not 
even covered by the regulation, how can you stand up in this 
House and justify your pleading on behalf of the pulp industry 
corporations that more effective laws to stop water pollution 
should be delayed even further? How can you justify that kind 
of a position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe if the hon. member would have 
even read his big research article, which was one article in the 
paper, that he would have looked at it a little bit more seriously. 
He would have realized that the province of Saskatchewan has 
done tests on Weyerhaeuser mill. And those tests have shown, 
and I have given the information in this House, that those tests 
have shown that they are meeting our pollution requirements at 
this point. 
 
The federal government’s own report, if you read it, indicates 
that the Weyerhaeuser mill in Saskatchewan is not the mill that 
they really are concerned about. But in one broad, sweeping 
statement they have laid a charge against every pulp company 
in Canada, and that is not a realistic way to address the issues of 
any industry. You address them one at a time, and that’s what 
we are doing in Saskatchewan. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. Before 
orders of the day, I would like to present to the House a ruling 
which relates back to Friday. I wish to read it as follows: 
 
On Friday a point of order was raised by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone stating that the ministerial statement of the Minister 
of Health was out of order on the grounds  

that it was too long and contained no new information on 
government policy. I have now had an opportunity to review the 
verbatim record. 
 
There are numerous precedents of this Assembly which clearly 
set out the guide-lines for ministerial statements. I refer 
members to the following citations of precedents. 
 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth 
Edition — c. 262: 
 
. . . The Speaker has emphasized that both the Government 
and Opposition contributions should be brief and factual. 
The purpose of the ministerial statement is to convey 
information, not to encourage debate. 
 
Standing Order 15 of the House of Commons: 
 
On statements by ministers . . . a minister of the Crown 
may make a short factual announcement or statement of 
government policy. 
 
Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
ruling of April 4, 1979: 
 
The purpose of a ministerial statement is to provide an 
opportunity for statements on government policy and 
administration. 
 
Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
ruling of March 9, 1983: 
 
Ministerial statements should be brief, factual and not of a 
nature to promote debate. 
 
Finally, Journals of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, a ruling of June 10, ’88, in which I said: 
 
I would suggest that the Premier’s statement yesterday was 
of a similar nature — of significant provincial interest but 
the statement did not announce new or existing 
government initiatives which pertain to the problem. I once 
more caution members (ministers) that statements should 
be brief and not lengthy in nature. 
 

Based on the above guide-lines, I find that the ministerial 
statement made by the Minister of Health was out of order 
because it did not contain information on new government 
initiatives. The Chair is concerned that when the rules are not 
followed, the time for ministerial statements . . . 
 
Order please. Order. Order. 
 
The Chair is concerned that when the rules are not followed, the 
time for ministerial statements degenerates into a debate which 
is totally out of order as there is no motion before the 
Assembly. In future I remind (members) and ministers that they 
must demonstrate the validity of their ministerial statement 
early in the statement or the Chair will be forced to intervene. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

248 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I commenced the debate on 
Friday last with regard to the Speech from the Throne, and at 
that time I outlined some of the things which I felt this 
government was very guilty of. I talked about at that 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, about the government being one that 
is mismanaging this province’s economy. I talked about this 
government misleading the people of this province with regard 
to their programs and with regard to responsibilities in the 
government. I talked about as well, Mr. Speaker, about the cruel 
and heartless aspect of the government. 
 
And I wanted to put forward today a thesis of this government’s 
direction of taking opposite positions from what they say, as 
well as making some comments with regard to the 
mismanagement of the province and privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is indeed a government 
of opposites, and I say that with a great deal of consternation. 
The government opposite has on many occasions put forward 
statements that are simply not true. They’ve put forward 
initiatives that they feel are important but they do the opposite. 
And I want to bring forward three or four examples, Mr. 
Speaker, very briefly. 
 
In the last couple of elections they came to this legislature and 
they went to the people of Saskatchewan and promised to 
reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. In effect what we’ve 
seen, Mr. Speaker, is not a 10 per cent cut in personal income 
tax but actually an increase on personal income tax of about 105 
per cent. There’s 105 per cent more revenue to the treasury right 
now, Mr. Speaker, from personal income tax returns than there 
was in 1982. And that is opposite of what they promised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also promised to eliminate the 5 per cent 
sales tax. We’ve seen not an increase . . . or decrease or 
elimination of the sales tax, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in effect a 
40 per cent increase, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, of a sales tax 
on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They promised, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate the gas tax, and the 
Premier of this province, as a matter of fact, stood before this 
legislature in May of 1982, and he said to the people of 
Saskatchewan: as long as there is a Conservative government in 
this province we will never, ever reintroduce the gas tax. We 
have not only seen the reintroduction of the gas tax, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve seen a substantial increase in the gas tax. And 
today we’ve even heard of reports from the newspapers that the 
Minister of Finance intends not only to maintain the gas tax as 
it is but to increase it one more time. 
 

This is not a government that has a lot of credibility, Mr. 
Speaker. They say one thing; they’ve done the opposite, in 
spades. They talked about improving medicare. They said, you 
elect us as a government and we will improve medicare; we will 
increase the services and programs that medicare offers. 
 
What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is the gutting of the dental plan, 
the children’s school-based dental program, a privatization of a 
medicare program that has resulted in increased cost to the 
taxpayers of this province in terms of taking more time to take 
their children to the dentist. We’ve seen more complications as 
they arise in regard to children’s health. No longer are children 
able to go to the school dentist down the hall and have their 
teeth checked on a regular basis. They now must have their 
parents accompaniment to go to the dentist in far away places. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, the privatization of the drug plan. 
They said, we’re going to enhance the drug plan. They said, 
we’re going to bring to the drug plan all of the drugs that are 
offered in the economy of Saskatchewan and included in the 
formulary of the drug plan. They’ve done that. They’ve 
broadened the formulary and the amount of drugs and the type 
of drugs available to the formulary plan. 
 
But what they also did, Mr. Speaker, when they did that, was 
increase the costs of the prescription drug plan to the point 
where now they’re saying, it’s too expensive to provide a drug 
plan as we knew it once before. Now, Mr. Speaker, with the 
privatization of the drug plan, have increased costs to those that 
are provided prescription drugs by their doctors for the purpose 
of maintaining or improving health. 
 
And what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is an incompetent, 
mismanaged approach to the drug plan in particular. Rather 
than saying to the doctors who offer prescriptions to their 
patients, drug costs are high, the prescription drugs that are 
being provided through the drug plan are fairly significant in 
volume, we’re asking you to cut back or be very cautious in 
issuing your prescription drugs; rather than saying that, Mr. 
Speaker, they eliminated the drug plan as we know it. 
 
They could have looked at the expenses and changed the drug 
plan to a point where it could have operated and provided 
prescription drug protection to those that required it. 
 
They could have said, Mr. Speaker, rather than having every 
drug that every company manufactures in North America in the 
formulary plan, they could have said to the drug manufacturers: 
watch your prices; don’t charge these high prices; cut back; be 
very, very cautious with regard to your pricing system because 
the system is getting very expensive. And if you don’t, we’ll be 
reviewing the matter and we’ll be cutting back some of the 
drugs that are on the formulary plan. 
 
They didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. They felt it was far more 
efficient to just cut back the drug plan to where we have now a 
deterrent fee for those that require prescription drugs for the 
benefit of their own health. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

249 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government of opposites went on record as 
saying, if you elect us, we will balance this budget. We will 
have a balanced budget, as the New Democratic Party 
government in the the previous 11 years. The previous 11 
budget years had balanced budgets. As a matter of fact, the 
Premier even said, Mr. Speaker, that we could even — this is a 
Conservative Premier saying this — we could even mismanage 
this province and still balance the budget. 
 
They’ve mismanaged it, Mr. Speaker. That’s a matter of fact 
that is shared by everybody in this province that can think and 
walk and talk. And, Mr. Speaker, what it hasn’t shown is that 
this government has mismanaged to the point that the budget is 
at such a very, very large amount — it is an operating budget of 
about $3.8 billion — that it is very difficult for our province to 
come out of this with any particular suffering and cost to the 
taxpayer. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, with an operating budget of 
$3.8 billion, it’s gone from an operating surplus of 150 million 
to $3.8 billion, and with a Crown corporation capital debt of $8 
billion, the people of this province have a total debt of $12 
billion. But 1982, when the Conservatives got elected, the total 
operating deficit . . . it was not a deficit; it was a surplus of 
$150 million. The Crown corporation debt was about 2 to 2.5 
billion. We had a Heritage Fund of about a billion dollars. We 
had a total debt of about one and a half to $2 billion. 
 
That has gone in seven years from $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, to 
$12 billion, in times when resources such as oil sold for the 
highest amount in the history of the pricing of oil in this world. 
And in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
mismanaged the economy to the point where we now have a 
deficit so large, a burden so large on the taxpayers of this 
province, that we’re on the verge of bankruptcy. And I could go 
on, Mr. Speaker, about some of the other examples of 
mismanaging the economy, but my colleagues have talked 
about those in great detail. 
 
What I want to talk about now, Mr. Speaker, is the role in 
government in Saskatchewan, the role in governments . . . a role 
of government in Canada. Our role as a government, Mr. 
Speaker, when we become government, will be to manage the 
province, manage the programs, manage the resources for the 
benefit of those who live in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A government has to be sensitive to the needs of the people it 
represents. It has to be responsible and accountable to the 
people that have elected it and to those who live in this 
province. In this province, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative 
government has not been responsible and has not been 
accountable to the people of this province. 
 
The government also, Mr. Speaker, has to have some 
accountability with regard to the fiscal management and to the 
creation of jobs in this province. In tough economic times, it’s 
the responsibility of government, Mr. Speaker, to be involved in 
the economy and to create jobs in co-operation with the sectors 
in our economy, the business people, the co-operatives and the 
Crown corporations. It’s, in tough economic times, the specific  

responsibility of government to ensure working people and 
working families in this province that they are not terminally 
hurt by the lack of jobs. 
 
It’s also the role of government, Mr. Speaker, to participate in 
creating programs that provide a fair taxation rate. The 
government opposite has not done that this year, Mr. Speaker; 
they’ve not done that in any of the previous years of their 
administration. And our government, Mr. Speaker, would be 
looking at a fair taxation policy so that those who can afford to 
pay their fair share will indeed be paying their fair share. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, governments should be a referee or an 
economic balance to the large multinational corporations that 
operate in this province and in this country. 
 
And on those counts, Mr. Speaker, in the roles that I’ve 
outlined, the government opposite have not done their job very 
well. It’s my contention, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier and the 
PC government in this province have fundamentally and 
structurally changed the face of Saskatchewan. 
 
We used to be a province, Mr. Speaker, that when we had a 
problem facing us, we worked in a co-operative, unified fashion 
to solve that problem. And we had the leaders, Mr. Speaker, we 
had the initiators, we had the people who strived to do better, 
and we in effect did it ourselves. And that happened in the 
1940s and the 1950s, in the 1960s, as well as the 1970s. 
 
In the ’40s and ’50s we had insurance rates which were very 
high that were being charged by insurance companies operating 
outside this province. Mr. Speaker, the people of the province 
felt that we could do better, that we could charge a fairer rate to 
the people that needed and required insurance. We felt that we 
could create jobs by forming our own company. We felt that 
any jobs that were created would be controlled in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and that head office jobs would be a 
fundamental part of that service that the insurance company 
would deliver. 
 
And as a result we created SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). We created SGI as a result of an external force, Mr. 
Speaker, an external, international, economic force that was 
hurting the people of this province. 
 
(1445) 
 
And we felt, we don’t have to be the lap-dogs of the large 
corporations as the Conservative Party always has been; we 
don’t have to be the people that subsidized these foreign 
corporations at high rates when we can charge lower rates for as 
good, if not better, coverage by our own people, for our own 
people. 
 
We did that with SGI, Mr. Speaker. We created a head office. 
Profits that were made over the course of the years were 
retained in this province, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of 
everybody, not just for those corporations that operate out of the 
United States or eastern Canada. 
 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

250 
 

In the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, we also undertook, as a result of 
international events, to do things on our own, and I could talk 
about the potash corporation. We had a great deal of resources 
that we looked at, Mr. Speaker. We worked in co-operation 
with business in the 1970s. And we developed some of those 
resources in co-operation, as well, through Crown corporations, 
so that the resources could be developed, that profits could be 
made, jobs could be created. And the ultimate winners, Mr. 
Speaker, were the people living in this province. And we did 
that with the potash corporation. 
 
What is happening now, Mr. Speaker, is that in all of the 
previous experiences that we’ve had with international forces 
affecting our economy, we’ve responded to locally with our 
own people. But what’s happening now, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve 
got a government which is changing all of that, structurally and 
fundamentally. 
 
Rather than being reliant on each other in a co-operative sense, 
in a sense where we work together to achieve certain goals, the 
government opposite is trying to make the people of this 
province more reliant and totally reliant on foreign corporations 
and multinational corporations. And that is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
In our view, it’s very, very inappropriate for us to give up some 
qualities that we have, some skills that we have, and forfeit 
them to an international corporation because of ideology. It just 
doesn’t make any sense. It doesn’t even make any sense, Mr. 
Speaker, from the perspective of a Conservative. They’re 
having a problem dealing with this issue themselves. 
 
Rather than having people be reliant on their own abilities and 
the abilities of others in this province to build and expand our 
economy, people in the Conservative Party and particularly the 
government, Mr. Speaker, are trying to get the Saskatchewan 
electorate more reliant on these multinational corporations, but 
at the same time increasing taxes to record levels. We’ve got 
less government for higher taxes, less services and less 
programs, and we’re paying higher taxes as taxpayers. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had that unity; we’ve had that 
united front when we dealt with major problems that faced us. 
And there was a common purpose, Mr. Speaker, as well. We 
had that co-operative spirit to approach challenges and to 
achieve things like rural electrification, like medicare, social 
programs, and other agricultural initiatives. 
 
But now there’s a deep division. This government has 
purposely divided the people of this province. They’ve taken 
the rural population, and they’ve tried to pit the rural population 
against the urban population. They’ve implemented tax 
programs, Mr. Speaker, whereby the municipalities in the urban 
areas are receiving less of their fair share in terms of taxes. Yet 
the rural population in some instances are receiving a little more 
than their fair share when it comes to programs like capital 
projects for urban development and capital projects for rural 
development. 
 
But the economic failure of the PC government, Mr. Speaker, 
cannot go unchallenged. The true measure of this failure is the 
toll of hardship imposed on  

Saskatchewan families that I’ve talked about. Lost jobs and lost 
opportunities are the price Saskatchewan people have been 
forced to pay for the PC government’s economic failures. 
 
These failures and their impact can be virtually illustrated in 
several different ways, and I want to do that this afternoon. 
 
For example, one of the basic tests of sound economic 
performance is the overall level of investment. But despite the 
PC government’s talk of economic diversification, and despite 
its open-for-big-business policy, total real investments has 
dropped sharply. This significant drop in total investment, in 
constant dollars, shows that the PC policy of megabucks for 
megaprojects is failing, and failing dismally. And it’s failing to 
sustain basic levels of capital investment. 
 
That fundamental failure has forced the hardship of 
unemployment on the thousands of Saskatchewan families 
throughout the province. Since the PC government took office 
in 1982, the number of Saskatchewan people without jobs has 
increased sharply and remained at unacceptable high levels — 
an average of 37,000 people unemployed in 1988. And that’s 
after 14,000 people left this province in a net migration loss, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What does that figure mean, of 37,000 unemployed? It means 
that the number of Saskatchewan people without a job and 
actively seeking a job is equal to the total combined population 
— man, woman, and child — of Lloydminster and Melfort and 
Melville, Humboldt, Nipawin, Biggar, Canora, Kamsack, and 
Preeceville. 
 
The lack of jobs and job opportunities has been especially hard 
on our young people as well. The best and the brightest of our 
new generation are leaving the province. We’ve paid for their 
education; we’ve invested in the future of our province by 
investing in our young people who we hope to take the initiative 
in building our economy over the next number of years. And 
that is gone because they’re leaving the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But since 1982, the number of jobs for Saskatchewan young 
people aged 15 to 24 has declined from 107,000, Mr. Speaker, 
to just 90,000 in 1988. These young people in rural 
communities, in the towns, and in our cities, cannot find jobs or 
opportunities for their future here in this province. They are 
being forced to move away, taking with them their hopes, their 
energy, and their ability. 
 
In 1982 the 15 to 24 age group represented about 19 per cent of 
the population of the province. Today, rather than 19 per cent, 
that percentage has dropped to 16 per cent. The provincial 
government’s own figures on interprovincial net migration 
clearly show the pattern since ’82. Among that 15-to-24 age 
group, Saskatchewan now suffers net out-migration of more 
than 3,000 people per year, and that’s young people. The same 
government figures also show that it is not only those in the 
15-to-24 age group that are leaving, it’s thousands and 
thousands of others. 
 
We’ve heard my colleague stand up and talk about those  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

251 
 

who have left this province to find jobs — about 14,000 people 
in 1988 alone, Mr. Speaker. We don’t hear the PCs boast any 
more about bringing home the children. Saskatchewan families 
know that when the PC performance is judged by that test, it 
has failed dismally. It’s again they’re governing by opposites, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The latest weekly figures from StatsCanada show that the 
average weekly earnings in Saskatchewan are the second lowest 
in the nation — only Prince Edward Island is worse. 
 
The economic pressure is even more severe on the tens of 
thousands of working people, many of whom are our young 
people and women, whose jobs are at the minimum wage or 
tied to the minimum wage. Since 1982 their wages have fallen 
far behind the increases in the cost of living. Since the PC 
government took office, the Saskatchewan minimum wage has 
had the lowest increase in Canada. When this PC government 
took office, the Saskatchewan minimum wage was the highest 
in Canada. It’s gone from the highest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
the lowest, and today we are finding this a very big hardship on 
those earning the minimum wage. 
 
An even more tragic consequence of the PC government’s 
failed economic policies has been the substantial increase in the 
number of families forced on to social assistance. It’s therefore 
no wonder that all across the province families and 
communities have become deeply concerned about food banks 
and child hunger and the poverty that is the harsh PC reality. 
 
We sometimes hear the PCs defend their policies — not very 
often, Mr. Speaker, but on occasion. The rising number of 
unemployed, the rising number on welfare, the low wages — 
those are their policies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But by trying to argue that their policies are good for business, 
they’re saying these things have a positive impact on business. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to many, many business people, 
many that I was in business with in the past as well, and they 
tell me that business in this city and in this province is at its 
worst level in their memory in the last 20 years. They’re 
struggling in downtown Regina, they’re struggling in the 
suburbs of Regina with regard to retail sales, because they do 
not have an economy, in their view, that is able to support the 
sales that have been a custom in this province. 
 
We’ve got, Mr. Speaker, a government that is not a friend of 
small business or family business. They may be a friend of the 
large multinationals and the large corporations, but they haven’t 
done a very good job with the businesses in this province. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, there were over 450 bankruptcies in 
Saskatchewan last year, which is a new record. 
 
But I’ve generally illustrated the nature and extent of the 
problems caused by the PC Government’s failures. And I think 
that the government has got to realize that, for the 
Saskatchewan economy to perform well, we need to develop 
the mixed economy where all three key sectors — the private 
sector, the co-operative sector, and the public sector — work 
together. 
 

Large projects, megaprojects, are not the answer. They in 
themselves create some employment, but they commit a large 
number of money to one region in the economy and one region 
in the province; and once they’re done, they’re done, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t generate the jobs that are necessary, 
considering the amount of money that’s been spent on them. 
 
The number of housing starts in Saskatchewan has declined 
substantially since the PC Government took office, and we 
talked about that on Friday afternoon, Mr. Speaker. We talked 
about how the housing construction business in this province 
had its worst year in 1988. The Conservative policies in regard 
to housing provided the housing industry with the lowest 
number of starts in the last 20 years in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1988. And that has a very negative affect on the 
economy in this province because housing is a very labour 
intensive kind of economic activity. 
 
On Saturday, Mr. Speaker, in the Leader-Post, they . . . we have 
right here a headline saying “Housing starts are down.” Now in 
1988, I remind you, was the worst year in 20 years for housing 
starts in this province. 
 
The minister of housing, the member from Regina South, was 
in this House the other day talking about all the jobs that were 
created by his home program, all the wonderful, good news 
that’s happening out there in the house construction business. 
And it’s my contention, Mr. Speaker, that he has misled the 
people of this province if they happened to hear him say those 
things. Because in the Leader-Post on Saturday, March 18, and 
I quote here: 
 

According to figures released by Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation for the month of February, housing 
starts in Saskatchewan declined by 52.6 per cent to 74 units 
from 156 in 1988. 
 

So 1988, Mr. Speaker, was the worst year for housing starts in 
this province, yet the first two months of ’89 are worse by 50 
per cent, 45 per cent, than last year. This is a direct result of the 
economic policies of the Conservative government. The total 
year-to-date starts in 1989 are 157 units, which is 45 per cent 
below last year’s level of 283 units, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The government says, well you know, it’s the international 
factor, it’s the drought, it’s slow population growth, low level of 
consumer confidence. They’re saying, rising interest rates. And 
of course their argument is beaten down and totally blown away 
by the article which appears right beside this article in 
Saturday’s paper, where it says: “Vancouver building soars.” In 
one, in Saskatchewan housing starts are down, but in B.C., 
Vancouver building soars. And I’ll quote from this article: 
 

Residential construction is setting a sizzling pace in 
Vancouver. Over the first two months of the year starts are 
up and the value of permits issued has virtually doubled. 
 

Virtually doubled. They’ve declined by 50 per cent in 
Saskatchewan and they’ve doubled in B.C., Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Yet the government opposite, the Tories in this  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

252 
 

province, blame the international economy. Well if they’re 
blaming the international economy, how come in British 
Columbia housing starts are increased. And last year in B.C. 
housing starts were not the lowest in the 20-year history; they 
were in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the highest that 
they’ve ever had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the small-business sector has demonstrated its 
ability to provide employment and to generate new jobs. From 
1978 to 1986 the employment growth rate for firms of fewer 
than 20 employees was 70 per cent, compared to less than 25 
per cent for all Saskatchewan firms. Or looked at another way, 
over that period those small firms with fewer than 20 
employees created 42,600 new jobs compared to only 18,300 in 
all other firms — 42 thousand, six to 18 thousand, three — 
more than a hundred per cent better. 
 
Local small business, in my view, Mr. Speaker, holds the key to 
the economic growth and prosperity in Saskatchewan. But the 
PC government’s defence for its poor economic performance is 
the excuse that it has been . . . that the government has been the 
victim of international circumstances. And to that, I think it’s a 
decent reply to say that Saskatchewan has always been affected 
by outside forces, but never before have we had a government 
that so totally abandoned any attempt to buttress the forces of 
international economy. 
 
(1500) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have the government now saying that in 
order to manage change we have to sell off the assets of this 
province. The Premier talks about, Mr. Speaker, about the role 
of Crown corporations and that there should be no role of 
Crown corporations in our economy, that we have to privatize 
the assets of our Crown corporations. 
 
Now the reasons for setting up some Crown corporations in the 
past are very clear. There are basically four or five reasons that 
Crown corporations have been set up in the past. They were set 
up originally to provide a service to the people of this province 
at the least possible cost, and I refer to the SGI example. 
 
As well, it was set up to retain profits earned by these 
corporations to be used to subsidize the treasury so that 
programs and services that are delivered by the government for 
the people of this province are not being paid for totally by 
taxpayers’ dollars but through other revenue sources. 
 
As well, Crown corporations have been set up in the past to 
create jobs. In times of corporations not being involved in our 
economy and the economy being a little low in terms of job 
creation, Crown corporations have done a very important job 
with regard to creating jobs. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations have been set up to 
establish head offices in this province. And they’ve established 
head offices in this province so that not only do profits stay 
within the province but jobs that are exported through 
multinational and national corporations out of province are 
remaining in this province, and we have some control over what 
the  

corporations do with regard to our economy. 
 
And as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had an example of 
corporations being set up to develop and promote our resources 
in the economy. 
 
In a February 3, 1988 Crown Corporations Committee meeting 
where we were reviewing the Crown Management Board, the 
Crown investments corporation, the Deputy Premier was asked 
the question about the government’s philosophy and ideology 
with regard to privatization. And the member for 
Souris-Cannington, the Deputy Premier, in response to the 
question about what their intentions were with regard to Crown 
corporations in this province, he responded by saying on 
February 3 in the Crown Corporations Committee that the 
intention of the PC government is to sell off as many of the 
Crown corporations that Saskatchewan has, so that if and when 
the NDP ever get elected again, they will never, ever be able to 
retrieve them. 
 
That is the policy of this government. That’s the policy that the 
Deputy Premier of this province had indicated was going to 
happen with regard to Crown corporations. 
 
And what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, is following to 
that a statement of a government hell-bent to sell off assets, to 
privatize Crown corporations and government programs and 
services, not for the purpose of efficiency or the purpose of 
creating jobs or the purpose of getting rid of a company that has 
a lot of debt, but specifically for the purpose of fulfilling the 
objectives of their ideology. And that is a wrong-headed 
approach, a wrong-headed approach when it comes to dealing 
with the economy of any province or any country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they talked about in previous speeches, the 
Premier has been in this House and the Deputy Premier, making 
speeches about privatization, how important it is for the people 
of this province, how they’re going to create jobs. 
 
Well what is privatization? Privatization basically is selling off 
the assets of the people of this province at discount prices to the 
friends of the government. That’s what privatization has meant 
for Saskatchewan. It’s also meant that when privatization of a 
corporation has been undertaken, or a program, it means 
increased costs to taxpayers; it has meant increased taxes to 
taxpayers; it has meant decreased services to taxpayers; fewer 
number of jobs, and of course a loss of control, the loss of the 
ability to control, in some small way, the effects of the 
downturns in our economy. 
 
And it’s not so bad, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, if you have a 
corporation that’s losing and hemorrhaging all kinds of money, 
to sell them off so we don’t burden the taxpayers if it’s not 
creating an economic objective. But we sell the money-makers. 
That’s been the problem with this government. 
 
And it’s an example, Mr. Speaker, of if you’re in business and 
you have some short-term debt that arises, you sell off part of 
your business, which generates revenue for your business, to 
pay this debt down. You sell off some more of your business to 
pay down some more debt, rather than  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

253 
 

over a long-term mortgage and paid with the profits. So after 
it’s all done, you’ve got no business left. Now that wouldn’t . . . 
I mean that . . . from a business point of view, it’s a very 
dangerous thing to do. 
 
If a business man’s in trouble, what they try and do financially 
is they try and look at the assets they have, to sell off some of 
their assets to get them out of trouble. What this government 
has done is they’ve sold a number of Crown corporations and 
privatized a number of services. Has the deficit gone down? It’s 
the fastest-growing deficit in all of North America. Has the 
Crown corporation debt decreased? No, it hasn’t. It’s gone from 
$2 billion to $12 billion in seven years. 
 
So under the guise of privatization, to get Crown corporations 
out of the economic sector and to return them to their 
multinational friends, they are saying, we’re going to try and 
reduce the debt. But where’s the money gone; has the debt been 
reduced? Not at all. It’s increased; taxes have gone up. All of 
the John Galbraith economic theories of dealing with the 
government in an economy have been proven wrong by this 
government, in spades. When you have a loss of tax revenue, 
you either cut services or you increase taxes. This government 
does both, and it doesn’t make any sense and the debt keeps 
getting larger. 
 
We’ve looked at SaskCOMP, Mr. Speaker, as an example. 
SaskCOMP paid $16 million into the treasury of our province 
over the last five years of its operation. We’ve sold that off. 
There’s been no tabling of documents in regard to where the 
money’s coming from, or how much, or where it’s going. The 
debt continues to increase and we’ve lost that revenue to our 
treasury, Mr. Speaker. And where’s it going to have to come 
from? It’s going to have to come from the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
The Poplar River coal mine was sold to Manalta Coal. A $129 
million asset was sold for $102 million with the loans 
guaranteed by the government. Good deal for business. 
SaskPower’s natural gas resources were sold to Saskoil. 
SaskPower’s natural gas reserves were valued at $934 million, 
almost $1 billion, and they were sold to Saskoil for $325 
million — sold at a discount price to a privatized corporation of 
Saskoil. 
 
Now that may be a good deal for Saskoil; it may even be a good 
deal for SaskPower, but where is the money to reduce the debt? 
SaskPower issued an annual report just last week, and it shows 
their long-term debt has increased to a dangerous level. Where 
is the revenue from the gas reserves that they’ve sold? 
 
And the interesting point about these gas reserves, I’ve been 
speaking with some oil companies and some natural gas 
companies in this province and operating outside the province, 
and they’re telling me, privately, that Saskoil got a heck of a 
deal. They paid one-third the value, the market value of these 
natural gas assets, and they’re mumbling and grumbling 
because they wanted to have a crack at putting a competitive 
tender in for these reserves. 
 
But the government, who has failed to recognize good 
government, did not allow these reserves to go to public  

tender. If they were so interested in selling them, why didn’t 
they put them up to public tender, and instead of getting 325 
million in some kind of shares and stocks and a little bit of cash, 
why didn’t they put them up for tender and get maybe $500 
million cash which would have had a true dent in the debt of 
SaskPower? They didn’t do that. They’re incompetent. They 
haven’t done that. They mismanaged, and they’ve bungled even 
this deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We talked about Sask Minerals and how this particular 
corporation which mines sodium sulphate and had some peat 
moss operations in the province, sold for less than $16 million. 
Over the course of the last six years, as a Crown agency, it 
provided not 16 million to the treasury of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, but a total of $23 million. We’ve sold this asset for 16 
million. Over six years it provided a revenue to our province of 
$23 million, and over 40 years there was a total revenue of $47 
million. Where is the cash? Where is the cash for this deal? 
They have not tabled the documents. We don’t know if there’s 
cash or whether there’s some other things going on. 
 
Saskoil was privatized in 1986 — they call it privatized. They 
sold 40 per cent of the value of the company on the 
stock-market through preferred shares and shares. The 
Conservatives privatized this company, and I want to talk about 
that for a minute, but they privatized this company which 
earned over the last three years, prior to being privatized, $115 
million net profit — $115 million profit by Saskoil from 1983 
to 1986. And every year Saskoil committed a significant 
dividend to the treasury of this province to subsidize the tax 
expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
But since it’s been privatized, in times when the price of oil 
were at the highest in the history of the oil business in North 
America and in the world, they have not paid one penny of 
dividend to the majority shareholders of this corporation, the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan own 40 per cent of this 
corporation right now, yet they have six of the 10 board 
directors on the board, and they’ve got, as a matter of fact, five 
directors, as an amendment to the Saskoil privatization Bill, out 
of the 10 that sit on the board. 
 
So in effect, we have a major say on this board of directors. The 
problem we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is that although the Premier 
appoints these directors to the board, they haven’t worked in the 
best interests, in my view, of the people of Saskatchewan, their 
major shareholder. They have not paid one penny of dividends 
to the people of this province, yet they’ve paid $13.5 million in 
dividends to shareholders who, in the majority, the 75 per cent 
of the shareholders that receive the dividends, live outside this 
province, and most of them in Ontario. 
 
So here we see a classic example of privatization gone crazy. 
Saskoil was privatized in ’86. Twenty five per cent of the 
labour force in Saskoil were sold off; we lost jobs. The 
dividends that were paid were paid not to Saskatchewan 
residents or Saskatchewan treasury to help assist in delivery of 
programs, they were paid to people out of the province. Instead 
of spending money in  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

254 
 

exploring in the province, they hired a number of people in 
Alberta and purchased a company worth $66 million, Mr. 
Speaker. This is another example of the crazy, foolhardy 
privatization policies of the Premier opposite and his 
government. 
 
And on top of that we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, a real spectacle, a 
real prime example of patronage and mismanagement and 
extravagance and waste in a government-run Crown corporation 
or privatized corporation. 
 
And I refer to Saskoil. Saskoil recently put forward a proposal 
call or a tender call for new office space. In the proposal call 
they wanted to have built in here, first-class leased office space. 
They wanted to have a banked indoor track. They wanted to 
have a sauna built for 10. They wanted to have a whirlpool built 
for 10. They even wanted to have racquet-ball courts with 
glassed walls and spectator seating. You know, this is the 
wonderful corporation that the member from Swift Current is 
involved with. She has approved this kind of an extravagant, 
wasteful project. 
 
Yet Saskoil has office space, prime office space in downtown 
Regina. But what they want to do is they want to, in the worst 
patronage way, help their own people. And what they’re doing, 
Mr. Speaker, is very simply, using the revenues of Saskoil to 
sign a long-term, 10-year lease to purchase new office . . . or 
lease new office space, not purchase it. And they’re not 
prepared to table the documents or the numbers of dollars it’s 
going to cost them. 
 
We’ve seen the Roberts group come forward with a proposal 
that Saskoil has bought. They’re going to build this large office 
tower on the corner of Broad and Victoria. Saskoil has 
guaranteed a 10-year lease — I think it’s 10 years; they won’t 
tell us specifically — but about a 10-year lease to cover off their 
office space to the tune of 60 per cent of this building. 
 
When you look at the numbers, it’s my view, Mr. Speaker, that 
these numbers will reflect the worst kind of patronage that you 
can possibly have in government or business. It’s one thing, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s one thing to hire a former MLA who was in the 
service of the public; it’s one thing to hire a friend of the 
Conservative Party if they have certain qualifications. And even 
if they don’t, I mean, that’s one form of patronage which is 
unacceptable. 
 
It’s another thing, Mr. Speaker, when they use the taxpayers’ 
dollars to lease a building at a high rate so that when the lease is 
over, after 10 years, the amount of money that’s been spent by 
Saskoil has paid for the building, cash, and they’ve got no 
building to call an asset. 
 
(1515) 
 
They spend . . . they commit funds for 10 years to lease all of 
this office space, five or six floors of an office tower, and the 
amount of lease they’re paying pays the total cost of 
construction of the building. When the lease expires, they still 
have to have office space, but they’ve got no building. The 
building’s paid for, and the people in the  

Roberts group are the same people that have been involved in 
the Tory party. One of the them is a former campaign manager, 
another has a daughter who is an executive assistant to the 
former minister responsible for SGI. 
 
That’s the worst kind of patronage because you’ve got 
taxpayers’ dollars that are secretly being paid out — because 
they won’t tell us how much or for how long — to a company 
that’s a Conservative, clearly a Conservative company, that is 
building a building which they will own as an asset when it’s 
over, but Saskoil and the taxpayers will have no involvement in 
it financially. That’s the worst form of patronage. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really an incredible government 
that we have here, that on one hand talks about responsibility 
and balancing budget and being a good government and 
managing the economy, where on the other hand they’ve shown 
through their actions that they can’t manage the economy. 
They’ve mismanaged the government. They have said one thing 
on so many occasions now we can’t keep track of, and they’ve 
done the opposite. They’ve shown very clearly that patronage 
and extravagance and waste and mismanagement are the calling 
cards of the Conservative government. 
 
And it seems to me that the people of this province don’t 
believe that that’s the way we should be dealing with our 
taxpayers’ dollars. It’s a total waste of money. It’s a terrible 
way to go about dealing with problems that exist in our 
economy. Rather than work with business and create jobs, 
rather than deal with improving services and programs for the 
people of this province, they have agreed to waste our money, 
to give it away, and to ignore their obligation as a very 
important partner in the economy to help create jobs. 
 
And with regard to privatization, Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that 
this is a crazy program. The corporations they’ve sold off, they 
have refused to table documents on. The corporations they’ve 
sold off, they have sold off winners to this . . . in many 
instances to the people of this province. And I think that what 
they’re trying to do is pull the wool over people’s eyes in this 
province. They’re trying to say privatization is a good thing; 
public participation is really good. Everybody wants to get 
involved. Privatization’s going to be a terrific job creation 
project. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Another word for corruption is what it 
is. Fill the pockets of the Tories is what it’s called. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My colleague from Regina Elphinstone says 
it’s another word for corruption. And in my view I think he’s 
dead on. Saskatchewan Government Printing — I want to take 
one more corporation. Saskatchewan Government Printing was 
a Crown corporation which was a competitive corporation. 
There are other printing companies in the province. And this 
government last fall said they were going to privatize Sask 
Government Printing. 
 
And they said that privatization is such a terrific, well-liked 
theory, and such a terrific, well-liked program, this will be 
over-subscribed; the employees will buy it off  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

255 
 

the government, and everybody will be happy. The government 
will be happy because they’ve completed their ideology of 
doing away with a corporation, and the workers will be happy 
because they own a piece of the company. 
 
Well, there were 22 employees left by the time the government 
spent six and one-half to seven years operating Sask 
Government Printing. And last fall, out of the 22 employees, 
one of them, the comptroller, bought 51 per cent of the 
corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, about 10 of the other 21 
employees bought some shares in the corporation. So in effect, 
11 of the 22 employees bought shares in this corporation. One 
of them bought controlling interest, 51 per cent. And you know, 
if you’re a business person, if you own 51 per cent of a 
company you have total control over what goes on. 
 
But some of the other employees, some of the other employees, 
the others that didn’t buy the shares last fall, were not buying 
the shares because they wanted some questions answered by the 
government. The government wouldn’t give them the answers 
to these questions, so they waited and they waited and they 
waited. 
 
Finally, coming late February we have Otto Cutts, the deputy 
minister responsible for government printing walks in the door 
and says to the 11 people who haven’t bought shares, don’t 
worry; I’ll answer any questions that you have, but I want you 
to consider the following proposal. We will buy for you 2,000 
shares at $1 a share, and will give each of you 11 that haven’t 
bought shares, these 2,000 shares on condition you sign this 
document on Tuesday. This was a Thursday he was in the 
office. It’s a real gift; it’s called gifting, gifting of shares. So the 
government couldn’t sell or privatize this printing company to 
the employees, because they didn’t want to answer any 
questions. They were dealing, in my view, very secretively with 
the employees. 
 
Yet when it came down to making a deal they want to strike by 
March 1, they tell the employees, half of whom didn’t buy 
shares, here are $2,000 in shares. Here are 2,000 $1 shares. The 
employees took advantage of the deal. And one of the 
humorous sides to this is, one of the employees that started 
about two or three weeks earlier, I believe it was, or two or 
three months earlier, took his 2,000 shares and a week later quit 
— took his $2,000 and he made a quick termination of $2,000 
salary. This is a laughable kind of operation this government’s 
running. 
 
So they’re telling the public one thing, that the government 
printing company is fully subscribed and fully sold off to its 
employees, but they don’t tell the real story about how half of 
the employees had to be given shares worth $2,000 each in 
order for the deal to be completed. That’s part of the 
privatization program of this government — at any costs, for 
any reasons whatsoever, let’s get rid of all these corporations. 
 
But I would like to now, Mr. Speaker, just say that I have really 
talked about the issues that I felt are important with regard to 
the Speech from the Throne, and I want to say that this Speech 
from the Throne is a vacuous document, it has contributed 
nothing to the problems that this government has created to 
solving those problems, and in  

my view it’s a Speech from the Throne that I personally cannot 
support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wanted to take this opportunity to say a few words about the 
Speech from the Throne, and I know that there will be several 
speakers on both sides of the House will finish the debate 
probably by this evening. 
 
What I wanted to do was talk directly to the people of 
Saskatchewan through this Assembly and to the House about 
the kinds of things that they have been telling me since the late 
1970s and certainly in ’82 and again in ’86. 
 
I believe that democracy is a very, very powerful mechanism 
and one that we certainly respect in this province and in this 
legislature. And the interesting thing about it is that if you’re 
not listening closely, Mr. Speaker, to the people in any 
democracy, then they certainly have the complete power to put 
the opposition in the place of government or anybody else in 
government. And I think that we’ve all learned, Mr. Speaker, to 
listen carefully to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I remember, in a very non-partisan sense, people telling me 
that they thought Saskatchewan could build more. They thought 
we could create new kinds of industries. They thought that we 
could protect people against certain kinds of things like 
international interest rates or drought. They thought that 
governments could work hand in hand with Crown corporations 
and with farmers, with the private sector, with co-ops, with all 
combinations of the institutions we have in Saskatchewan to 
build a better life and more opportunities for them and their 
communities and their children. 
 
Well I found nobody really disagreeing with that, Mr. Speaker, 
when I travelled across Saskatchewan, and I’m sure members 
on both sides of the House have travelled. Everybody says, let’s 
build the community, let’s build processing and manufacturing, 
let’s diversify. Why can’t we do those kinds of things that will 
help us build as well as any other nation or any other province 
any place in the world. And they’d make recommendations. 
And you see some of those recommendations carried on in this 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They said, we want access to energy in Saskatchewan. And in 
1982 and again in ’86, they said, could you please help get 
energy into our homes? and as a result we had a rural gas 
distribution system which cost a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. But 
we are very proud of that, because Saskatchewan people said, if 
we have natural gas in the ground, why don’t we give it to the 
people? Why don’t we deliver natural gas to their homes and 
their towns and their villages and their cities? 
 
That’s government expenditure. That’s the government 
involved in a major way, significant way, providing service to 
the people of Saskatchewan based on a resource that we have in 
the ground. And it cuts the cost of living in small business, in 
homes, schools, everywhere, Mr. Speaker, because natural gas 
is one of  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

256 
 

the lowest cost, cleanest forms of energy we have, not only in 
Saskatchewan but indeed in North America. Now that’s 350 to 
$400 million provided to the Saskatchewan people by the 
Government of Saskatchewan to make sure that we are cost 
competitive. 
 
Now the same applies with the technology that we have to 
allow our people to communicate — individual line service. 
People across Saskatchewan from Prince Albert to Swift 
Current to Estevan to Yorkton, North Battleford, would say, can 
I have individual line service so I have access to complete 
communication world wide? And If I want to tap into new 
computer technology, and I want one on my farm, or I want to 
get access to fibre optics, or I want to be part of mainstream 
Saskatchewan and Canada, North America, can I have 
individual line service? And we said, of course, that makes 
eminent sense because it keeps them competitive, keeps them 
aware. Children and adults can get access to education through 
distance education, through computers, through programs. 
Nobody disagrees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that cost money. And if you look at bearing power lines, 
providing individual line service to communities, and natural 
gas to homes, towns and villages, and I think both sides of the 
House agree. And from what I’ve seen, it’s been endorsed. 
That’s over a billion dollars of brand-new government 
expenditures — new government — to help facilitate industry, 
to help educate, to make it safer, to make sure that we have 
diversification and processing and manufacturing. 
 
We make our own cable here now for the power corporation; 
we make plastic pipe; we encourage Ipsco to continue to work 
— all those things make eminent sense. People ask for that, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s one of the most important things that we can 
do, as a government and as a Legislative Assembly, to provide 
those kinds of ideas to people and for people when they ask 
their legislative members to do it. 
 
The same applies to water pipelines, to irrigation, to protecting 
them against some of the international vagaries, particularly of 
markets and of interest rates. And I suppose that’s one of the 
things that I will always remember about my activity in politics 
in Saskatchewan, is the real antagonism and frustration and, in 
some cases, fear Saskatchewan people associate with 
international interest rates. They don’t like it, and you can’t 
blame them. You get a mortgage at a certain per cent, 8 per 
cent, and then it goes to 21 per cent and you’re stuck. And you 
try to pay off the farm; you try to run a business, and it’s this 
international fluctuations. And they don’t like it; it frightens 
them. 
 
Interest and the interest rate to Saskatchewan people is the cost 
of capital. It is the cost of building. And if you have a small 
population and you want to build, there’s only two ways to do 
it: you either have to borrow the money from somebody, or you 
have to encourage your local people to invest and do it. And 
what they’ve said to me time and time again, and it goes right 
back to the co-op movement, and it goes back to the very reason 
that we’ve had government involved for a hundred years, 
particularly where there’s a small population in your young 
country, is to take on those international  

fluctuations and allow people to cope with them and build and 
be independent — independent. 
 
And that’s what I admire and that’s what I respect about the 
kinds of things that we see in health and education and rural gas 
and in diversification in the Speech from the Throne — our 
independence, so that we can stand on our own two feet and 
say, I don’t care what those interest rates are internationally; for 
home owners in Saskatchewan, it’s nine and three-quarters on 
the first $50,000. And that’s the way it is, period. 
 
And we are there to stand in front of the international banks and 
international anybody, or the federal government for that 
matter, and say, for Saskatchewan people, and for those that are 
particularly low income, and those that might be poor, and 
those that might need money for this, and those that might need 
money for that, they’re at least not facing 20 per cent interest 
rates. 
 
And for economic development and for natural gas programs 
and for building communities and for helping the rinks and 
allowing development to take place in all kinds of communities, 
that’s what they tell you, Mr. Speaker. They say: be there to 
protect the families; be there to build the infrastructure, and 
work with everybody to get it done. 
 
Now they say, work with with Crown corporations. They say, 
work with the public sector to spend this money on education, 
rural gas, individual line service, hospitals, nursing homes. 
They say, spend it; do it. Co-operate with the co-operators; 
co-operate with the private sector; co-operate with the national 
governments and neighbours on either side and be prepared to 
do good business world-wide. 
 
(1530) 
 
And we’ve been known to do that. I just returned from China, 
Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you, they still remember Alvin 
Hamilton being there in 1958. He was the first minister in the 
free world to go into China and say: we’ll do business with you; 
we’ll sell you our wheat; we’ll be there; your families are the 
same as our families. And we respect that. And you can go back 
there any day of the week right now with Alvin Hamilton, or his 
name, and they just open their arms. They respect Canadians; 
they respect Saskatchewan people. 
 
Well, it’s a feeling that is not confined just to being local that 
you get along with your neighbour from town to town, and it’s 
not just the neighbouring province and the neighbouring 
community. It is a feeling that is extended by Saskatchewan 
and, I think, Canadians world-wide. 
 
We trade with the Soviet Union, with South America, with 
China, with India, and we provide that same sort of integrity. 
Here’s what you can get if you deal with Saskatchewan people. 
Here’s the kind of wheat, kind of potash, the kind of 
compassion you have. Here’s what we do in irrigation. Here’s 
what we do in rural gas. Here’s the best dry land farming 
equipment. We helped them with embryo transplants in the 
dairy business. We do all of that, and it makes Saskatchewan 
people well-recognized nationally and internationally. 
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

257 
 

And it comes right back to their basic fundamental beliefs — 
help people help themselves. Stand tall and be independent; not 
arrogant, but independent. Design the structures and the 
infrastructures to build your community so that in fact young 
people have opportunities. And don’t be afraid to be out there in 
the rest of the world to show them that you’ve got the kind of 
technology or the kind of information that would help people 
build and grow and expand. 
 
In other words, have your face in the windows of the world, so 
that indeed, like Alvin Hamilton did, this is the best wheat in 
the world. And the Chinese, believe me, believe that. There is 
no better quality and no better continuity of supply than buying 
Saskatchewan wheat in Beijing. And we’re proud of that, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re going to continue that. 
 
And that’s the kind of tradition that you see in the Speech from 
the Throne. That’s the kind of life, that’s the kind of integrity, 
that’s the kind of work that has built Saskatchewan’s reputation 
world-wide. 
 
Now it’s not just confined to the resources and it’s not confined 
to rural and it’s not confined just to towns and villages; it’s in 
every walk of life. And we see it, frankly, in health care. 
 
I got a call this morning, for example, and I know the Minister 
of Health is working on this, but Saskatchewan is invited and 
has been invited to a conference in California on the new 
technology in health care. And they’re saying, how did you put 
this into place? And I’m talking about the new plastic health 
card. And we designed it in co-operation with Co-Operators 
Data Services. And I’m very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. And I 
was in Naicam the other night, talking about it. And the people 
from the upgrader in Regina, Mr. Harold Empey and others, 
were there describing the upgrader and all the good things that 
it is doing, and I’m very proud of that, because it makes us 
independent. But what I’m very proud of here is Saskatchewan 
people taking the lead in the world on health care technology. 
 
And we’ve been known for our compassion in health care, and 
we’ve been known as the home of medicare, and we’ve been 
known for providing services and technology and an attitude 
about health that is on time, is out front, and is leading. 
 
And here we have not only interest from the Pacific Rim — and 
I can tell you that it’s there — but other provinces, and now the 
United States and several states interested in our technology, a 
plastic, computer-based health card that will provide 
information that helps the medical profession, that helps 
consumers, that helps pharmacists. And people like it. 
 
It is on the frontier, and it takes a little bit of courage. And it’s 
done in co-operation with the government, the co-operative 
sector, the private sector — we had WESTBRIDGE, we had a 
firm from Toronto and one from Alberta. The lead agency was 
Co-op Data Services in Saskatchewan. And are they proud of 
it? Of course. They’re excited about it, and I’m excited about it. 

The Government of Saskatchewan, a Conservative government, 
working with the co-op in leading technology, world-wide. And 
I say that for a reason, because I am proud of the upgrader, the 
largest single project in the history of Saskatchewan right here 
in this capital city, so we can be independent. We don’t have to 
use Alberta oil to make our gasoline and diesel fuel. For the 
first time we stand on our own feet and we use Saskatchewan 
heavy crude to make our gasoline and our diesel fuel and, if we 
want, our petrochemicals. Now isn’t that a good idea? 
 
I tell you, you go across Saskatchewan and you ask co-op 
members, you ask people who have voted anything from CCF 
to Liberal to NDP to Social Credit to you name it, they’d say, 
you bet, let’s build it. And it’s done here in complete 
co-operation with the co-op sector, with the private sector. And 
they’re working together like this. 
 
So we’ve got oil producers and gas producers working with the 
refinery; we’ve got co-op members all over the province 
working together. We’re funding a whole bunch of it, and we 
co-operated, and co-op did the federal government into it. This 
is the biggest co-op thing that ever happened. 
 
What am I saying, Mr. Speaker? It’s Saskatchewan. And you 
take the public sector, and you put it to work in natural gas, and 
you put it together in telephones, and you put it into irrigation, 
and you put it together in roads and highways and health care 
— it’s massive public expenditure. 
 
And you take that alongside the co-op sector and you build the 
biggest upgrader, the first in Canada — not only the biggest but 
the first — and the largest project in the history of this province 
right here, in co-operation with the government, the private 
sector and the Co-operators. 
 
And in health care, I mention it again, the best technology 
you’re going to find world-wide, and only the beginning — a 
little magnetic tape on it — all the things you can do that are 
possible with that card, when you look at the technology we 
have now for all forms of health care, and you’re just limited 
only by your imagination. And Co-operative Data Services of 
Regina, Saskatchewan, was the lead agency, and I’m proud of 
that. And we’re going to continue to build with it. 
 
Now I make that point, Mr. Speaker, so that the sense of 
balance stays in Saskatchewan. We work with the private 
sector, we work with the Co-operators, we work with 
government, we work with other governments, we work with 
communist governments, we work with free enterprise 
governments, we work with people who speak 100 languages 
— all the time. That’s the balance that is important for 
Saskatchewan people. It isn’t all government — it isn’t all 
private, it isn’t all co-op, it isn’t all small, it isn’t all large, it 
isn’t all rural, it isn’t all urban — it’s all of that working 
together, you know, for the first time. And I mean this in as 
positive a sense as I can. 
 
We now make our own paper. We didn’t use to do that in 
Saskatchewan. And if you ask people, and if they just put their 
politics in their hip-pocket for a minute, and you say,  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

258 
 

is it a good idea for Saskatchewan to make its own paper? 
they’ll say, right on! We can provide it to our schools, to the 
legislature, to offices. And we now export paper all over North 
America. That’s a good thing. We did that with the private 
sector, and they didn’t take the fence posts and the trees and 
take them down to New York or some place and make the paper 
there and have the jobs go down there with the trucks. They 
said, we’ll make it here. 
 
It’s like an upgrader. You don’t want the oil to go down the line 
and all the jobs go down the pipeline. You want to stop here, 
Mr. Speaker, and you want to make the jobs here. So we make 
the gasoline and the diesel fuel, and we are independent. And 
the same applies to paper. 
 
Well it’s a combination of things that does that, Mr. Speaker. It 
is that common sense, that non-partisan feeling across 
Saskatchewan that says people in this province want to build. 
They’ll do it with the wheat pool, and they’ll do with the United 
Grain Growers, and they’ll do with the co-op, and they’ll do it 
with the private sector, and they’ll do it with McDonald’s, and 
they’ll do it with John Deere. What is it? They don’t much care 
about the politics. And I think, frankly, they probably get tired 
of hearing about it. 
 
What they want to see is good, solid ideas from men and 
women, from both sides of this legislature, building for the 
future, not saying, is it this union that’s going to control it, or is 
it this private sector that’s going to do it, or it’s all got to be the 
co-op, or it’s all got . . . They know it’s not that way. They’re 
sophisticated enough to know that. They just want us to get on 
with it, not to be fighting about it, but to get on with it. 
 
They want some interest rate protection; everybody agrees with 
that. They want the co-operative sector involved; we agree with 
that. Everybody does. You want to see the private sector work 
with the co-op sector; well, people in the opposition and on this 
side of the House work in the private sector — run their own 
farms, their own businesses, their own law firms. We do that all 
the time. 
 
What they want to see is us take the lead and be innovative, be 
aggressive and get out there. Now we can understand that 
everybody wants to be king, and some people want to be 
premier, and that’ll go on for the next hundred years, hopefully, 
in a democracy in Saskatchewan, and that’s a good battle. 
 
Now what I want to say that’s important about this Speech from 
the Throne, and I’m not going to set aside much of the 
important things that are in there, is that much of what we can 
do in health care, which is a huge amount of money now — 1.2 
to 3 billion — and it is a lot on a per capita basis; most people 
would agree with that. And new hospitals and technology and 
rehabilitation, like Wascana, and drug rehabilitation for young 
people, and all those things — much of what we can do, there 
and in education, which is about three-quarters of a billion 
dollars, and social services, and the things that we want to build 
with government money, much of it can be financed with the 
kinds of things that we’re doing to replace international money 
and using Saskatchewan money. And again I don’t think it’s 
partisan at all. 

What am I talking about? I’m talking about taking 
Saskatchewan people’s savings — their money, their savings, 
their payrolls — and investing it in Saskatchewan and backing 
out of those international interest rates. That’s what I’m talking 
about. There are only two ways we can build here. You can 
borrow the money from somebody else, or you can use your 
own money and you can build here and be more independent. 
Well I’m all for being independent economically, as strongly as 
we can. 
 
What’s that mean? That means you build your upgraders, and 
you build your meat packing plants, and you build your own 
fertilizer, and you build your paper, but you can’t do it alone. 
That’s the kicker. You can’t do it alone, and Saskatchewan 
people have figured that out 50 years ago. You’ve got to do it 
together, because if you try to go alone, even if government 
tries to go alone, you got to borrow the money. Because if you 
wanted to build a new power project or build a new this, you’d 
have to go into the international markets, and they’re subject to 
those international interest rates, and you pay interest. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . That’s why we said, how about if we get the 
money with you participating and the interest goes back to you. 
You be a major shareholder and then we don’t have to look at 
those international interest rates. We can be more independent; 
we can have the corporations more independent. A good thing 
made even better. A strong power corporation and a strong 
telephone company that is based on Saskatchewan investment 
and Saskatchewan people, not on international borrowings. 
 
Now what does that mean? That means when we do a $300 
million power project, rather than borrow the money from New 
York and pay 10 per cent on 300 million, which is 30 million a 
year going out of the country, we don’t do that any more. We 
go to the people of Saskatchewan and say, here’s a $300 million 
Power bond. Would you participate at 10 per cent? And, by 
George, they’re there in spades. Sell it right out. 
 
And then every year that 10 per cent on that 300 million goes 
right back to Nipawin, Carievale, St. Walburg, Kindersley, 
Midale, Swift Current — to the people. And they’ve all got 
involved. And I haven’t heard a word against it. And all 
members of the House know if you can finance it locally it 
makes sense. Then the interest goes back, so there’s 30 million 
a year just in that project alone that went back to the people of 
Saskatchewan so they can reinvest and they can build, as 
opposed to going to a banker. 
 
Now who would you rather borrow from? Your dad? A 
neighbour? Or an international banker? Think about that. 
Everybody would recommend you borrow locally or you get a 
joint venture partner and you do it locally. Well that’s one 
project. 
 
When we do rural gas to people and they want access to energy, 
we can either go to the international market and borrow money 
to do it, or we can sell and provide bonds — SaskEnergy bonds 
or SaskPower bonds. And we’ve done I don’t know how many 
hundreds of millions of dollars in SaskPower bonds. And that 
helps finance that  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

259 
 

whole rural gas distribution system. And every community likes 
it and we’re less dependent on those international interest rates 
and somebody else calling the tune. 
 
Now if we can do that, if we can do that — and I think 
everybody agrees here — if we can do that to allow people to 
participate in Crown corporations so that they have a share in 
government, they know they’re strengthening the Crown 
corporation; they know by reducing that interest rate and that 
debt that you can have lower rates for people. 
 
And clearly that’s the case when you look at the recent 
TeleBonds. Over 30,000 people bought over $105 million in the 
first telephone bond issue we ever had. Why? Because, they 
said, it’s good for Saskatchewan. It’s good for the company. 
We’ve got individual line services that we’ve got to finance all 
over the place, and I can help keep my own rates down because 
I’m investing in a Crown corporation that is here, head office, 
and it’s growing and it’s stronger; and there’s less debt and less 
fluctuations that I have to face in those international interest 
rates. That’s why we’ve sold almost a billion dollars in bonds. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now I think, with the greatest degree of respect, that wasn’t 
going on before ’82 and ’86, and it’s just getting people to work 
together because they love to do it if you give them the 
instrument, the financial instrument, and that’s all the co-op was 
when you think about it. They designed an instrument so 
everybody could get involved. I want my share, my share, my 
share, my share. I want a crack at this; I want to vote on it. Very 
popular in Saskatchewan. 
 
What is public participation? I want to share in the action. I’m 
going to reduce my bills, I’m going to take out those 
international banks and interest rates, and I’m going to build 
here, and all that investment comes right here. And what do we 
see? The biggest co-op project in the history of this country, 
right here. And we see the biggest and newest technology in 
co-ops in health care, right here, and we have people that have 
shared in it all across the province. We see public participation 
in bonds that are setting records in the entire nation, if not North 
America. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and it’s no different than having people get 
involved. It’s independent; it’s wise. And look at the head 
offices. We have combined a great big uranium company, 
Eldorado Nuclear, with a great Crown corporation, 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation. We’ve 
put the two of them together, which is the largest mining, 
processing and marketing uranium company in the free world, 
right in Saskatoon. And the legislation’s passed this House. We 
got it here; it’s going to be here, and it has to stay here. And we 
can have Canadians and, for all I know, people from Germany 
and France invest in that corporation to make it strong here. 
 
Now, Mister, why not? Why not? It’s here. It’s expanded. Head 
office is coming here. They’re bringing the processing here, 
their market intelligence. We market in the United States. The 
President of France was just here a  

year or so ago and he’s going to 70 per cent nuclear energy, and 
he’s getting it from Saskatchewan, proud as punch of his 
investment. 
 
How do Saskatchewan people feel about Germans? French? 
Chinese? Americans? Spanish? South Americans? We all 
settled this place. We’re young. We’re young at heart. We’ve 
got the whole world there as our oyster if we want to go get it, 
if we don’t get narrow-minded and say, we won’t trade with 
anybody, or we won’t be in China, or we won’t be in Europe, or 
we won’t have the President of France here, or we won’t have 
the Chairman of the People’s Congress in the Republic of 
China, Wan Li — will be here for a state dinner and get a 
Ph.D., honorary degree from the University of Regina. Why? 
Because that’s what Saskatchewan is all about. That’s what we 
are. That’s what built us. That’s why we’re excited to be 
involved in the world. 
 
And we invite people to come to Saskatchewan. We have a 
little over a million people. Wouldn’t we like to have more 
people? Great opportunity, great land, blessed with 50 million 
acres of farm land, and with all five energies, and forest and 
minerals and water, smack dab in the middle of North America. 
And we’re talking about shutting them out? No way. That’s not 
the Saskatchewan way. It’s not our heritage. 
 
When I look at public participation, and again in the best 
non-partisan sense that I can, it’s asking people if they want to 
be part of the action and if they want to build major world-class 
companies right here and be more independent. We make our 
own paper. We use our gas. We use our oil. We make our own 
meat. We make our own fertilizer. And by George, we’re going 
to make our own fertilizer, right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s overdue. I mean, the biggest market in 
the world — North America, and we don’t make it, but we’re 
going to. And that just makes eminent sense. 
 
And then we have the economies on scale. And guess where 
they come for paper? And guess where they come for the meat 
and for the nitrogen and for the potash and for the pulp? Where 
do they come? And the fibre optics and the technology for rural 
gas, where do they come? They come here. They’re not going 
to Alberta, they’re not going to Manitoba, and they’re not going 
to Toronto. They’re coming here for that. 
 
We are going to take what we’ve been blessed with, and we’re 
going to get Saskatchewan people involved and roll up their 
sleeves as deep as they want to go. It will go back to the co-op 
movement, it will go back to my grandparents that homesteaded 
here, it’ll go back to anybody that ever believed in building — 
building, diversifying, growing, manufacturing, and providing 
opportunities for people all over this province. 
 
And we can be so proud of that. And all of that can be used to 
build the finest health care, the finest education, the finest social 
services, and all those things that we want and people on both 
sides of this House would like to have. 
 
Well, the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, and the 
subsequent budget that you’re going to hear, lays that out:  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

260 
 

a vision for top-notch, health care technology, the best nursing 
homes, the best specialization in health care that you can find; 
agricultural programs that are designed to get people to 
diversify and help them build in their communities; utilities that 
will be alive and part of the community to help you build a very 
major part of the community; and long-run, low utility rates and 
natural gas and individual line service and sophisticated 
irrigation. That can be financed if everybody gets involved in 
government, with government — the private sector, the co-op 
sector, small business, big business, municipal governments, all 
of us. 
 
And that isn’t partisan, Mr. Speaker. That Speech from the 
Throne that you heard delivered was not partisan. That was a 
speech that said that we can build and we’re proud of it. 
Everybody in this House makes mistakes from time to time, but 
it should be mistakes of commission, not omission. 
 
We plan to build, we plan to create, and we plan to co-operate, 
and we plan to have Saskatchewan people involved as much as 
possible. So I’m going to support the Speech from the Throne, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe in the kinds of things that we can do in this province. I 
believe that people are not really partisan. I believe that they 
want to see us give them an opportunity and help them move 
forward. And they want to see it in health, education, the 
environment, agriculture, and certainly in public participation. 
 
You know as well as I do, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s fair, 
both sides of the House in this legislature have supported public 
participation and now support it publicly. And the bonds, and 
indeed the shares . . . and the only criticism I ever heard of 
anybody offering shares is that, well, you would offer too many 
to offshore. And that’s the only one I’ve heard — not to 
Saskatchewan people, not to Canadians. They like the head 
office here and let’s offer it here. 
 
Well obviously, you limit the offshore, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 
seen that in corporation after corporation in public share 
offerings all the time. If that’s it, then I believe we have a 
consensus. We have a building mechanism that has the 
Co-operators, that has government, that has private sector, small 
and large, rural and urban, across this province, and I’m 
optimistic about the 1990s and the 21st century for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe this is one of the finest places to live. It’s one of the 
greatest places to be in the history of man. We have right now 
the opportunity to be as good as anybody in the North American 
continent when we look the 1990s and the 21st century, Mr. 
Speaker. So I congratulate those that have worked hard to put 
the emphasis on health and education, agriculture and the 
environment, and particularly public participation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I will whole-heartedly be working with the people of 
Saskatchewan to build this province with the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome  

the opportunity to join in this debate, on this throne speech 
debate. I, in particular, welcome the opportunity to speak after 
the Premier who has just delivered what only can be described 
as a speech in this House that is about as old and barren as that 
throne speech which he never hardly addressed in the speech 
that he just delivered in this legislature this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a display of a Premier and a 
government that has run out of steam, and it’s time for a 
change. And nothing could emphasize that more than the kind 
of remarks we just heard here today. One would have expected 
a great deal more. So I welcome the opportunity to speak here. 
 
I want to say first of all, as other members have said, a word of 
congratulation to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
He’s a newly elected member and I wish him well. 
 
I welcome the opportunity to speak in this Legislative 
Assembly on behalf of the constituents of Regina North East 
who elected me to represent them. I want to express to them my 
appreciation for all of the advice and suggestions which they 
have given me over the months in the past about the issues that 
are important to them and suggesting areas that need attention 
by their government. And I know how disappointed they’re 
going to be when they found that the Premier, in speaking in 
this throne speech debate, was not able to address one single 
one of them — just as disappointed as they have been about this 
throne speech. 
 
Now the Premier spoke glowingly about democracy. That is a 
difficult thing for him to talk about, but he spoke glowingly 
about democracy, and it was this Premier who also talks about 
how much one should respect democracy. It was this Premier 
who waited nine months in order to call this legislature into 
session, because that’s how much disrespect he has for 
democracy and this institution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why didn’t he call this legislature into 
session, Mr. Speaker? Because he was afraid to face the public 
of Saskatchewan and the questioning that would take place in 
this legislature about all the mismanagement and the corruption 
and the patronage that this government has become so famous 
for. That’s not democracy. Mr. Speaker, that is an abuse of 
democracy; that is ignoring the wishes of the people who want 
this democracy to work for them; that is ignoring the 
democratic institutions which they have worked so hard to build 
here. And this is the man who will stand up here today and talk 
about democracy as a very powerful mechanism and a powerful 
force. 
 
Well I ask, Mr. Speaker, of the Premier — and I wish he had 
stayed in the House to listen — I ask him . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I recognize I shouldn’t be doing that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I want to ask the Premier, for the record, I want to 
ask him: if he is so concerned about  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

261 
 

democracy, where is the honesty and the integrity that is needed 
in order for this democracy to work? It is not here. If he so 
strongly believes in democracy, why has he misled the public of 
Saskatchewan with promises that then he has betrayed and has 
not been prepared to keep? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Surely one of the essential requirements 
of any democratic system, Mr. Speaker, is for the public to be 
able to trust those leaders who represent them. If democracy is 
such a power mechanism, Mr. Speaker, why has it been abused 
by this Premier to such an extent where he has taken what has 
been a growing and a thriving province, in which there was 
hope for the future, and destroyed it to the point now where the 
hope is gone. 
 
If he has so much respect for democracy, why has this Premier 
brought into this legislature, which was tabled not too long ago, 
one of the worst and unexplainable and inexcusable 
gerrymanders that this province will ever see — gerrymanders 
of constituency boundaries. Is that democracy, Mr. Speaker? 
No, it’s not; it’s hypocrisy for the Premier to even speak about 
it. 
 
Democracy requires accountability by the government. It 
requires the government to be able to tell the truth and to be 
able to be accountable to the public on how it’s managing the 
public’s affairs, on how it’s spending the taxpayers’ money. 
Has this government been forthcoming and prepared to do that? 
No. 
 
It took two years to table the last Public Accounts — two years 
late in the Public Accounts that should have been here tabled in 
the last legislature because the government refused to be 
accountable. That’s not democracy. There were orders for 
return, Mr. Speaker, that were ordered in 1986 and were only 
tabled a few days ago. That’s not democracy, because that’s not 
accountability. What a joke. What hypocrisy. 
 
All of these things the Premier talked about, didn’t talk about. 
Did he spend any time, Mr. Speaker — and I think that this is a 
very, very important point — did this Premier spend any time, 
in his address here today, talking about the hardship faced by 
our family farms today? He didn’t say a word. There are 
literally thousands of farm families out there who are going 
under. They are being foreclosed on and legal action is being 
taken even by that Premier, as the Minister of Agriculture, and 
in this debate he didn’t say a word. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why the hope is gone. Did this Premier 
even utter the words, young people, and the kinds of things and 
the kinds of future that they’re facing here today, in this address 
today? Not once. Not once. Oh he talked about democracy. He 
talked about democracy. But what kind of democracy is this 
government running when young people are leaving this 
province by the thousands because they don’t see any future in 
this Saskatchewan under this administration? 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the Premier address the needs of the 
small-business people in this province? No! He never spoke 
about the needs of the small-business community,  

the small-business people who are suffering out there and 
hurting just like many other people — just like the farm 
community. Those small-business people depend on 
Saskatchewan people who are working and making a good 
wage so that they can spend some money in their shops and 
their stores. 
 
(1600) 
 
But instead, those people are moving out of Saskatchewan, and 
so that in the month of February what did we see? We saw a net 
out-migration of almost 7,000 people, and I can’t remember in 
my lifetime when we have had a net out-migration of that 
amount. Now that’s a tragedy. That is a tragedy. 
 
Did this Premier say one word about that in his speech? Not 
one! He ignores the real hurts, and he ignores the real issues out 
there and tries to cover up with some of the rhetoric which he’s 
so well-known for, but which he cannot back up with any kind 
of substance. 
 
Oh yes, he bragged, he bragged about the massive expenditures 
of this government. He made a point of doing that. He talked 
about billions of dollars. And to this man, what’s a billion? 
What’s a billion? He’s got all this money to give to his personal 
friends and his party political friends, hiring all kinds of people 
who are put on the patronage gravy train, giving away our 
assets to friends of the Conservative Party in the name of public 
participation, which is nothing other, Mr. Speaker, but 
corruption and giving away of the assets to friends of the 
Conservative Party and friends of members opposite. 
 
We just had in question period today one example of the scams 
that are going on — that involving Joytec, which is an industry 
in Saskatoon which is . . . And the minister in charge, the 
minister from Saskatoon, doesn’t like to hear that. But he is 
involved in that scam, Mr. Speaker. He is involved in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — There’s a bunch of people who went to 
that minister with a suitcase and said, we want a pile of money; 
fill it up. And he shovelled it in and now they’re leaving to go 
to British Columbia and we’re left with nothing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And the taxpayers are going to be short a 
million and a half dollars because of this kind of democracy that 
the Premier speaks of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the man who said that our economy was so 
strong that we could afford to mismanage it. That’s what the 
Premier said in 1982. Well boy, he has mismanaged it. He has 
mismanaged it like nobody else thought that anybody could 
mismanage. He took a province with a surplus of $140 million 
seven years ago and he’s turned that surplus into an 
accumulated deficit of $4 billion. Now that’s mismanagement, 
Mr. Speaker, and he says how proud he is of that. 
 
He took a province, this Premier, the member from  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

262 
 

Estevan, in 1982, which had a total debt, mostly self-liquidating 
debt, a debt that the taxpayers would never have to pay because 
it was money that was earning money through the corporations 
like the power corporation and SaskTel. Well he took that total 
accumulated debt, self-liquidating debt of about $2 billion, and 
do you know what he has done with his great mismanagement? 
He has turned it into a debt of over $12 billion in seven years. 
That is a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is giving away the future of the young people of this 
province to outside interests, to outside interests. Oh but he . . . 
the Premier’s worried about that now, you see. He now talks 
about independence. He talks about how important it is for 
Saskatchewan people to be independent. Now why is he talking 
that way? He’s talking that way because he knows that all 
around him this giving away of Saskatchewan assets is 
beginning to crumble politically and the public of 
Saskatchewan is saying, we have had enough and he has gone 
too far; everywhere they’re saying that. And the member over 
there from Morse, who sits there, knows that to be true. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are saying, they have gone too far 
and it’s time for a change before they destroy it even more. And 
that’s why the Premier is here today talking about how 
important for Saskatchewan to be independent. 
 
But what are the real, real realities and what are the actions that 
this government is doing? Well he talks about independence. 
What does he do on his trip to China? Now here is the Premier 
who has been in this province and in this legislature saying 
government has no place in anything — we have got to get 
government out of business; we have got to get government out 
of Crown corporations. And the first thing he does on his 
month-long trip to the Far East when he should have been here 
looking after making sure that the farmers got their drought 
payment, while he was on this trip, he goes to the people of . . . 
to the Government of China, the communist government in 
China and says, oh but we will sell the potash corporation to 
you, the Government of China. 
 
Well it’s not good enough for the people of Saskatchewan to 
control their destiny by some involvement through their 
government in things like the potash corporation, but it’s quite 
all right to sell it off to another government in a foreign country, 
even the communist government in China. And this Premier 
talks, he talks of independence. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you have to really sometimes wonder what 
this man has been smoking before he gets up to speak, because 
what he says is not what he does. And the list of broken 
promises is so long that it would take me all afternoon for the 
time that’s left to be able to repeat them all. 
 
On the one hand he talks about independence. On the other 
hand he goes across the Pacific Ocean to say, take us over; 
we’re going to sell it to you; and then you will tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what you want them to do with their resources. 
That’s not independence. That’s not independence. That’s 
giving it away. That’s giving the control of our future to 
somebody else. 
 

This is the Premier, Mr. Speaker, who has a strange vision. You 
know what his vision is? His vision is that there is a strong wind 
blowing over the world, and that wind is blowing over North 
America and over Canada, and all we can do is get caught up in 
this wind and be blowing away with it and hope by some 
chance it will deposit us in a nice soft landing. 
 
We don’t share that view, Mr. Speaker. We don’t believe that 
we should simply let ourselves cave in to the interests around 
the world without doing the things we’ve always done, and that 
is set up the institutions and take the initiative to do some things 
for ourselves and to do some things for the people, with the 
people. 
 
He pretends that to be the case but the record doesn’t show that. 
And I’ll give you the example, just one example, and there 
could be many. In this so-called independence philosophy that 
he prophesies, he sold off Saskoil because that was going to 
make us independent. And what was the result? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1984 Saskoil made a profit of $44 million, and it 
stayed in Saskatchewan. Every single penny of it stayed in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It still does. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well a member said, it still does. Well if 
he would only be patient and listen, I will tell him what’s been 
happening to it. 
 
The member from Weyburn, you know, Mr. Speaker, well I 
want to tell the member from Weyburn that whereas in 1984, 
$44 million that Saskoil earned stayed in Saskatchewan, in 
1987 when Saskoil lost $1.3 million, the people out of the 
province, from Ontario, who had bought up 75 per cent of the 
preferred shares, got dividends of $5 million. And who paid for 
that, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan paid for that, 
because that’s the Premier’s definition of independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not independence . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I see that the member from Weyburn doesn’t 
like the truth, because he’s erupting in his seat. Well I want to 
tell him, Mr. Speaker — through you, of course  
_- that he has good reason to be concerned. He has good reason 
to be concerned. And the Premier’s speech in the House today 
is clear evidence of that. The reason he needs to be concerned is 
that from one end of this province to another the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying, we have had enough of this sell-out 
and this giving away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And they’re telling the member from 
Weyburn that it is time for a change. And there’s going to be 
that change. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just comment on a few other 
things. This speech that the Premier gave talked about 
Saskatchewan people taking the lead in health care technology 
or Saskatchewan taking the lead in health care technology. 
 
Well I ask him the question, why did he not address the  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

263 
 

question of the thousands of children who no longer are getting 
dental care because of their destruction of the children’s 
school-based dental program? Why didn’t he bother talking 
about that? They’re not independent. 
 
There was a time when those children were independent from 
the fear of not being able to look after their teeth. Now all over 
the province there are thousands of children who used to see a 
dental nurse and got preventative care and got care that was 
needed when required. Now those thousands of children don’t 
see even a dentist. That’s not independence. 
 
The Premier never stood up . . . when he stood up, never 
bothered to talk about how this government has destroyed the 
prescription drug plan — destroyed the prescription drug plan. 
Oh they’ve got what they call a deductible. And they say it’s 
$125. Before the senior citizen or before the family can get any 
cover for their drugs, prescription drugs which a doctor 
prescribes, they have to pay the first $125. 
 
But that’s not the whole story. Because I know people from my 
constituency, and this will apply in your constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, who have a family of five — the husband and the wife 
and three children who are either 18 years of age or over and 
are dependent yet on the parents at home because they’re going 
to school. You know what their total deductible is? It’s $500. 
Because after 18 years of age, you’re no longer covered by the 
family plan. And there’s an awful lot of people in this province 
who can’t afford a $500 punishment or penalty because they 
need to take some prescription drugs. The Premier never 
addressed any of that. 
 
Did the Premier say anything in his talking about this health 
care technology, did he ever say anything about the over 10,000 
people who are waiting for a hospital bed in order to be able to 
get their necessary surgery? Not a word. Oh no, not a word. He 
tries to cover it up with the rhetoric. Over 10,000 people, some 
of whom have died, waiting for a hospital bed. And the Minister 
of Health doesn’t like to be reminded of that. But those are the 
facts and those are the cruel, cruel realities. 
 
That’s the kind of health leadership in health care technology 
that this Premier, the member from Estevan, has brought to this 
province of Saskatchewan. He’s not built a better health care 
system; he has destroyed a good one that we used to have, the 
best in North America. And he tries to cover it up by talking 
about taking a lead in health care technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, technology doesn’t help the family that lost a 
father because that person did not get care in time. Technology 
doesn’t help that person who has got a painful hip and needs 
orthopedic surgery and can’t get it for 18 months. Technology 
doesn’t help those children who used to get dental care and now 
don’t get it any more. 
 
We have seen the destruction of the best health care system in 
North America and maybe the world, and all the Premier can do 
is brag about his massive expenditures. Oh, he spoke about 
building. He spoke about building. And the people all over 
Saskatchewan are  

asking, where is it? Where is this building? He hasn’t built; he 
has destroyed. He hasn’t built hope; he has destroyed hope. 
 
Why do you think people are voting with their feet? Why do 
you think there were almost 7,000 people, mostly young, in net 
out-migration out of Saskatchewan in February? Because 
they’re saying that under this government there is very little 
hope. 
 
Is it building, Mr. Speaker, when we now have the greatest 
number of hungry people in this province we’ve ever seen, 
including the 1930s? Is the Premier proud of the fact that in 
Saskatchewan we now have the highest poverty rate in Canada, 
surpassed only by Newfoundland? Oh, he’s building all right, 
but he’s building the wrong things. 
 
(1615) 
 
He’s building poverty and hunger. What is he building when 
you see so many young people leaving the province? What kind 
of building is this, Mr. Speaker, when farm families are being 
devastated daily because of foreclosures being brought on by 
the Agricultural Credit Corporation, of which the Premier is in 
charge and the minister. Is that building? And he never 
mentioned it once. What kind of irresponsibility is that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing the Premier never mentioned is the 
biggest element of public participation this government has ever 
brought about, and that is public participation by defeated 
MLAs and cabinet ministers of the Conservative Party. Now 
these are the people who could hardly wait to get into the 
private sector. They could hardly wait to make this great fortune 
of theirs in the private sector. Where are they all? They’re all 
working for the government. They’re all being paid by 
taxpayers’ money. While young people are forced to leave this 
province and go somewhere else to look for hope and to look 
for a future, we have people like the defeated cabinet minister, 
Mr. Schoenhals, who is making thousands of dollars by being a 
chairman of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. He’s 
filling his pockets all right, but those young people graduating 
out of our high schools and universities today have to leave this 
province to find a job and to look for a future. 
 
Oh, they’ve done very well, Mr. Speaker, about looking after 
Gordon Dirks, who was hired for a while on a consulting 
contract with the Department of Education. He was a cabinet 
minister that the Premier never spoke about today, this man 
who said, in the private sector I’m going to do well, but he had 
to come running to the public trough after he was defeated in 
the 1986 election. 
 
What about Mr. Embury, another defeated cabinet minister, 
who was also on another consulting contract with the 
government? Or Mr. Sid Dutchak, who was also the interim 
chairman or president of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. I understand now it hasn’t ended; he’s gone to 
bigger and better things. He’s now been hired by the federal 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is patronage; that is patronage. That is 
not allowing the public to be involved and to  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

264 
 

benefit from the prosperity and the good things in 
Saskatchewan. That is only giving it away to the few. That is 
only giving it away to the few, the friends of the member from 
Weyburn, who are well connected with the Conservative Party. 
 
I could go through this list for a long time, but I think those few 
examples suffice to highlight the point that when this 
government talks about public participation, what they mean is 
defeated MLAs and cabinet ministers of the Conservative Party 
who are participating in the public trough. That’s what they 
mean by public participation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that the Premier never talked 
about is this government’s commitment to deterrent fees in the 
health care system, and that’s why the Premier talks only about 
technology. 
 
The best thing he can say about this government’s health care 
program is that he has given everybody a plastic card. And he’s 
so happy because everybody has got this plastic card and it’s 
going to make them well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Premier that that plastic 
card hasn’t helped those children who don’t get dental care. 
That plastic card is not helping those over 10,000 people 
waiting for a hospital bed to have their surgery. Is that plastic 
card helping that family of five who’s got a 500 deductible on 
their prescription drug plan? Not at all. And the Premier is so 
proud of his new technology plastic health card. Well if that’s 
the best he can say about his health care programs, Mr. Speaker, 
I simply say that’s not good enough. 
 
Now let me go back to the government’s commitment to 
deterrent fees and health premiums. They have tried to create 
the myth that health care costs are out of control. Well that has 
been done by right-wing governments right from the first day 
that medicare was brought into this province. Their argument 
from day one has been, you will not be able to control health 
care costs because they believe that people should only be able 
to get health care if they can afford to pay for it. And if they 
happen to get sick, they should be punished by being charged a 
premium or a deterrent fee. 
 
Now the members may deny it; they may deny it. They’ll say, 
oh that was Dick Collver who said that. Or they will say, oh that 
was Colin Thatcher who said that. Or they will say that was the 
leader of the KOD (Keep Our Doctors), Staff Barootes, who 
said that. And I suppose if that’s all it was, Mr. Speaker, one 
would have to give them benefit of the doubt. But who else is 
saying that? Every one of them is saying that privately, and 
unfortunately for them, some of them are saying it publicly, as 
is the case of the member for Maple Creek, the Minister of . . . 
what’s the member for Maple Creek, the Minister of . . . 
whatever she’s the minister of, speaking to a public meeting in 
Moose Jaw said the following. And I read from here: 
 

Duncan said the government looked at reinstating premiums 
as a way of controlling health costs. 
 

They can’t blame it on Dick Collver or Colin Thatcher or Staff 
Barootes. They believe it over there, and they’re stating it every 
day, Mr. Speaker. And this was said on  

June 24, 1987. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh, I suspect the Premier will be able to 
make it less painful in some way because you’ll be able to pay 
it through the plastic card. And he’ll brag about what a great job 
it’s doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let me just take a look at some of the things that this 
Premier has said. When it came to dealing with the problems of 
Saskatchewan, and dealing with the federal government and 
providing some leadership on behalf of the province so that the 
federal government knows what our needs are, the best 
response that the Premier can make is, keep up the good work, 
Brian, when he talks to the Prime Minister. And he has locked 
himself up so tightly in the hip pocket of the Prime Minister 
that now he is in the position that when the farmers of 
Saskatchewan need somebody to say to the federal government, 
this drought payment is an absolute disgusting mess, he cannot 
do that. He no longer has the clout with the federal Prime 
Minister and the federal government to be able to do that. 
 
And so we have farm families in this province who were 
promised $45 an acre getting $7 and $12 an acre. And on top of 
that, when they can’t afford to meet those payments because the 
money they were promised isn’t sufficient and is late, what does 
the Premier do? Does he go to the Prime Minister and say, this 
is wrong; you made a promise and you can’t break this 
promise? Of course not. He has the agricultural credit 
corporation foreclose on them. He goes to the courts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker, has been growing out of 
control. Did the Premier speak about that in his speech? Of 
course not. Did the throne speech address that? Of course it 
didn’t. It never mentioned it at all. We have an net 
out-migration of young people . . . before the February numbers 
it was 1,600 people a month, and with the February numbers 
it’s considerably higher than that. But the speech ignored that; 
then the Premier ignored that in his remarks here today. 
 
Our farm families are faced with a crisis, and government 
agencies are foreclosing. You know it takes a special kind of 
arrogance for the Minister of Agriculture, who happens to be 
the Premier, to say to farm families, he knows that they have 
said to him that equity financing is not acceptable but he intends 
to put it into place anyway because his privatization ideology 
dictates that farm land should become land bank, owned by 
financial institutions and foreign investors. 
 
And I think it was interesting that on Friday last we found out 
that the Premier had been saying in his speech in Moose Jaw 
that the way he is going to entice investors from Hong Kong is 
by giving them cheap land and cheap labour. Is that why he’s 
foreclosing on this farm land, because it’s a way to provide 
cheap land to these investors from Hong Kong who then will 
run our farms and own and control our farm lands? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this hare-brained program of equity financing is 
put into place, Saskatchewan farm land will  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

265 
 

soon be owned by United States and Hong Kong interests and 
foreign interests, and not by the farmers of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s wrong, and we don’t agree with it. 
 
Now that may be the way of the market-place which this 
Premier so greatly admires, but it’s not good for Saskatchewan. 
We want our farms to be owned and operated by Saskatchewan 
farm families, and only in this way will our communities 
remain strong and will they thrive. And this Premier’s approach 
will be the beginning of the end of them, as more farm families 
leave or become tenants of the investment corporations and 
foreign owners, which is the path in which he is now leading 
this province. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that that is not our vision of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We don’t share the view of this 
government that simply relying on the large out-of-province 
corporations to develop our economy is enough. All around us 
we see the failures of that approach. The number of people 
working in Saskatchewan has been reduced by 10,000 over the 
last 12 months. Students are being turned away from our 
universities and technical schools because of quotas. Waiting 
lists in our hospitals have reached horrendous proportions, and 
people are dying while waiting for a hospital bed to get 
necessary surgery. And this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, fails to 
address all of those, and the Premier failed to address those 
things in his remarks as well. 
 
Our public debt has increased from just a little over $2 billion in 
1982 to over $12 billion in 1989. Our streets and our roads are 
falling apart because of government neglect. The business 
community is in desperate straits, while this government spends 
its time and the public tax dollars on megaprojects and personal 
friends of the Conservative Party and the Premier. 
 
You know, patronage has become the standard with this 
Premier and this government. Almost every defeated cabinet 
minister is employed with this government, and betrayal and 
dishonesty have become the trade mark of this Premier. 
Promises mean nothing. The truth doesn’t matter. And that’s 
why people are saying, it’s time for a change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — They want a government that will be 
honest with them, a government that will keep its promises, a 
government that will bring and provide hope for the future 
rather than despair, which is the case in this province today. 
 
And the only answer this government has got is, give away or 
sell away the assets to their friends, not because it makes any 
social or economic sense but because this Premier is blinded by 
an ideology — an ideology which is a belief that the public 
sector has no role to play and the market-place should 
determine all of the decisions. And  

yet in spite of this we know that he contradicts himself, 
depending on where he is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech does not address the problems 
that Saskatchewan people face. It is another continuing legacy 
of the promises that this government made and has broken. It is 
not addressing the problem of selling off our assets and 
therefore selling off our future. It does not deal with the 
question of the thousands of young people who are leaving this 
province. It’s a betrayal; it’s a legacy of broken promises, and it 
shows that this Premier and this government can’t be trusted 
because they never keep those promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only that, but they have taken a province that 
was set up for the 1990s; a province which was growing; a 
province whose population was increasing; a province where 
jobs were being created; a province where the private 
small-business community was thriving, and they have brought 
it down to a province in which many small-business people are 
being threatened; in which farm families are losing their land; 
in which young people now have to go somewhere else to find a 
future; in which health care, which was one of our jewels in 
Canada, has been literally torn apart because of the neglect of 
this government — all in the name of new technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take a great deal of time longer, 
but I want to close by saying that we don’t need the kind of 
mismanagement that we have seen from this government. What 
we need is a vision which provides some hope, and this throne 
speech doesn’t provide that vision for the future. It exposes a 
Premier and a government for his lack of vision. 
 
The Premier is saying to the people of Saskatchewan that there 
is a wind blowing around the world, which I referred to, and all 
we can do is jump on it and hope that we get lucky. Mr. 
Speaker, that is a narrow and cynical view of our destiny. It is a 
sense and a philosophy of giving up — giving up to those 
forces out there. That’s what the approach of this government 
is. What they are saying is that all we can do is be the victim of 
the events around us; just leave it to the market-place, and the 
government shouldn’t make any decisions. 
 
(1630) 
 
I don’t share that view, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people have 
in the past, and can in the future play a role in determining 
those events, not just be the victims of them. We didn’t develop 
our universities and our medicare and a telephone system and 
an electrical grid by leaving it to the market-place. Our vision is 
that we can still, in the future, chart new paths and innovate and 
build for the benefit of all, not just a few. 
 
We can once again be the leaders in Canada. We have the 
capacity to do all of that, but it will not happen if we turn all of 
the economic decisions to the corporate interests, as this 
government is doing — interests that are not even resident and 
located here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We cannot do all of that by simply turning all those decisions 
over to the Weyerhaeusers of Tacoma,  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

266 
 

Washington, or some of those decisions over to the government 
in China or over to Carling O’Keefe. We need a strong private 
sector, Mr. Speaker, we need a strong co-operative sector, and 
we need a strong public sector, all working together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And if we really truly use all of those 
sectors, Mr. Speaker, honestly and openly, we can build again; 
we can become the kind of province in which there is a future 
for young people. 
 
It was this Premier who said in 1982 they were going to bring 
the children home. Well what’s happened to that dream, Mr. 
Speaker? Where are all those children? They’re in Vancouver, 
they’re in Toronto, and they’re leaving by 6,000 a month in net 
out-migration. 
 
We need not only to build, Mr. Speaker, but we need to rebuild 
all of those things that this government has torn apart and 
destroyed. We can influence the events that will determine our 
future and not just be the victims of those events, Mr. Speaker. 
And using this strategy we will fulfil our vision of a prosperous, 
caring economy and a society in which everyone shares in the 
benefits and not just a few. That’s our vision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We will fulfil our vision of a province 
where people don’t have to be afraid of the great costs that may 
come about because they happen to get ill or get old, and where 
children can once again have a dental program for themselves. 
That’s our vision. 
 
We can fulfil a vision of a province where students aren’t 
turned away by the hundreds from our university and our 
technical institutes because this government has not provided 
adequate funding; where small business can thrive and create 
jobs for our people as it once did; where small business is not 
forgotten by the government in favour of the out-of-province 
corporations and the megaprojects which swallow up vast 
amounts of tax money but create few jobs; a province where our 
young people can live and work and build a future, not a 
province where they have to leave. 
 
A vision, Mr. Speaker, we need to build and we can build; in 
which we have a province where our farm families can rely on a 
long-term, stable agricultural policy which provides stability 
and security instead of having to rely on the whims of 
politicians at election time. We know the results of that. 
 
We have a vision of a province in which all people, both urban 
and rural, understand each other and work together for a better 
tomorrow; a province where families can grow up with equal 
opportunities for all, where they can stay together instead of 
having to see their children leave to find a future somewhere 
else; a province in which the government works for the people 
rather than against the people, which has been the record for 
seven years of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech provides none of that.  

This throne speech tries to create a cover for the 
mismanagement, the corruption and the dishonesty of this 
government. This throne speech does not deserve the support of 
the members of this House, and any members who’ve been to 
their constituencies since this throne speech was read in this 
House will know that their constituents are telling them, you 
should vote against that throne speech. And the members 
opposite who do not do that do so at their own peril. 
 
I have listened to my constituents and I have been to other parts 
in the province, and I know what the people are saying, and in 
view of what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this 
throne speech and I will not vote for it when it comes up for 
vote later today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure to participate in the throne 
speech debate on behalf of the citizens of Saskatoon Mayfair, 
the largest constituency of the province, with over 22,000 
voters. 
 
Before I get into my main remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
take a few minutes to congratulate Her Honour, Sylvia Fedoruk, 
on her appointment as our new Lieutenant Governor. There’s 
no doubt about it that Sylvia Fedoruk is a natural for such a 
position, and certainly she has proved herself in so many ways, 
particularly in her research and academic abilities, the work that 
she’s done at the university, and as well, Mr. Speaker, I’d add, 
in the area of athletics. I’ve had the pleasure of knowing Her 
Honour for several years and having worked with her on the 
board of governors at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m very pleased, as I know you are, having been a former 
educator, with the deep commitment that she has to the boys 
and girls of our province. There’s no doubt about it that she will 
be an excellent role model for our young people as she visits 
schools throughout our province. I’m sure that with the hard 
work and the effort that she has put into her own career, that she 
will be a great inspiration to them and will show that from hard 
work and good solid effort can come success. 
 
I also want to, Mr. Speaker, congratulate the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on his successful win in the recent 
by-election. I have no doubt that this man will serve his 
constituents very well. He deserves a lot of credit, I believe, 
because of the hard work that he put in during that campaign. 
And also, I think too that his victory is that much better because 
of the tactics used by the opposition during that by-election. 
And every dirty trick, I think, in the book was thrown into that 
election, and I think a very good man came out on top. I was 
pleased to be able to assist the member in his bid for election 
and a lot of very fine people in the constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I know that our member is going 
to do very well for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased with the throne speech that was 
delivered so eloquently by Her Honour. It outlined a strong list 
of very positive steps taken by our government in the past 
number of years. But I think also  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

267 
 

what’s very important, that it laid out a very solid blueprint for 
the future of our province — a blueprint that is designed not 
only to take a look at the current-day problems that we have to 
find solutions for, but also a vision for the future in looking 
ahead to building and that growth that we need that will take us 
right on to the 21st century. 
 
Saskatchewan people over the years have displayed a very, very 
optimistic attitude because of the many challenges that have 
been raised by many things. Whether it’s the weather, whether 
it’s other elements, whether it could be poor prices, whatever 
the case the might be, they have always faced these challenges 
and have moved ahead. Challenges, I might add, that they have 
always looked ahead with optimism and not the doom and 
gloom that we hear so much about from the other side of this 
House. 
 
People have always worked very close together building this 
province of ours, and they have no hesitation in accepting 
whatever challenges are ahead for tomorrow. We realize we 
can’t live in the past. We have to take a look at the fact that the 
world is changing very, very quickly around us, and we’ve got 
to be prepared to take advantage of every opportunity that’s out 
there for us. 
 
I’d like, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at the priorities of our 
government, and some of the things that we have done and 
things that we plan on looking ahead to in the future. Many of 
my colleagues have dealt with these priorities in a lot of detail 
over the last several days, and what I would like to do is restrict 
my remarks, more or less, to the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Health care, as you know, is certainly a very top priority as far 
as this government is concerned. We often hear the opposition 
members speak about cut-backs, and I would like to refer to 
some of the comments made by the member from Sutherland. 
He talks about health care. And the member from Sutherland, 
this is what he indicates, that we’ve got a lot of problems with 
our health care system in this province. He says: 
 

And darker still is the lot of Saskatchewan people when it 
comes to health care. I say it’s back to the dark ages when 
Saskatchewan people have to die waiting to get into 
hospitals. And when they wait so long that when they finally 
do get through the doors, it’s not for surgery, but it’s for the 
autopsy. That’s scandalous. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think when one considers the high calibre 
of the health people that we have in this province, our dedicated 
nurses and medical staff, that that is a real slap in the face when 
a member of this legislature should make comments such as 
that. 
 
We’ve never seen construction of new facilities in this province 
such as we have during the last few years — nothing in the 
history of the province. We can consider that for programs, 
when it comes to health care, they’re very, very costly. We’re 
always concerned about new technology, and new technology is 
costly. We think of the modern equipment that we are putting 
into our hospitals today. They cost a great deal of money. 

We had, not too long ago, an announcement made by our 
Minister of Health with regard to centres of excellence in the 
city of Saskatoon so that our hospitals are going to be working 
much closer together and providing excellent care for all of the 
people that come through their doors, something that all of us 
can be truly proud of, Mr. Speaker, because I’m sure that our 
hospitals in Saskatoon will be among the very best in North 
America. 
 
When one considers the fact that our budget for health care in 
this province has been increasing every year since the PCs came 
to power, when one considers that it’s gone up by over 60 per 
cent since 1981-82 from a total of about $741 million to over 
$1.2 billion, and when we have members opposite then talking 
about cut-backs, Mr. Speaker, I think that their definition of 
cut-backs must be a lot different than anyone else in the 
province. 
 
Some examples of the major construction that has taken place 
in the city of Saskatoon over the last few years, and very, very 
major, I might add, when one considers the University Hospital 
expansion, $28 million. Now that’s a lot of $2 a bushel wheat, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also got the new 44-bed psychiatric unit at University 
Hospital, for another $3.2 million. St. Paul’s Hospital, total cost 
of $53 million, 97-bed expansion which will be opening up 
some time later this year, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s a lot of $10 a 
barrel oil, Mr. Speaker. A new City Hospital, $112 million, 488 
new beds that will be open some time within the next two to 
three years, Mr. Speaker. A new cancer clinic open not too long 
ago, $17 million, plus $5 million for equipment over the next 
five years. 
 
We have the new Parkridge Centre opened last year; Calder 
Centre, a new location, several hundreds of thousands of dollars 
spent on renovations; the Children’s Rehab Centre, Mr. 
Speaker. And I can comment on that because of my 
involvement with schools, and children that have serious 
physical disabilities that do attend the Children’s Rehab Centre 
— one of the most modern facilities that you’ll find any place 
in Canada and probably in North America. The Alvin 
Buckwold clinic, also an excellent facility with very, very 
dedicated staff — something that has been done during the 
tenure of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something else that’s very, very significant, and 
this isn’t just for the city of Saskatoon — 1,675 special care 
home beds built in the province since 1982. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a far cry from the previous administration that felt that the 
way to handle the problem of the growing number of older 
people within the province was to have a freeze on the 
construction of nursing home beds. Mr. Speaker, a 57 per cent 
increase in funding since 1982 — $125 million to $197 million. 
Mr. Speaker, that represents a lot of uranium at $14 a pound. 
 
We not only have to consider the money that’s been spent on 
new construction, new facilities, but consider some of the other 
very important changes that have taken place in this province 
during the last five or six years in the area of health care. One of 
the first that I believe is very, very significant is the increased 
day surgery facilities in the city  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

268 
 

of Saskatoon. It’s now possible for our surgeons to perform 
about 2,500 more procedures per year than before. Hospital 
waiting lists cut by 25 per cent. Do you ever hear the members 
of the opposition talk about that? 
 
(1645) 
 
What about the new CAT (computerized axial tomography) 
scanners that have been put into all of the major hospitals in the 
province? Another very significant step, Mr. Speaker, was the 
taking over of the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent 
Living) program by the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. The 
funding has been increased substantially. 
 
I toured that facility not too long ago and I must say that I was 
very, very impressed by the type of work that is being done at 
the Abilities Council with regard to the SAIL program. This has 
been a very, very good move. I think we’ve got very good 
service as far as the people requiring those particular pieces of 
equipment, but also it has meant meaningful employment for 
more people at the Abilities Council. 
 
Home care today I believe is a very, very important part of the 
services that we provide for seniors. I know that this is a service 
that is provided right throughout the province, not only in our 
cities, but also in our towns. And I know that those of us who 
have ageing parents can certainly appreciate the amount of 
service that home care has provided over the years. To this 
particular service we’ve had an increase of 77 per cent. And I 
think that that’s the feeling of the government moving ahead 
and meeting today’s needs, moving ahead to meet that demand 
with a growing population of more seniors. 
 
One of the other very important steps taken by this government 
was the elimination of extra billing by doctors. We don’t hear 
members opposite talk very much about that at all. 
 
What about the increased funding for public health programs in 
Saskatoon? I heard one of the members opposite going on the 
other day in great detail about the fact that public health 
spending had been cut back. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the city of 
Saskatoon it’s been increased certainly over the last few years. 
 
The plastic health card. That’s another item that has been 
mentioned by many of the members on this side of the House, 
and for good reason. That’s something that members of this 
government are very, very proud of. There’s no doubt about it 
that with the number of seniors that I come in contact with, that 
they appreciate the fact that this government is still going to 
have a drug program of some type for many, many years to 
come. 
 
Seniors, I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, and ones that I’ve talked to 
have told me that they don’t mind paying a small amount for 
their drugs providing they are going to be assured of having a 
type of program there 10 or 20 years from now. So the plastic 
health card, I feel, a very important step ahead in the use of 
modern technology and something that is a great benefit as far 
as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned. 
 

We all are concerned, I’m sure, about prevention. And the 
Everyone Wins program that was introduced by our Minister of 
Health this past year is something that has a great deal to do 
with the whole idea of promoting healthy living. And that’s 
something I think if all of us took to heart, that we could do an 
awful lot to cutting down on some of our expensive programs 
that are needed later on in life. Other preventative health 
programs will certainly be introduced in the future to meet the 
concerns not only of our seniors, but all citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, something that I want to touch on next is 
with regard to education. And having spent over 30 years in our 
education system — and I know you, sir, have spent many years 
in that field as well — I feel very proud of what we’ve 
accomplished in our educational system in this province. I 
know that times are changing and we’ve got to ensure that our 
children and youth are prepared and meet any of those new 
challenges. 
 
And I just want to refer to comments, again made by that 
illustrious member from Saskatoon Sutherland the other day 
who made some comments here with regard to education. And I 
think that for anybody who has been involved in education or 
who is involved in education today . . . and I know that the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana was also in education at one 
time. I worked with her on a few cases. I know that, as well, 
Saskatoon South, an individual that was in education, and I 
think that they must feel just a little bit badly when one of their 
colleagues makes comments such as this. 
 

In Saskatchewan young people know that the educational 
system is in shambles. The scholars are leaving the province 
at the university, the libraries are going without books at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and that science is being 
conducted with outdated equipment. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I hear comments like that made by the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Sutherland, I really have to 
question whether or not he’s even been in some of our schools. 
I really have to question that, and I think that that is a real slap 
in the face to some of the very good things that are going on in 
our schools today. 
 
Let’s take a look at some of the expenditures and money that’s 
going into education today to help improve the programs for 
our young people. Let’s take a look at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and I had the pleasure of serving on the board of 
governors there for four years, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look at 
some of the major facilities that have been constructed over the 
last number of years — and again, the opposition likes to talk 
an awful lot about cut-backs in education. 
 
The College of Agriculture building which is now under 
construction and will be completed within the next two or three 
years — $92 million being spent on that one project. Now that 
project, Mr. Speaker, is something that is very, very important 
to this province where agriculture has been one of our main 
industries for many, many years. That’s the whole area in which 
our province has been built — $92 million being put into a 
brand-new college which is now going to bring all of the 
research facilities together in agriculture and give them the type 
of  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

269 
 

facilities that they need to carry on their very important work. 
 
A new administration building that was put up a couple of years 
ago — $7 million went into that building. A new geology 
building — $18.5 million; small animal resources building for 
$3 million; waste management for about 2 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the average person 
generally understands the tremendous cost that goes into 
facilities on our campus at the University of Saskatchewan. Not 
only do we need money for the construction of these buildings, 
but also many millions of dollars in so far as expensive 
equipment is concerned. 
 
We’ve also had a lot of discussion with regard to SIAST and 
what’s been happening in that particular area. And it seems to 
me that just a few minutes ago, we heard the member from 
Regina North East talking about how our students have really 
suffered in our technical institutes over the last few years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have in the neighbourhood of 
about 1,500 more spaces today in our technical schools than 
when that party was in power. Now I can’t understand where 
he’s getting some of his information if he’s saying that we’re 
really doing so terrible there. And that includes the new 
Woodland Campus in Prince Albert, which cost $35 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we’ve got a lot of things that are happening, Mr. Speaker, 
in the area of secondary education, and I’ll talk a little bit more 
about that, but I wanted to talk a bit about construction within 
the K to 12 area. We’ve had new schools that I’m aware of, 
built in Saskatoon in the last two or three years, that have cost 
in the neighbourhood of 3 to 4 millions of dollars each. St. 
Angela school, St. Volodymyr School, Dr. John G. Egnatoff 
and DunDonald elementary school, just to mention a few of 
them. 
 
We have an expansion going on right now just down the street 
from my office and in the middle of my constituency at Bishop 
James Mahoney high school, where the provincial share going 
into the expansion there is in excess of $500,000. And these 
again, Mr. Speaker, are facilities that are required to meet the 
needs of today, and particularly up in my area where the 
population has grown substantially over the last number of 
years. 
 
Now that’s just talking about construction. We’ve got a lot of 
other initiatives that have been taken by this government, and 
are being taken by this government, to meet the needs of our 
young people. 
 
One that I think that’s particularly important is the student aid 
program, where we know that interest rates — and the people 
opposite like to talk about interest rates, and they’ve raised that 
concern a few times in the last few days — interest rates back in 
July of 1982 were 15.5 per cent for student loans. Now you and 
I both know, Mr. Speaker, that there are many young people 
today that have to rely on getting student loans when they go to 
university. The student aid program that was brought in by this 
government had the interest rate at 6 per cent, Mr.  

Speaker — 6 per cent, not 15.5 per cent, but 6 per cent. 
 
We’ve also brought in the language training institute in Regina 
which, I think, has got tremendous potential and tremendous 
significance. We find that today that we’ve got many more of 
our business transactions going on with a lot of different parts 
of the world. And with the work that is being carried out by 
these people in the language training institute, young people 
have an opportunity to learn many languages, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can also look at the school of physical therapy, Saskatoon 
— increased enrolment by 50 per cent; the reorganization of 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) and the regional college programs. 
 
Now having spent most of my lifetime out in rural 
Saskatchewan, there is no doubt that young people living in 
those areas have an additional expense if they go on to 
university in Saskatoon or Regina. They are a great distance 
from home; they always have to pay a lot of money for room 
and board as well as pay the same tuition fee that others pay. 
Mr. Speaker, is there any real reason then why these young 
people shouldn’t be living in or near their own communities and 
have that opportunity to take the first and, say, possibly the 
second year of their programs in a regional college. Why should 
they have to always go to the city? People don’t understand that 
people living out in the area where I was, in the 
Kelvington-Wadena area, they’re 125 to 150 miles away from 
home to go away to university. 
 
What about the concern about the costs for those families living 
out there in those rural areas and having their young people then 
be able to take that first and second year? We know that our 
university campuses are crowded. There’s no reason in the 
world why these young people can’t stay home and take some 
of those courses initially in their own areas. Enrolment at 
Kelsey has increased from 9,700 to over 16,000 in the last few 
years — very substantial. 
 
You’ve heard it mentioned in the throne speech as well about 
the Saskatchewan Communications Advance Network. This is 
something, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to benefit all areas of our 
province. We’re concerned about getting more information out, 
more programs into all areas of our province, and there is no 
doubt you’re going to hear much more about the SCAN 
program over the months ahead. 
 
Our Minister of Education has also had a great deal of concern 
about literacy in this particular province. And a lot of programs 
have been developed, a lot of emphasis put on that area in the 
last few months to try and make it possible for more and more 
people to learn the basics of reading. 
 
Another ongoing concern that we have is the drop-out rate of 
our young people from our schools. So programs are being 
introduced that are going to be designed to lower the drop-out 
rate. 
 
And other areas that we are looking at are career counselling, 
business education and work experience  
  



 
March 20, 1989 

 

270 
 

being incorporated into our educational process. 
 
We have many young people today who for one reason or 
another, Mr. Speaker, can’t handle the regular academic 
program, but yet those people still have a right to go as far as 
they can in our high schools. With the work experience 
programs, which I might say I had a fair bit to do with, we 
found that they’re invaluable as far as training some of these 
young people, upgrading them in their academic skills as far as 
we can, and also giving them a work experience out there in 
their neighbourhoods, whether it’s in the grocery store or the 
local service station or whatever. But it’s something that does 
train them to be responsible employees, and many of these 
young people then are able to go on and get very meaningful 
employment when they leave high school. 
 
Well, we’ve had a lot of increased spending in all levels of our 
educational programs when you consider that the University of 
Saskatchewan grants have increased 57 per cent since 1982. I 
might add as a sideline, Mr. Speaker, that between 1971 and ’82 
that grants, operating grants to the University of Saskatchewan, 
they didn’t increase by 57 per cent, Mr. Speaker; they actually 
declined by 30 per cent. 
 
Now I haven’t heard any of the education critics on the other 
side talking about that little fact. SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) expenditures have 
increased 52 per cent since 1982. K to 12, increase of 54 per 
cent from ’82 to ’89. Now, Mr. Speaker, again that’s cut-backs; 
I don’t know where the members opposite are getting their 
definition from. 
 
Another area that I want to move on to, Mr. Speaker, but being 
now near 5 o’clock, I would suggest that we call it it 5 and I 
would like to carry on with this this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


