


















































March 23, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 23, 1989 
 

339 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce this morning to you, and through 
you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a delegation of 
elected officials from the city of Melfort who are sitting in your 
gallery. I would like to introduce to all members, Mayor Carol 
Carson; seated beside her is Alderman Dub Henderson, 
Alderman Don McRobb, Alderman Terry Elliott, Alderman 
Charlie Clark, and city administrator Ken Dobson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be important for you to know that 
this delegation was up very early this morning. They left the 
city of Melfort at approximately 4:30, were in my office at 7:30, 
and we had a very nice visit. So I welcome the officials from 
the city of Melfort, and I would ask all my colleagues to join 
with me in that. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Losses at Cameco 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question this morning is to the Deputy Premier, and it relates to 
the privatization of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation), and now Cameco, in what appears 
to be another piece of solid evidence about what privatization 
really means to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
namely, job loss and loss of economic control in this province. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is this: would the Deputy 
Premier confirm reports that Cameco has announced lay-offs of 
substantial numbers of workers — some reports that we’ve 
received being up to a third of the workers — has announced 
those lay-offs, and that for the balance of the workers there has 
been redeployment to other jobs but with no guarantee of return 
back to their original jobs. Will the Deputy Premier please 
confirm that that’s the case? And how does he explain this latest 
example of PC-style privatization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that 
yesterday in Saskatoon there was an announcement of lay-offs, 
and workers at the Star Lake mine received notice of a lay-off, 
Mr. Speaker. I think there were 35 people involved at the Star 
Lake mine. 
 
And the reason for the lay-offs at the Star Lake mine . . . You 
will recall, Mr. Speaker, about two and a half years ago when 
the Star Lake mine was announced, it was announced that there 
was about two and a half years worth of ore to be milled at that 
mine. Now as it turned out, they were pretty well right on 
target. There was about two and a half years worth of ore, and 
when they ran out  

of ore, Mr. Speaker, they chose not to just crunch rock through 
for the sake of keeping the mill open. 
 
They are quite hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of some 
new and good discoveries close by that Cameco is involved in 
with other joint venture partners, that they will be able to get the 
mill operating again soon, and we hope, Mr. Speaker, that that 
will be the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier, and I must premise my question by saying that 
that is exactly, I think, the only thing left in this PC 
government, and that is, hope — lots of hope and lots of prayer 
that something turns around, because certainly the statements 
don’t gibe with the reality. Mr. Deputy Premier, when we 
inquired of this privatization a year ago, you told this 
legislature, page 2451, I quote directly: 
 

You can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that the people who 
work at SMDC today will be working there in the new 
merged uranium company as well. That was a 
(re)commitment that was given by this government and 
SMDC, and that will be a commitment that is delivered, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Deputy Premier, those are your words. My question to you 
is: how do you square that assertion, that promise to the 
workers that privatization would not mean job loss, how do you 
square that with today’s announcement of 40 people at least 
being laid off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d like to once more remind the hon. 
members that unparliamentary language is not acceptable — 
order, order — unparliamentary language is not acceptable in 
this House, whether the individual is speaking and has the Chair 
or whether he’s seated. That is the type of thing that spreads a 
bad atmosphere in the House and is difficult to control. 
 
So I’d simply like to ask hon. members — order! — hon. 
members on both sides of the House for their co-operation in 
not using unparliamentary language. That’s a reasonable 
request. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder what the merger 
or privatization has to do with the depletion of an ore body. Mr. 
Speaker, when the ore body has been depleted, now it may be 
socialist economics to continue digging and pumping it through 
the mill in the event that one grain of gold may be found at the 
outside chance, but that’s not the way that the industry works. 
They like to have a proven reserve before they build the mill, 
and when the mill then crunches all this rock through and gets 
the gold out, then they look for new reserves to keep the mill 
going, and that’s exactly what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, that there would be no job loss as a result of 
the merger, Mr. Speaker. That’s been the case —  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

340 
 

that’s been the case. 
 
Now compare that, compare that, Mr. Speaker, to the stated 
position of members opposite. You want to talk about job loss? 
They have said that they will close down the uranium industry 
in the North. Now to compensate for a closed-down uranium 
industry, they want to continue to operate a depleted gold mine, 
Mr. Speaker. Tell me what the sense of that is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A new 
question to the Deputy Premier. I want to preface the question 
by saying to the Deputy Premier and to all of his fine colleagues 
who are in support of him at the back, when I’m sitting over 
there as the premier, I’ll be answering the questions about what 
we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I might add, I’ll be answering the 
questions fully and truthfully . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, Order, order, order. Would you 
allow the Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, I will be over there 
answering the questions fully and frankly to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is this: he this morning 
would have us believe that all of a sudden he found out that the 
ore body has run out. Is the Deputy Premier telling us that we 
should accept, actually accept that he did not know that a year 
ago, that he didn’t know that about the situation with respect to 
the Star Lake mine a year ago; that the planning was based in 
such a way that he would not be aware of it? And if he was not 
aware of it, or if he was aware of it, how in the world does he 
justify this statement of a year ago that says there will be 
absolutely no job lay-offs? 
 
Look, Mr. Deputy Premier, my question to you is this: why 
don’t you fess up? Privatization means one thing and one thing 
only, a sell-off of Saskatchewan assets to big business friends 
and lost jobs and miseries for Saskatchewan families. Fess up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we knew two and a half 
years, we knew two and a half years ago, and we told 
everybody two and a half years ago. We said that there would 
be about two and a half years worth of ore at the Star Lake 
mine, and that happened to be about two years ago. 
 
There’s absolutely nothing, nothing to do as it relates to the 
depletion of this ore body with the merger. The only way we 
could have extended the life of the ore body is to shut the mine 
down earlier and then bring it on at some later date to satisfy 
members opposite. Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope, I sincerely 
hope that when that member becomes the premier of this 
province . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government of today has taken care of the development of our 
economy, particularly in the North, in such a way, Mr. Speaker, 
as to ensure a sustained mining industry in northern 
Saskatchewan, particularly in the uranium sector that they have 
said they’re going to close down. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I 
hope that they don’t insist on operating depleted ore bodies, and 
I hope that when he comes here, Mr. Speaker, he has a lot more 
sense than he’s displayed to date because I want, Mr. Speaker, 
to have a pension in my old age, and one that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Deputy Premier, in the absence of the 
Premier. If the Premier has developed any skills in his years in 
office, it is his ability to avoid problems and obfuscate on 
issues. Yet even he seems to have run out of room on the 
question of interest rates after yesterday’s severe jump in the 
prime rate. Even he seems to admit there’s a modest problem in 
Saskatchewan with the prime rate at that level. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is whether or not you’re 
prepared to take any concrete steps. I once recalled referring to 
the Premier’s relationship with Brian Mulroney as a small dog 
on a short leash. We’re asking you to jerk the leash a bit this 
time, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, my question is whether or not you’re 
prepared to take the step which we urged last Friday and join 
with the official opposition in sending a resolution to Ottawa 
urging that the high interest rate policy be adopted. Are you 
prepared to take that step? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier indicated on 
several occasions, and once again this morning on national 
television, that the interest rate policy being pursued by the 
federal government is a wrong-headed policy; that the policy is 
designed, or so stated, to attempt to cool off inflation that for 
the most part is focused in Toronto and Vancouver, and that the 
rest of the country is paying the price for it. He made the 
observation — the city of Saskatoon is a good example — 
where the inflation rate is running at about 2 per cent. Hardly 
you need high interest rate policies to cool off a 2 per cent 
inflation type of situation. 
 
Now the member opposite, the member from Regina Centre, 
indicates, what are we doing about it. 
 
Now in 1982, when interest rates were at 20 per cent we 
brought in a policy, Mr. Speaker, that brought interest rates 
down to thirteen and one-quarter, which is about where they are 
now. 1986 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They were against it. 
  



 
March 23, 1989 

341 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Exactly, they were against it. In 1986, 
we brought that down further to all people with a mortgage in 
the province of Saskatchewan to nine and three-quarters. 
 
The members opposite, when they were in power, at 20 per cent 
interest rates did zero, Mr. Speaker, did nothing. We have 
brought those rates down effectively to the consumers of 
Saskatchewan to nine and three-quarters, something that no 
other province is doing. 
 
Are we doing something about it? Yes, we are doing something 
about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can well 
understand the man who brought in the most intelligent budget 
ever might be somewhat reluctant to deal with the problem 
which, Mr. Minister, you contributed to so largely with your 
enormous deficits over the years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All that we ask, Mr. Minister, is that you 
put that concern in the most convincing manner possible and 
join us before orders of the day in giving leave to move the 
following resolution: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to 
abandon its policy of high interest rates. 
 

My question, Mr. Minister, is — this resolution was drafted in a 
non-partisan form — will you join us in taking this simple, 
effective step. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would respond to that 
question in the following way. Would the hon. member be 
prepared to recant and to say that their policy that they pursued 
before 1982 was wrong-headed? Would they now join with us, 
Mr. Speaker, in advocating the policies that we have employed 
here — in other words, nine and three-quarter per cent interest 
rates to the mortgage holders in Saskatchewan — would they 
join with us, indicating to Ottawa that this is a good policy 
being pursued in the province of Saskatchewan, something 
recommended by the federal government to assist both us and 
other provinces across the country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
It’s a new question. I think it’s apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the 
bankruptcy of this government is complete when they haven’t 
anything to say except to harp back to 1982 and to suggest that 
we created high interest rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, nobody’s accusing you of 
creating high interest rates. We’re accusing you of doing 
nothing about it and being bankrupt on the subject. 

My question to the minister: will you and your colleagues, if 
you haven’t the courage or the nerve to speak on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people on this issue, Mr. Minister, are you and 
your colleagues prepared to call an election so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can determine whether or not they want to be led 
by such a gutless government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if a policy was brought in 
in 1982 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . if a policy was brought in in 1982 
that was valid for that time, if that policy is still valid today, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been people that have been assisted in paying 
their mortgages in 1982, 1983, 1984, ’85, ’86, ’87, ’88, ’89. 
And those people this very day, Mr. Speaker, receive the benefit 
of only a nine and three-quarters per cent mortgage. Now the 
member opposite would have people believe, those very people 
that pre-1982, when interest rates were at 20 per cent and sat on 
their duffs and did nothing, should now ask the people, elect me 
and I will deal with your interest rates. People are not that 
stupid, Mr. Speaker! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Help for Small Business 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Finance, as well. And I want to say to the minister 
that all of the small-business community in Saskatchewan is 
really excited about this little performance you’ve had in the 
last couple of minutes. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Finance Minister, what your little tirade is 
going to do and your little talk about 1982 or 1972 or 1942 is 
going to do to help the small-business community in 
Saskatchewan? What’s it going to do in 1989 — today — to 
keep the stores open on Main Street, Melfort; Main Street, 
Prince Albert; Main Street, Lafleche, Saskatchewan; Main 
Street, Assiniboia, Saskatchewan? What have you said that’s 
going to offer any encouragement to those folks, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the 
members opposite first of all say that the NDP are the people 
that stand for helping people with interest rates. Now we are to 
believe that, Mr. Speaker. Now they are to have us believe that 
it is the NDP that stand for business; the NDP stand for 
business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite says what have we done for business, Mr. 
Speaker? Well, less than a year ago we put forward $10 million 
to assist small business in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
what did we hear from the members opposite? 
 
An Hon. Member: — They were against that. 
  



 
March 23, 1989 

342 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — They were against that — $10 million 
into the pockets of small business in Saskatchewan — they 
were against it, and now they say to business, trust us socialists 
because we really have the interest of business at heart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, can you tell — you won’t answer the 
question, clearly; clearly, your pipeline to Mulroney is plugged 
— can you tell us, can you tell us what you’re going to do in 
this budget to help the small-business people in Saskatchewan 
who are closing their doors, leaving this province by the 
hundreds? Can you tell, is there going to be anything in this 
budget for small business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the 
tradition of the parliamentary system, I would ask the hon. 
member to just be patient until next week. He will find out what 
is, in fact, in the budget, Mr. Speaker, and then I would also 
encourage him, when there are those nice things in the budget, 
that the hon. member will stand up and congratulate the 
government for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increasing Drop-out Rates in Schools 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question’s to the Minister of Education, 
and after the performance that we’ve just witnessed in this 
legislature from the Deputy Premier and the acting Finance 
Minister, no wonder young people don’t have any hope in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I have an internal study funded 
by the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association, and this 
study done by experts from the University of Saskatchewan 
shows that the Grade 8 to 12 school drop-out rate in 
Saskatchewan has increased by 50 per cent since 1980-81. 
 
Since this study is nearly one year old, can you tell the parents, 
trustees, teachers and students of this province what specific 
action your government’s going to take to turn this critical 
situation around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to keep things in total 
perspective, Mr. Speaker, first of all I think we would all work 
under the assumption that we would like to see all the children 
who start in kindergarten or grade 1 in schools in the province 
go on to finish their entire years right through grade 12, and in 
fact even have the opportunity to go on to post-secondary 
education. I think whether you’re a trustee, a parent, a teacher, a 
government representative, an opposition representative, we 
would all like to aspire to that goal. 
 
And indeed, if one looks over the last two or three  

decades, we’ve made some significant headway from where we 
had only 50 per cent of our children completing grade 12 to 
now where we’re in that 75 per cent neighbourhood. But we 
must do more, Mr. Speaker; programs like the community 
school programs that are aimed specifically at schools with a 
high native population; to look at innovative ways to involve 
parents; involve the community in keeping those children in 
school; initiatives against that whole area of drug and alcohol 
abuse, Mr. Speaker, that wreck a lot of lives and end up with 
children dropping out of school sooner than we would like to 
see them. 
 
There is probably no one simple answer here, Mr. Speaker. We 
will be continuing our initiatives in this area, working with 
trustees, working with parents to see if we can’t improve these 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — A new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
education and hope is the key to the future in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Young people have to have the tools to 
compete in the market-place because you have said so. This 
study shows that fewer and fewer students are going to have 
those tools. When are you going to understand that longer 
graduation lines today mean shorter unemployment lines 
tomorrow? And what are you going to do, Mr. Minister, to turn 
this crisis around? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
earlier, we have programs designed in terms of some specific 
initiatives. We’re talking about community schools that are 
aimed particularly at those schools that have inner-city . . . tend 
to be inner-city and with high native populations. 
 
I could talk about the Saskatoon native survival school. It’s an 
alternative school designed to accommodate and provide 
meaningful experience to the students who have dropped out of 
the regular school system. 
 
I could talk about NORTEP (northern teacher education 
program) and SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher 
education program), Mr. Speaker, our northern teacher 
education, our southern teacher education programs, training 
native teachers with innovative, individualized programs. 
 
I could talk about our full range of drug and alcohol abuse 
programs, Mr. Speaker. I could talk about our new curriculum 
and how that’s designed to help encourage young people have 
the tools for the future and, as well, keep them in school, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Minister. Mr. Minister, 
the young people of this province need future-oriented 
programs and policies that give them  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

343 
 

hope, and you’re not offering them hope. Talk is cheap. What 
we need is innovative, future-oriented programs to encourage 
young people to stay in school. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you weren’t wasting $9 million on a birthday 
party, and if you weren’t wasting $20 million on useless PC 
government advertising, those kinds of innovative, 
future-oriented programs could be in place to offer young 
people hope. When are you going to put Saskatchewan students 
and Saskatchewan children first? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raised 
the whole issue of the future, the future of our young people, 
and that’s pretty hollow rhetoric coming from an NDP 
opposition member, when in the next breath she criticizes the 
Future Corporation that talks exactly about the future that our 
young people will play, and the role our young people will play 
in the global village of the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for the hon. member’s information, that very program that 
she’s against, that very program that she’s against, the Future 
Corporation — that very initiative she’s against is the very 
corporation that the first project that they announced, Mr. 
Speaker, the very first project that was announced by the Future 
Corporation was a project for our high school children to 
participate in a scenario when they could see themselves 
looking at where Saskatchewan can take itself in the future, 
whether it be in our economic development areas, the high-tech 
areas. Mr. Speaker, it’s very much an educational initiative, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

High Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
seek leave pursuant to rule 39 to move the following resolution: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to 
abandon its policy of high interest rates, which is tailored 
to the needs of central Canada and which will aggravate 
the economic hardship facing Saskatchewan farmers, 
business people, and consumers. 
 

I seek leave to move that motion, seconded by the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act respecting the Protection of Children 
and the Provision of Support Services to Families 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. We’ll be unable to 
get to second readings without some co-operation. Order, order. 
Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be pleased 
to commence the second reading speech; however, with the 
shouting from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I must once more ask the House 
for their co-operation. We can’t do the business of the House if 
the hon. member is interrupted continuously, so I think we 
should all co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
that you are impressing upon the members of the opposition 
some respect for democracy. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I don’t think that 
comment was warranted either. I’d just like to ask the minister 
to get on with his second reading. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, allow me to shout 
out this speech as we proceed today. It gives me great pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to shout here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think this is the last time I’m going to 
call for order. We’re all responsible people, and I’ve asked three 
times, I believe, and that should certainly be enough. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to the 
members present today that I’m pleased to introduce The Child 
and Family Services Act which comes before this Assembly 
today to revise the law in this area. It’s been approximately 17 
or 18 years since the last Act was revised and passed, and the 
families of Saskatchewan and our society has changed 
considerably in that period of time. 
 
I want to review briefly today what this Act will cover and why 
it’s so important to the families of Saskatchewan. The emphasis 
of this Act, Mr. Speaker, is to support families and help keep 
families together. And we are all familiar with the all too 
common family problems that we have in our society today and 
the family disruptions that we see as a result primarily of the 
life-styles that we have adopted in this country and in the 
western world. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this Act will emphasize out-of-court 
resolution of disputes and issues. We are trying to attempt, 
wherever possible, to have family issues settled through 
discussion, through reasonable consideration, rather than go to 
the courts which will only be used as a last resort. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, that it gives me no pleasure as the 
Minister of Social Services to have to intervene and take 
children away from their families. As we speak today, there are 
approximately 2,000 — I think it’s grown to  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

344 
 

about 2,200 children that are now wards of the province of 
Saskatchewan — for which, on your behalf, I have 
responsibility. We try to limit the numbers but, however, 
unfortunately in some instances we have to intervene. 
 
There will be in those instances where the province has to 
intervene in the family, an Act here that will make the 
intervention as fair as possible and as minimal as possible. We 
will try to have, wherever possible, voluntary agreements or 
mediation so as to avoid dragging the family through court. 
 
Mediators will be people deemed by myself and appointed from 
the community, and they will be judging the parenting 
standards. So we will try to obtain people who have parenting 
skills, people who have wisdom in the ways of the world so that 
they can act as mediators to help solve these disputes within 
families and situations where the province of Saskatchewan has 
to intervene on behalf of the children. 
 
This new Act, Mr. Speaker, will require the reporting of child 
abuse, with a fine for failure to do so. It will be the 
responsibility of every citizen in Saskatchewan unless they have 
a legal exemption. Every citizen will have the responsibility to 
report child abuse or child neglect where it gets to the state 
where the child’s health or their growth and development are in 
danger. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, will also empower the department to 
screen for child abuse, to screen child abuse reports, so that not 
every report that comes to my department will result in a 
full-fledged investigation. My department officials will have the 
discretion to determine whether, in this situation, the Bill will 
say the department officials will determine whether the case has 
any merit or whether it’s frivolous, so that if someone totally 
falsely accuses someone of child abuse, my department will 
make a decision based on their discretion and only investigate 
those cases which warrant investigation. This is the same power 
that the police have used for years to not investigate where they 
think there is a hoax or something frivolous. This is an initial 
screening process that will be allowed in this Bill. 
 
This Bill will, furthermore, attempt to define more clearly what 
actually amounts to neglect or child abuse. And I believe that 
all members will understand it is very difficult to draw the exact 
line as to what is neglect or what is abuse and what might be 
discipline or what might be poor parenting that does not warrant 
the state’s intervention. This is an extremely complicated and 
sensitive area. This Bill will attempt to clarify this area of what 
is child abuse and/or neglect. 
 
This Bill will, in addition, clarify when a child may be 
apprehended. By this we mean, Mr. Speaker, taken away from 
its family. The Bill will also provide, for the first time ever, 
family review panels. These panels will have the initial power 
to decide whether the child stays with the family or is kept in an 
institution or a foster home pending resolution of the problem, 
further mediation, or possibly a final court decision. 
 
And what will happen is that rather than have the current 
situation where a child is taken from the family and the  

matter remains before the courts, as to whether or not the child 
should go back into the family or whether the child should stay 
as a ward of the province. This can take many months, and 
therefore the family has not had the power to go before anyone 
and say, give us our child back, under certain conditions, or we 
will change things, and then the long-term decision can be made 
later. 
 
These family review panels of wise and true citizens selected 
throughout Saskatchewan will have the power to say, this child 
should be sent back to the family, and will have for the first 
time ever also the power to set conditions under which the child 
is to go back to the family. 
 
And I don’t like to compare a family situation to a criminal case 
situation. However, what this will allow is that where you have 
a bail application in a court situation where someone is released 
into society pending the outcome of their trial, in this case the 
panel will have the power to send the child back to the family 
under conditions, pending the final outcome. And we believe 
this will assist in the resolving of family disputes and will assist 
in the raising of children without lengthy court cases. We want 
to use the court as a last resort in family problems. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Bill also contains provisions for 
children under the age of 12 who have committed criminal 
offences but are too young to be charged as young offenders 
under the Young Offenders Act. This will give my department 
the power to deal with the correction of those children under the 
age of 12. 
 
And we believe this is extremely necessary because children 
under the age of 12 have to be disciplined and have to be taught 
what is right and what is wrong and how to live in society. 
Because the experts in families tell us that the first 12 years are 
more important than the next 12 years. So we have to have the 
power in this Bill to get to the children before they become a 
major problem, and this Bill will try to remedy that situation. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide for provisions 
for 16- and 17-year-olds. However, this will be on a voluntary 
basis. And we have an unusual situation where, when the 
Young Offenders Act was proclaimed, the Department of Social 
Services took jurisdiction over 16- and 17-year-olds. And these 
are predominantly males who are really not boys and not quite 
men, and they’re in a transition stage. And a lot of them get into 
a lot of difficulty. We have some females, but it’s 
predominantly males. Seems that we as males have a more 
difficult time settling down in this age group. 
 
What we’re trying to do in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is make a 
provision where we can voluntarily assist 16- and 17-year-olds, 
but we do not intend to make it mandatory that we provide child 
and family services protection to all 16- and 17-year-olds. And 
the reasoning behind this, Mr. Speaker, is that we find it 
extremely difficult for the government — and as a matter of fact 
many parents also find it extremely difficult — to completely 
manage how a 16-year-old or a 17-year-old will live their lives. 
And it’s quite difficult for us to take a 17-year-old and put them 
into a foster home, for example, where they are difficult to 
handle if they are totally rebellious. 
  



 
March 23, 1989 

345 
 

So we are not making this provision mandatory, but we are 
making provision to allow services to these people who are not 
quite children and not quite adult in a transition stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also makes provision for the court to order 
protective measures other than the removing of the child from a 
home. In the past it’s been quite restricted on what courts could 
do, and we want to allow courts and this family mediation panel 
the power, as I indicated earlier, to say, all right, the child can 
return to the home under these conditions. 
 
Possibly some aggravating situation that had been causing a 
problem may have to be removed. In some cases this could be 
one parent. It could be a parent that has problems with 
substance abuse. But the courts will have the power to set 
conditions in order to keep the family together, while we on 
behalf of the government try to improve the family so that it can 
be self-sufficient rather than become a broken family and a 
permanent burden on society that leads to long-term problems 
with the children and the grandchildren. 
 
So these are some of the things that we are trying to do in this 
Bill. And in addition, the Bill will recognize the role of foster 
parents and provide for foster care service agreements, so that 
where we do have to remove children from their families due to 
abuse or neglect, we have now beefed up the foster-parents 
program. And there will be specific agreements under this Bill 
for foster-parents to provide certain treatment to these children. 
 
There is also something else that is historic in this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is that this Bill will allow for Indian child 
welfare agreements using Indian bands in Saskatchewan to 
deliver the services. Now this will have to be in conjunction 
with the responsibility of the federal government to provide 
services on reserves, but we are prepared in this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, to give the province’s jurisdiction, by delegation, to 
Indian bands in Saskatchewan so that they can deal with their 
own young people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government believes firmly, and is in 
agreement with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 
that the province of Saskatchewan cannot raise Indian children 
on the reserves, or cannot take them into the care of the 
province; that the problems of the families on Indian reserves 
and in our native community have to be resolved by our native 
people. And we are prepared to give them the jurisdiction and 
the authority to deal with their own children through the means 
of this Act. 
 
(1045) 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Act, for the first time in the 
history of Saskatchewan, allows Indian bands to intervene with 
respect to the welfare of treaty Indian children. It gives them 
status in courts, the similar type of status that parents would 
have, and it also takes into account, and the Act takes into 
account, the cultural background of all children. 
 
This is not only Indian children but children of all origins.  

They could be children of English, Scottish, Irish, German, or 
Indian origin. However, this is a suggestion of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, that cultural background be 
considered. And this Act, and the other Acts that I will speak to 
this morning, will for the first time allow for the cultural 
background of the child to be taken into consideration when 
courts or family mediation panels are dealing with a child. 
 
Another provision in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to make 
provision for openness in dealing with the clientele, while at the 
same time trying to maintain the principle of confidentiality. 
The Bill will provide so that we release as much information as 
possible to the parents, to everyone interested, to Indian bands 
if they show interest in the child. We will try to release as much 
information as possible so that they can openly deal with the 
problem. The Government of Saskatchewan has nothing to hide 
with respect to children, in the care of children. 
 
So therefore this Bill will liberalize the law with respect to 
information but yet respect confidentiality. Some things are the 
business of the relatives, of the province; they may be the 
business of the Indian band, but they are not the business of 
society as a whole. The problems of families and children are 
not to be open to idle gossip and for the public’s insatiable 
demand to gossip about the problems of our society. We will 
open it but we will not allow confidentiality to be broken. 
 
In addition this Bill allows for the charging of fees in some 
situations, and the Bill provides for the allowing of charging of 
fees by the province where the service provided to the family or 
the individual is not a service that all of the public would 
require, where it’s some sort of a special service only for the 
benefit of that individual. 
 
And we have situations where we have brought in programs in 
our department that are special, they are new, they are not 
common to anywhere else in Canada, and they have been so 
popular that we feel that where they provide a specific service 
that is not essential to the public but helps that individual; that 
where people can afford to pay for some of the costs of that 
service, that this Bill will allow for the charging of fees where 
people have the means to pay. 
 
This is not to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Social 
Services intends to make any money. I might say that we have a 
budget in excess of $375 million annually, and we use this for 
the neediest people. But for those people who require special 
services that are not essential but that they would like to have 
that service, then we want to be in a position to provide that 
service. 
 
So all in all, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this 
Act is a revision to bring the current law into the 1990s, to bring 
this province and its families into the next century. It is a Bill 
that allows an openness and an honesty in the administration of 
Social Services in the services to families and children. 
 
And this Bill will set the stage for dealing with the problems 
that the fast life and the ever changing world of modern 
technology has brought to our society. So it’s with great 
pleasure I move second reading of this Bill, Mr.  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

346 
 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter into the 
debate on this Bill today. I’ll be making a few introductory 
remarks and then, at the end of those remarks, asking for leave 
to adjourn the debate. And I’ll reserve most of my major 
comments, I think, for next week on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to say, first of all, that we agree with the Minister 
of Social Services that the need for new legislation in this field 
is long overdue, and therefore we welcome the introduction of a 
new Bill in this area. I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are a number of areas of this Bill that I think will be positively 
received by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m particularly pleased, for instance, to see the provision for 
protective intervention orders in this Bill that will make it 
possible for children to stay in the home, while those who are 
the source of the abuse may be removed from the home. 
 
I also welcome, at long last, the provision for 16- and 
17-year-olds, on a voluntary basis, to receive services under this 
Bill. We’ve long had a crisis in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
where 16- and 17-year-olds were simply unable to get any 
urgently needed services under the family services Act. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, brings me to the heart of the point that 
I’d like to make this morning with respect to this Bill, and that 
is that the usefulness of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, will 
depend on whether or not this government is prepared to put 
into place the resources at the community level to support 
families in crisis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government to date, with 
respect to cutting services to families that are in crisis, is bleak 
indeed. And if that record continues, as I suspect it will, Mr. 
Speaker — but we’ll see in the budget next week — if that 
record continues, then this legislation will, to a significant 
degree, be ineffective in terms of helping families and helping 
children. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I noted that the minister said that there are 
now some 2,200 children in his care as Minister of Social 
Services in the province of Saskatchewan, and I note, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s a significant increase of at least 200 over the 
situation three years ago. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the 
reason that we’ve seen another increase in the number of 
children who have had to become wards of the Minister of 
Social Services is because this government and this Minister of 
Social Services has dramatically cut back services to families in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to give a few examples of what I 
mean by this before I beg leave to adjourn the debate. First of 
all, on the front line, in terms of providing services to families 
in crisis, and integral to the operation of this legislation that’s 
before the House now, Mr. Speaker, is the operation of the 
Mobile Crisis Services in Regina and Saskatoon and Prince 
Albert. 
 
And what have we seen the government do to the mobile  

crisis intervention services in this province since being 
re-elected in 1986, Mr. Speaker? Well in Regina, their budget in 
1986 was $400,000, Mr. Speaker, and today in 1988-89 fiscal 
year, it’s $326,000. In other words, Mr. Speaker, they cut 
$74,000 from the budget of the mobile crisis intervention 
services in Regina. 
 
What did they do the mobile crisis intervention services in 
Saskatoon? They cut the budget, Mr. Speaker, from $344,000 in 
1986 to $299,000 today, Mr. Speaker. And it’s the same in 
Prince Albert, a cut from $270,000 in 1986 to $168,000 today. 
 
Now I tell the Minister of Social Services, that with a record 
like that, you can bring in whatever legislation you want. And 
while this legislation has many useful provisions, it will be 
ineffective if you don’t provide the services on the ground to 
implement the legislation. 
 
I just want to give a couple of other examples if I might, Mr. 
Speaker. Every Friendship Centre in this province, every single 
Friendship Centre has had its programs slashed by the Minister 
of Social Services. There are family service workers in every 
one of those friendship centres, Mr. Speaker. And what’s 
happened? We’ve seen cuts in the last two years of in the range 
of 15 to 20 per cent in all of those Friendship Centre programs 
for family service workers. 
 
Just by way of an example, Mr. Speaker, the Friendship Centre 
in Regina, cut from a budget of 70,000 in 1986-87 for its family 
service workers, to 54,000 in the current fiscal year; the 
Friendship Centre at Meadow Lake, cut from over $31,000 in 
1986 to only $27,000 today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Friendship Centre in La Ronge, cut from from almost 
$32,000 in 1986 to $27,000 today. And those are just the cuts, 
Mr. Speaker, since the 1986 election. The previous Minister of 
Social Services slashed the family service worker budgets in 
those friendship centres by more than 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in addition to that, this government eliminated all the 
recreation programs in the friendship centres for young people 
in this province to try to keep them off the streets. And that’s 
the kind of record, Mr. Speaker, that will make it very difficult 
for the legislation that the minister brings before us today to be 
effected. 
 
I just want to give one other example before I close in this area, 
and that is, Mr. Speaker, that one of the key elements to this 
legislation being successful is to have good counselling services 
available throughout the province of Saskatchewan without 
people having to wait lengthy periods of time to access 
counselling. That’s absolutely key, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If a family is in crisis, it does them no good to go down to the 
Family Service Bureau in Moose Jaw or Regina or Saskatoon, 
and be told that there’s a six-week waiting list before they can 
see a counsellor. That does them no good at all, Mr. Speaker. 
Some families can wait six weeks, but many families can’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what we’ve seen this government do since being  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

347 
 

re-elected in 1986 is to freeze the budgets for all the counselling 
services offered by family service bureaus in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the result of that is that 
families in Regina and Saskatoon do have to wait six weeks 
before they can access counselling services in this province. 
 
And I just again want to give a couple of examples here, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want members of the legislature and viewers 
who are listening to bear in mind that we’ve had considerable 
inflation since the 1986 election. 
 
Family Service Bureau of Regina budget in 1986 for 
counselling services, $108,000. Budget today, $105,000, Mr. 
Speaker, and that does not take account of the fact that we’ve 
had inflation of in excess of 10 per cent during that time. In real 
terms, we’re looking here at a 12 to 13 per cent cut in 
counselling services for the Family Service Bureau of Regina. 
 
Exactly the same situation for the Catholic Family Service 
bureau in Regina — a cut from $81,000 in 1986 to 70, almost 
$79,000 two and a half years later, Mr. Speaker, and there’s 
been 10 per cent inflation in the meantime. 
 
And it’s exactly the same situation in Saskatoon. The Catholic 
Family Service bureau, their counselling program has been cut 
back from $80,000 in 1986 to 77 and a half thousand dollars in 
1988-89. And the Minto Family Life Education Centre in 
Moose Jaw has had their counselling budget frozen now for the 
last three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I tell the Minister of Social Services that it simply won’t 
do to bring in new legislation if you’re not prepared to put the 
services in place to implement that legislation. 
 
We’re seeing long waiting lists, Mr. Speaker, at the Crisis 
Nursery in Saskatoon. Families are in crisis, they want to place 
their children in the nursery, and they can’t get them in. It’s 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that this Minister of Social Services 
would let that happen. And I say that until he comes forward 
with a budget that will enforce and implement this legislation, 
then this Bill will have little effect in helping families in crisis, 
despite some of the positive measures that do exist in the Bill. 
 
I’ll have a lot more to say on this legislation next week, Mr. 
Speaker. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’m sorry, I should just say, Mr. Speaker, that 
I just adjourn the debate. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1100) 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to Promote the Growth and 
Development of Children and to Support the Provision of 

Child Care Services to Saskatchewan Families 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me pleasure to speak to second reading of this Bill which is an 
Act with respect to child care. 

The situation that we have here, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Saskatchewan does not have and has never had a child care Act, 
and that the child care that we do have in Saskatchewan was 
operated and is operated under regulations under The Family 
Services Act. 
 
Up until this time, Mr. Speaker, no government has seen fit to 
actually pass a child care Act. So what we have now, Mr. 
Speaker, is an initiative by the federal government to provide 
for a national child care strategy. And in order to enact the 
national child care strategy proposed by Ottawa, and in order 
for Saskatchewan to deliver a better and improved child care 
system, we are introducing The Child Care Act today. 
 
It is the opinion of the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the existing programs permit insufficient options for child care 
in Saskatchewan. Now fortunately the regulations, as 
established by the former government, could be changed and 
are broad enough so that this government could introduce 
family child care homes to deliver smaller units, to give parents 
a choice in child care. 
 
It is the intention of this Act, Mr. Speaker, to continue with the 
existing child care facilities and build upon that base. What will 
be done under this Act, Mr. Speaker, is that we will continue to 
encourage parent-owned and -operated child care facilities in 
Saskatchewan. And if the national child care Act comes to pass, 
they will be eligible for capital funding of up to 75 per cent. 
 
In addition we have introduced, as a government, family child 
care homes which provide for smaller units for those parents 
who wish in urban areas to have their child cared for in a home 
environment, rather than in an institutional environment. These 
family child care homes, Mr. Speaker, are also legitimized in 
this Act and will assist in rural child care, so that we can deliver 
child care units in sizes as they are demanded in smaller 
communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
In many ways this Act, Mr. Speaker, will continue and 
legitimize the processes that this government has started under 
the regulations as they have existed. The Act will enhance 
flexibility to develop different types of child care facilities in 
Saskatchewan to meet the unique needs of infant child care, 
rural child care, and child care for teen parents. 
 
We have started this process even prior to the introduction of 
the Act, and have developed an additional teen parent centre in 
Saskatoon at Mount Royal Collegiate where teenage parents 
can continue with their high school education. We have also 
improved the funding, and this Act will incorporate the Balfour 
child care in Regina so that we will have in Regina and in 
Saskatoon a centre for the education of parents who have 
children, and these parents are high school students. 
 
This Act will continue to focus on parent child care and child 
care centres operated by parent boards of directors. As indicated 
earlier, should the national child care Act come to pass, which 
unfortunately was not supported by the members of the party 
opposite when it was passed  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

348 
 

through the legislature in Ottawa in the House of Commons . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The members opposite interrupt and 
say that they were opposed to the national child care Act; I 
agree that they admit their opposition to the national child care 
Act. I am pleased that they admit that opposition, but I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that this Act that we are introducing in the 
legislature today will have the province of Saskatchewan 
co-operate with the federal government. 
 
I know the members opposite are not interested in co-operation. 
They are shouting nasties from the other side of the House. I am 
used to that, Mr. Speaker. I am intent as the minister, and this 
government is intent, to do what is proper in assisting to the 
people of Saskatchewan, despite the opposition being opposed 
to things from their seats or standing in opposition. 
 
This Act . . . the members opposite are concerned about this Act 
because they have their own vested interests and they want to 
only protect their vested interests but they do not wish, as this 
Act will do, to give parents a choice in the type of child care 
they will have. 
 
This Act will continue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I might say to the members opposite that they are 
shouting from their seats, but I cannot hear their questions so 
it’s rather difficult for me to answer their questions if they shout 
from their seats. The members opposite will be given time in a 
few minutes to stand in their place and speak on the record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At this time I on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
are here before the people introducing improvement for 
families, improvement in child care, and I cannot see why the 
members opposite insist on interrupting while these 
improvements are being explained. 
 
What this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is permits certain things that 
are new to Saskatchewan but are very common to Canada. This 
Bill will permit for the operation of commercial child care 
services. This commercial provision will have a limit that no 
one owner may own more than two centres. The intention of 
this provision, Mr. Speaker, is to limit the operation of any 
child care chains in the province of Saskatchewan. And if this 
province were ever to have a child care chain, it would be 
limited to two facilities. 
 
The members opposite have no respect, Mr. Speaker, for the 
individual choices and wishes of individual citizens and people. 
And I hear the members opposite criticizing anyone operating a 
child care as a business to take care of children. I say to the 
members opposite that they should have nothing to fear from 
competition in the provision of child care, that parents will 
choose the type of child care that they believe is best for their 
children. 
 
And when the members opposite shout from their seats, they do 
a disservice to the parents of Saskatchewan. They insult the 
parents of Saskatchewan because they are suggesting that the 
parents of Saskatchewan are not smart enough to decide what’s 
best for their own children. 
 
This Bill will allow the parents of Saskatchewan to choose  

the child care that they wish for their children. And the 
members opposite insult the parents of Saskatchewan by saying 
that no — the members opposite, the members of the socialist 
party of Saskatchewan say only they know what is good for 
children — the parents in this province do not know what’s 
good for children. 
 
The government, Mr. Speaker, cannot accept that kind of an 
attitude. The Government of Saskatchewan and this Bill does 
not accept that only socialists know what’s best for our 
children. Our premise is that parents of Saskatchewan will 
decide what is best for their children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill respects parents, 
and parents will have choice. They will have the choice of a 
parent-operated child care. They’ll have the choice of a child 
care operated by other individuals in which they do not have to 
actually operate but can purchase the services that are allowed 
under the national child care Act. This Bill allows for infant 
child care. It will be broad enough to allow for 24-hour child 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite respect only ideology and 
do not respect the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan as 
reflected in the choices that parents will be allowed to make. 
The members opposite, who speak continuously of freedom — 
the freedom of choice, the freedom for the citizens to choose 
what is best for them — say that we should not allow parents to 
choose child care for their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what is historic about this Bill. First of all, 
for the first time ever we will have a child care Act that will not 
be dictated by the cabinet Table. And secondly, for the first 
time ever, the parents of Saskatchewan will have a choice in the 
child care they seek for their children. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, will require all child care centres to be 
licensed, and these licences will be enforced. This Act will 
require that family child care homes be licensed where the 
provider chooses, but all licensed and unlicensed facilities 
cannot provide child care services to more than eight children. 
We have to draw a distinction here between baby-sitting and 
child care services. It is not the intention of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to interfere and regulate in the choices that 
parents have made with respect to hiring baby-sitters for their 
children. 
 
This Act will regulate child care centres but will not go into the 
homes of families to regulate people up and down the streets 
and rural areas of Saskatchewan, doing baby-sitting services. 
The government will not intervene with those types of 
arrangements. 
 
So I want it made perfectly clear that this is a child care Act and 
not a baby-sitting Act, and that we will not regulate baby-sitting 
in this Act, but we will regulate child care. And we will provide 
for the licensing of child care but we will not interfere in what 
parents are doing with respect to the hiring of their own 
baby-sitters. 
 
In this Act, Mr. Speaker, licensed family child care home 
providers will have to comply with all standards set out in  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

349 
 

the regulations of this Act, and when they are licensed, the 
parents or the child care will be eligible for the subsidies where 
the income of the parent warrants. 
 
This Act is not only an Act that provides for rules and 
regulation and allows for child care, this Act also makes 
provisions for the subsidization of child care which, I might 
say, Mr. Speaker, to date 80 per cent of subsidized child care 
spaces are being used by single parents. And the emphasis in 
this Act will be to assist those parents who need assistance in 
child care and to allow those parents who can afford to pay for 
their own child care to make their own choices and purchase the 
service that they desire. 
 
This Act also provides for powers of investigation to investigate 
alleged contradictions of the Act. And we have in the past, and 
we will under this Act cancel licences where we find that child 
care is not being properly provided. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Act maximizes Saskatchewan’s 
opportunity to take advantage of the national child care 
strategy. And we feel confident that the federal government, 
now that the election has been won, will proceed with a national 
child care strategy despite the objections of the NDP in Ottawa; 
that this national child care strategy will be implemented and 
Saskatchewan will have the legislation and the programs to 
co-operate with the federal system. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, that this Act is an 
outline to provide legislation to allow the flexibility to give the 
parents of Saskatchewan the type of child care that they wish to 
have. And therefore it is my pleasure to move second reading of 
Saskatchewan’s first Child Care Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to serve notice to 
the Minister of Social Services that this legislation for profit 
commercial child care in the province of Saskatchewan is not in 
the best interests of Saskatchewan children, not in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan families, is a blatant attempt to 
privatize child care in the province of Saskatchewan, and will 
be fought by members of the opposition every stitch of the way, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — every stitch of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to 
examine the state of day care in this province as a result of the 
policies that this government has pursued over the last seven 
years, that now paves the way for this Bill. And I’ll just take a 
moment to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, because of this government’s policies we’ve seen a 
chronic shortage of day-care spaces in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In terms of available day-care 
spaces, less than seven per cent of the children of women who 
are employed in the province of Saskatchewan — children 
under 12 — can be accommodated by the licensed day-care 
spaces that are presently in place in this province, which means 
that  

everybody else who has child care needs, needs to go to a 
non-licensed space. 
 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, has intentionally 
underfunded day care in this province and has consistently 
refused to open new spaces in this province, Mr. Speaker. And 
when they do announce new spaces, they’re primarily 
announcements that have tended to fill closures in the day-care 
system over previous years. And I will elaborate on that when I 
address this Bill further next week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the second point I’d like to make in terms of the crisis in 
day care that this government has perpetrated in Saskatchewan, 
is that for the last seven years there has been a freeze on the 
subsidies that are available to parents who are sending children 
to day-care centres or family day-care homes in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
We’ve had a seven-year freeze, Mr. Speaker. In 1981, when this 
government on this side of the House was still in office, we had 
a subsidy with a maximum of $235 a month when the average 
day-care centre in Saskatchewan was charging in the range of 
250 to $260 a month in fees. Today, Mr. Speaker, that 
maximum subsidy is still at $235 a month. But what we have 
instead, is fees that average between 350 and $360 a month in 
the cities and about $320 a month in rural Saskatchewan. And 
the result, Mr. Speaker, is that low-income families have been 
having to pay in excess of $120 per month, per child, for 
day-care services. If you’ve got three children in day care and 
you’re on minimum wage, you’re having $360 a month taken 
out of your salary cheque, even if you’re on maximum subsidy. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, that situation of the seven-year freeze 
on day-care subsidies has resulted in a lot of parents, 
low-income parents, not being able to afford the non-profit 
day-care centres or the family day-care homes any more in this 
province. 
 
And a third thing has happened, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
subsidy freeze, and that is that wages in day-care centres have 
become abysmally low. Day-care workers are paid on average 
in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 30 per cent less than the 
people who care for animals at places like the forestry farms 
and other centres in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a 
disgraceful situation, and it’s a situation that this government 
has brought on as a result of its freeze in grants and freeze in 
subsidies. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, this government has intentionally 
created a situation in which non-profit centres have been 
underfunded. Non-profit centres have not been able to meet the 
needs of many families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, with the seven-year freeze in funding, 
almost all middle-income families in this province have been 
ineligible any more for any assistance from this government. In 
1981 a middle-income earner could get assistance from this 
government, from our government, if they needed help in the 
area of day care. This government has provided them  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

350 
 

with no assistance, Mr. Speaker, because of the seven-year 
freeze. And therefore all middle-income families have become 
ineligible for any assistance for day care in this province. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, has set the stage for the door to be 
opened to for profit commercial day care in this province. And 
so I want to turn to the Bill for a minute and make three or four 
points. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, as the minister has admitted, this Bill 
permits for profit commercial day care in this province. It 
permits day-care chains from the United States and from 
provinces like Ontario to move into this province and set up 
operations. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, it permits 
franchising of day care in this province. 
 
The Minister of Social Services says, oh yes, a day-care chain 
will be allowed to come in, but will only be allowed to set up 
two commercial centres in this province. But what he doesn’t 
tell us, Mr. Speaker, is that the door will be wide open to 
franchising of day care for commercial chains in this province. 
And that is unacceptable, I believe, Mr. Speaker, to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow those 
commercial chains and those franchised centres to receive 
grants and subsidies in the same way that the non-profit centres 
do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s agenda is even worse than I’ve 
suggested today, because in this legislation, and specifically in 
section 22 of this Bill, the Minister of Social Services is giving 
himself the right to set restrictions on the number of children in 
a non-profit centre, the number of children in a non-profit 
centre whose parents will be eligible for day-care subsidies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, his agenda is very clear. I say that this 
Minister of Social Services plans to restrict the amount of 
subsidy that can go to any non-profit centre. And he plans to 
take some of that money, Mr. Speaker, and he plans to give it to 
the commercial centres of this province. We’re not going to see 
a major increase in the day-care budget. We’re not going to see 
a major increase in the day-care budget. We are going to see, 
Mr. Speaker, a shifting of the day-care budget from the 
non-profit centres to the for-profit commercial centres in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I say shame to the Minister of 
Social Services that he would ever do that — and he’s doing it 
at the expense of the children of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a couple of other 
comments on this Bill before I adjourn the debate, and that is, 
Mr. Speaker, that I think the number one issue in this debate is 
over the question of quality of day care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The issue is quality and what the best method of 
providing quality day care is. 
 
And our position is that commercial for-profit child care will 
not be the best vehicle for providing quality day care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. First of all, Mr. Speaker,  

research across this country shows that the first premise to 
quality day care anywhere is parent involvement, parental 
support, support of parental values in the day-care centre. 
 
And the key difference, Mr. Speaker, between the model of day 
care that this Minister of Social Services supports and the 
model that we support, is that we believe, Mr. Speaker, that a 
day-care facility that doesn’t provide for parents to have some 
control over the way that day care is run is not a day care that 
will provide the best quality of care for children in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And that’s a key philosophical difference, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This minister is eroding parental control. He’s making a 
provision for parent advisory boards to the commercial centres, 
but that is not the same as a parent being able to walk into a day 
care and know, Mr. Speaker, that they have a say in the way 
that that day care is run. And that’s the number one agenda of 
this government, is to do away with the opportunity for parents 
to control their day-care facilities in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another key issue in this Bill is that the record of 
the commercial centres in lobbying for weaker day-care 
regulations, in lobbying against improvements in day-care 
regulations, Mr. Speaker, is very clear. All you have to do is 
look at the situation in Ontario, the situation in the United 
States, and you’ll see that the consistent record, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the commercial for-profit day-care centres have lobbied 
against improved regulations by government in the day-care 
field. 
 
And it will be very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see whether this 
government, when it writes the regulations, is prepared to 
strengthen the regulations with respect to things like child-staff 
ratios in this province. Because, Mr. Speaker, the non-profit 
centres have consistently operated above the minimum 
regulations in this province. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll 
see that the commercial centres will lobby against improved 
regulations and will operate only barely to meet the regulations 
that are now in place. And those regulations are the key to 
quality day care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, with respect to commercial day care, 
I want to say that we on this side of the House believe that the 
profits that will be made from the commercial centres will be 
directly at the expense of quality of care at those centres. 
They’ll be, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of decent staff salaries 
for day-care workers. That’s the first thing they’ll be at the 
expense of, and if you can’t pay your staff a decent wage, then 
you can’t get decent quality child care in a centre. So the first 
thing that profit will do is it will erode the salaries of day-care 
workers in the province of Saskatchewan which are already at 
the poverty line. 
 
And second, Mr. Speaker, we believe that for-profit commercial 
centres will also erode the other services that are available to 
children in those centres unless those centres charge higher fees. 
Fewer of the commercial centres will have things like hot lunch 
meal programs for children, Mr. Speaker, because the money 
will be taken from meals for children and it will go into profit 
for those  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

351 
 

commercial centres instead. And if they do have those kind of 
services, it will only be as a result of higher fees for parents that 
send their children to those centres. 
 
So in summary, Mr. Speaker, and in conclusion, what this 
Minister of Social Services has done is created a crisis in day 
care in the province of Saskatchewan, frozen funding to day 
care for seven years, opened the door, created a chronic 
shortage of spaces in this province, and therefore created an 
opening, because of the chronic shortage of spaces and the 
crisis in day care, for the profit commercial sector to come into 
the day care field in this province. 
 
I don’t hear, Mr. Speaker, parents in Saskatchewan crying out 
for for profit commercial day care. What I hear them calling for 
is more day care spaces and better quality day care and control 
over the day care facilities that they run. And the Minister of 
Social Services is providing them with none of that. His only 
agenda in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to provide more spaces for 
day care without any additional cost to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We say that that’s not the way to provide quality day care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We will oppose this legislation 
every step of the way. 
 
I will adjourn the debate at this point in time and pick it up next 
week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1130) 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act respecting Adoption 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
gives me pleasure today to speak to second reading on the 
reintroduction of an adoption Act. I recall that up until the 
election of the NDP government in 1972, Saskatchewan had an 
adoption Act, and that when the NDP government was elected 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In ’71. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And I’m corrected, in 1971 — late 
1971, I say to the members opposite . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. It was early. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Early? All right. Some of us haven’t 
been here that long that we recall 1971. Members opposite, 
some of them have been here so long that they know all of the 
history of Saskatchewan, but I stand to be corrected. 
 
In 1971 the election of the NDP government saw the 1972 
Family Services Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which put adoption 
into The Family Services Act. And the first problem was that 
you couldn’t find the adoption Act or the adoption laws. 
 
It has come time now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to revise the 
adoption laws, and it gives me pleasure to re-enact an adoption 
Act so that anyone who wants to find the law on  

adoption can look at The Adoption Act. 
 
This Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, recognizes the best interests of 
children regarding the placement of children and the making of 
adoption orders. And I must emphasize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that this Act is for the benefit of children and not the adopting 
parents or the natural parents; that the first criteria is what’s best 
for the child. 
 
Secondly, this Act will make provisions to license and regulate 
adoption agencies. We have seen the introduction of one 
adoption agency as a pilot project in Saskatchewan — 
Saskatoon Christian Counselling (Services), and I have made it 
clear that it is the intention of this government to establish no 
more than two adopting agencies in Saskatchewan. In addition, 
this Act will continue government adoptions in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Act will recognize for the first time the rights of birth 
fathers. And I might say that it is the position of this 
government that we will, over the next two years, encourage 
and pass laws to make birth fathers more responsible for their 
children. But in exchange for that responsibility of birth fathers, 
we are also going to give them the rights to have their paternity 
rights recognized with respect to adoption, and the consent of 
the birth father will be taken into account under this Act when 
adoptions are made. 
 
I might say, of course, that there are provisions in this Act that 
you have to of course locate the birth father, but where the birth 
father shows an interest in his child, that birth father will have 
rights with respect to adoption and may be considered for 
adoption. 
 
This Act will have a stipulation with respect to consent to 
adoption, and the provisions with respect to when a birth 
mother can give consent to adopt out her child, which is usually 
an infant, will be changed to be more consistent with other parts 
of Canada and with what is practical. 
 
No birth mother will be allowed to consent to an adoption 
unless her child is at least three days old. The former law had 
no such limitation. But we will make a change. The current 
provision says that the mother has 30 days to revoke her 
consent, and this leaves the situation in limbo with respect to 
adoption. 
 
To be consistent with other provinces and what is practical, this 
law will propose that birth parents have 14 days in which to 
revoke their consent to adoption, but no consent will be allowed 
to be taken until three days after the child is born, so that the 
mother will have an opportunity to see the child, to develop 
some affinity to the child, before the mother considers giving up 
the child for adoption. Now this will be, of course, the choice of 
the mother, but there will be at least three days before any 
consent can be given. 
 
This Act will also, Mr. Speaker, require independent legal 
advice for all adoptive birth parents, so that the consent to adopt 
one’s child will not be obtained without full knowledge of the 
legal rights of the parent. It is not the intention of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to either promote or allow the 
taking of children from their natural  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

352 
 

parent for the purposes of adoption. We want the natural parent 
to give this serious topic due consideration and fully understand 
the law before they consent to the adoption of their child, which 
after 14 days will become a permanent matter. 
 
This Act will also require independent . . . excuse me, this Act 
will also permit provision of some services by qualified 
non-departmental social workers and other professionals. Now 
members opposite today have referred to agencies who provide 
social work services in Saskatchewan now under contract to the 
Department of Social Services. This Act will make it legal for 
agencies under contract to do counselling with respect to 
adoption and to do preparatory work prior to the consent to 
adoption, because every family has to be checked to see if that 
family is suitable to raise the proposed child. 
 
I might say that this Act, Mr. Speaker, will give greater 
protection to adoptive children with respect to the quality of the 
parents they will receive than to natural children who have no 
choice as to who their parents will be. We do not, and I believe 
will never have any requirement that natural parents qualify as 
parents before they have children. But adoptive parents have to 
qualify as parents before they can adopt a child. So as much as 
the state can possibly ensure, every child that is adopted will go 
into a good family. 
 
This Act will provide for the possibility of contract agencies 
ensuring that these families are adequate. This Act will also 
clarify various types of adoption. We will continue with 
adoptions that we call Crown ward adoptions, where a child 
becomes a ward of the province of Saskatchewan and it turns 
out that the child cannot go back to live with the parents. And at 
some stage it is our desire to have that child adopted out under a 
Crown, the state, ward adoption. 
 
As I indicated earlier, this Act will also provide for agency 
adoptions, and it is the intention of this government to limit 
those agencies to two in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the member from Regina Victoria has a 
speech that he’s making from his seat, but I say to the member 
from Regina Victoria that he will have opportunity to stand up 
and speak on this Bill in about five minutes. The member from 
Regina Victoria seems to be infuriated, Mr. Speaker, and I 
suggest that he settle down and wait his turn. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, this Act will also allow for 
independent adoption. This is a situation where the parents 
choose not to, where the parents choose not to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, but with the 
interruptions it’s difficult to lay out to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan the exact contents of the Bill. 
 
But I say that independent adoptions will continue to be 
allowed where the parents choose to adopt out their children 
without the assistance of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
where they arrange with someone they know to adopt a child to 
that person. This of course, Mr. Speaker, will all have to go 
through the court system and have the approval of the courts. 
But this is a practice that has continued in Saskatchewan for 
approximately the entire length of the history of this province 
and will be  

continued. 
 
We will, for the first time ever, allow provision for step-parent 
adoption. Now there have been step-parent adoptions in 
Saskatchewan before, but this Act will streamline and enhance 
the provisions for step-parents to adopt children. Unfortunately, 
we have more and more situations where, as a result of broken 
families, we have new families created. And we believe that 
these new families should be able to adopt children where the 
new spouse is prepared to take that child in, and this will 
facilitate that kind of a situation. 
 
This Act will also continue the departmental assistance for 
applicants who wish to adopt a child from a foreign country. 
This will be referred to as international adoption. It will make 
provision to allow for the courts to give prior approval to 
recognize a foreign simple adoption order for all legal purposes 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what we say here is that the courts in Saskatchewan, if 
satisfied that a legal, proper adoption can be arranged in a 
foreign country to bring to Canada a child that can be raised as 
a Canadian and have all the benefits and opportunities of 
immigrating to Canada into a family, this Act will allow 
international adoptions and allow the court to sanction them if 
the court is satisfied that the adoption in the foreign country is 
legal. 
 
We do not sanction, or will we ever permit, the importation of 
children into Canada unless they are legally adopted in the 
country of origin. But it is the opinion of this minister that we 
should not discourage infants from immigrating to Canada 
where they can be raised as happy, healthy Canadian citizens 
when they would have lived in poverty, unwanted in the 
country that they came from. 
 
And so we encourage international adoptions. But this Act will 
set out rules so that people in other countries will not be taken 
advantage of, so that there will be no dealing in babies from 
other countries. This Act will allow international adoptions with 
law and order. And the Government of Canada has an 
international adoption desk right now, and this Bill will allow 
the Government of Saskatchewan to co-operate with the 
Government of Canada to allow for the orderly immigration of 
children into Canadian and Saskatchewan families. 
 
This Bill provides also for the open adoption concept which has 
been started in Saskatchewan, and I recall a year ago the 
members opposite were adamantly opposed to open adoptions 
in Saskatchewan and adamantly opposed to the Saskatoon 
Christian Counselling (Services) contracting agency trying a 
pilot project in open adoption. By open adoption they have a 
system where, if the mother wants to participate in the choosing 
of parents, she may. And if parents wish . . . adoptive parents 
wish to adopt where they know that the mother will have 
chosen them and the mother will interview them as prospective 
parents, this will be allowed under this Act. 
 
I might say that the pilot project, Mr. Speaker, has gone so well 
that in the last 15 months Saskatoon Christian Counselling 
(Services) has placed 31 children while the  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

353 
 

province of Saskatchewan has only had approximately 61 
children available for adoption. So we can see that more 
children have become available for adoption through the 
agreement of the birth mother and the adoptive parents. 
 
And up until the time that I stand here and give this speech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I have not had brought to my attention any 
problems with open adoption at Saskatoon Christian 
Counselling (Services) — not that I can recall any major 
problem. I recall objection from the members opposite. I recall 
some objection from people on philosophical grounds. I recall 
some concern from some people. But of the 31 cases, as I speak 
today, I know of no problems, and what we have is happy birth 
mothers and happy adoptive parents and, hopefully, 31 children 
that will find happiness in the province of Saskatchewan with a 
good family. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the reasons that we 
tried open adoption was to give birth mothers an option of 
saying, yes, I will go through pregnancy and have this child, but 
I need the assurance that the family it’s going to will take 
proper care of it. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing 
more important than having the birth mother feeling 
comfortable and satisfied that she has helped find a good home 
for her child. I believe there is nothing more comforting for that 
mother. 
 
And now, as Minister of Social Services, this Act . . . we have 
opened up the Act in the past few years to allow birth mothers 
from many years ago to follow through and find their children. 
It tells me, Mr. Speaker, that birth mothers, even though they 
give up their children, have an attachment for that child, they 
still care about that child, and they want to see how that child is 
doing. Through open adoption, now 31 birth mothers will be 
able to work in co-operation with the adoptive parents to see 
how their child has turned out, rather than go through all of 
their lives not knowing what happened to their child. 
 
(1145) 
 
And a year ago, Mr. Speaker, this government was soundly 
criticized by the members opposite for doing something of this 
nature. And it’s unbelievable that the members opposite, who 
have always considered themselves to be radicals and for 
change, would resist positive change when it is brought before 
them. This Act will continue the open adoption concept. 
 
And this . . . I announce with the introduction of this Act, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan, through 
the Department of Social Services, will also give parents, both 
birth parents and adoptive parents, the option to have open 
adoption if they so choose. And this will be delivered through 
the Department of Social Services through the means of the 
passing of this Act and through the policies of our department. 
So this government, through this adoption Act, will again give 
parents, either natural or adoptive parents, the choice to make 
decisions for themselves rather than have the government set 
stringent rules saying, you as a parent cannot make decisions 
for your child. 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Act will provide for the 
government to have the ability to charge for fees in adoptive 
services where, in the opinion of the government through its 
regulatory powers, these services are not open to the public as a 
whole but are special services to individual parents or children 
who can afford to pay for that service. 
 
As I indicated earlier, this government has opened up the 
adoption records to parents and children so that they can trace 
their ancestry either for matters of interest, or matters of 
follow-through, just with respect to the human feeling and 
needs to want to follow through your offspring and see what has 
happened to them, and even assist them 30 or 40 years later if 
they would need some assistance. 
 
These fees, again, have been criticized because the members 
opposite believe everything should be free. And they also 
believe that we should be free from paying of taxes. And if you 
are free from the paying of taxes and everything is free, Mr. 
Speaker, what you get is nothing — for free you get nothing. 
 
This Act provides that the Minister of Social Services has the 
power to waive fees where people cannot afford to pay fees. 
Recently it has come to my attention that there are people 
objecting in the media this very day to the paying of fees. And 
it seems very unusual to me, Mr. Speaker, that people who can 
afford to pay the fees refuse to pay for a service that’s being 
provided to them that the former government never, ever 
provided. So as soon as this government makes moves that you 
could call progressive, that you could call even radical, but they 
are positive moves to allow people to trace their parents, then 
all of a sudden, because the members opposite didn’t have the 
foresight to allow people to have this information, they did not 
charge anything because they did nothing. 
 
This government has done something, and we’re allowing 
parents of children to trace their relatives, but we are saying that 
you should pay a modest fee where you can afford to pay it. 
And members opposite say, no, that should be free. 
 
This Bill provides, Mr. Speaker, for fees where people can 
afford to pay. These are not fees for services that the public as a 
whole needs and has access to, but fees for services where there 
is a special interest involved. The tracing of my ancestors is of 
special interest to me, and I submit that if a person who can 
afford to pay a fee of $80, refuses to pay $80, that person is not 
very serious in knowing about their ancestors or the 
information. And why should the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
satisfy the curiosity of people with money in their pockets 
simply because the people with money in their pockets don’t 
think it’s worth anything to them to find out what the 
information is? 
 
I agree that people who cannot afford to get this information 
should not be charged. This Bill provides that the minister can 
waive that fee. As minister, I have waived that fee in many 
cases, but I can say that the policy of this government is not that 
people do not pay fees because they don’t want to pay fees. 
People who can afford to pay for the service they want will 
have to pay for it. People  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

354 
 

who cannot afford to pay for it will have the taxpayers pay for 
it. And I believe that is a reasonable way of running a 
government. 
 
With respect to fines and penalties under this Act, Mr. Speaker, 
this government will not tolerate people dealing in babies, 
selling babies, or making commissions in the trade of babies. 
And for that reason, this government in this Bill will double the 
fine for infractions under this Act from a maximum of $5,000 to 
a maximum of $10,000, and we will double the maximum 
incarceration to one year. We will not tolerate people trying to 
profit from the sale of babies, and this Act will be strengthened 
to prevent that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will allow parents a choice in the form of 
adoption that they can have. We will allow parents a choice in 
the means of delivery of adoption. We will allow people to 
provide services and, where necessary, the province will pay the 
cost of these services; and where the benefit is strictly to the 
parent as an individual citizen, we may charge a modest fee. 
But certainly, a modest fee charged by the province, or a cost 
recovery fee by a contracting agency, is not engaging in the 
business of the sale of babies, which we will not tolerate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So therefore it gives me pleasure to enact and bring before this 
Assembly an adoption Act that allows for parental choice, that 
allows for flexibility. And I cannot see, Mr. Speaker, how the 
opposite party, who always passes resolutions in favour of 
choice, can be opposed to choice for parents in these instances. 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of An Act respecting Adoption. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there are two or three points I’d like to comment on 
with respect to this Bill. First of all, there are some positive 
things in this Bill. I think probably its major strength is that it 
requires the courts to determine the best interests of the child 
when placing a child for adoption, Mr. Speaker. And those best 
interests are very specifically and, I think, quite well spelled out 
in this Bill. We support that move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about the question of providing 
parents with a choice. And in so far as he talks about that choice 
being between an open adoption system and the traditional 
system that we’ve been used to, we have no problem with that 
on this side of the House. Contrary to what the minister said in 
his speech, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House 
don’t have a problem with the principle of open adoption where 
both the birth parents and the adoptive parents are in agreement 
with that process. We have no problem with that process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we have a problem with, is the Minister of Social 
Services’ proposal that the large bulk of infant adoption work in 
the province of Saskatchewan should not be done any more by 
the Department of Social Services but should be taken away 
from the Department of Social Services and instead should be 
put in the hands of private agencies, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
central issue in this Bill, and it is on that issue that we take 
opposition to the  

legislation, and not on the basis of many of the other positive 
measures in the Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in effect, what we have here is another case 
of privatization, this time privatization with respect to adoption 
services, particularly infant adoption services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we had a problem with respect to a 
shortage of perspective adoptive parents in this province, I 
could see why there might be a role for a non-profit agency 
becoming involved in helping the government to find 
perspective adoptive parents. 
 
And in so far as we look at native adoptions and the shortage of 
native adoptive parents — adoptive parents of native origin — 
there may well be a role for a non-profit agency to become 
involved in working with the government to seek out adoptive 
parents of native origin. And I think we’d be prepared to look 
quite positively at that. 
 
But with respect to the government’s agenda, Mr. Speaker, 
which is essentially to establish two or three private agencies in 
the province of Saskatchewan to, in effect, run infant adoption 
services in this province and take that service out of the 
Department of Social Services, we fail to see, Mr. Speaker, how 
that will be in either the best interests of the adoptive parents, 
the birth parents, or the children concerned. And I want to 
spend just two or three minutes explaining why I believe that to 
be the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services himself 
has acknowledged that these private agencies will be charging 
fees. First of all, by way of the legislation, there will be a 
charge for the legal services that both the birth parent and the 
adoptive parent require before the adoption order can be 
completed. And those services will be charged for, Mr. Speaker, 
and in the past the Department of Social Services has provided 
legal services free of charge. Now what the Minister of Social 
Services is proposing is that the adoptive parent or the birth 
parent pay for those legal charges themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services has 
acknowledged that the agencies themselves will likely have to 
charge fees. It’s very clear that he does not intend to fully fund 
these agencies in the long term, Mr. Speaker, and therefore 
these agencies will need to charge parents fees to supplement 
any funding that they get from the Department of Social 
Services. And those fees, between the legal fees and the agency 
fees, we could easily be talking about charges in the range of 
hundreds of dollars — several hundreds of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I believe, and members on this side of the House believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that it should be a basic principle in this province 
that adoptions are carried out on the basis of the family’s fitness 
to adopt a child, whether they will provide a good home for that 
child, and should have nothing to do with whether or not that 
family has the ability to pay the fees in order to adopt the child. 
So we stand four-square against fees for adoption. We’re 
against legal fees for adoption. We’re against agency fees for 
adoptions, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 23, 1989 

355 
 

The second point and the final point I want to make, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to this Bill and with respect to private 
agencies, is that we fear that the private agencies will create an 
inequitable system in this province with respect to adoptions 
and waiting lists for adoptions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minster is talking about establishing two or three private 
agencies in this province. Clearly those private agencies will be 
in the urban centres. They’ll likely be located in Regina and 
Saskatoon. Right now, Mr. Speaker, someone who wants to go 
on the waiting list to adopt an infant child in this province can 
walk into the Social Services office in La Ronge or in Swift 
Current or in Prince Albert or in a remote area of rural 
Saskatchewan, can go to their nearest local office, and they can 
be placed on the waiting list to adopt an infant child from that 
local office of the Department of Social Services. 
 
Now that same prospective adoptive parent will have to travel 
to Saskatoon or Regina to be put on the waiting list, Mr. 
Speaker. It may be months before they find out where the 
private adoption agency is, how they can get on the waiting list. 
Under the system that the Minister of Social Services is 
proposing to set up, people in northern Saskatchewan and 
people in rural Saskatchewan will not have equal access to 
adoption services as will people in Saskatoon and Regina. And I 
predict that the large number of people at the top of the waiting 
lists of these private agencies will be from Regina and 
Saskatoon, and that is unfair to the people of Saskatchewan as a 
whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are two of our major objections to this Bill. I’ll be 
outlining a number of other objections when I speak on the Bill 
again next week, and at this point, Mr. Speaker, I will move to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1200) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be back in 
this debate. I left off yesterday, Mr. Speaker, saying that we 
wanted to review the words of the minister yesterday when he 
introduced the Bill, and we have done that. And I must say that 
we didn’t miss anything when we said it was very short and 
didn’t deal with privatization in any meaningful way. 
 
I want to take some time to review the remarks that I made 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and then talk about some of the 
problems that we see with the Bill directly. 
 
I want to say again that the minister’s speech was very vague 
and outlined very little about what privatization will do to the 
province of Saskatchewan, or in fact what it  

has done in the past five or six years since the privatization 
process has been in place here in the province. 
 
I say to you that, as well, the credibility of the government is at 
stake in privatization because they keep redefining where 
privatization makes sense. A year ago, the Premier of the 
province said that none of the utilities, particularly SaskPower 
would not be privatized. He gave that commitment to the people 
of the province. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure 
you’re aware, he broke his word and trust to the people of the 
province. I would use stronger language, if it were allowed in 
the House, Mr. Speaker, but it was a falsehood when the 
Premier said that he would not privatize the utilities and 
SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to quote to you from November 14 
of 1987, in a story carried in the Leader-Post where the Premier 
is quoted as saying . . . when asked what corporations could be 
sold, the Premier said: 
 

The only ones not being considered are SaskPower, the 
utility portions of SaskTel, and the automobile accident 
insurance fund which is administered by SGI. 
 

That’s a commitment; that is a commitment that he gave, not 
only to the people of the province but to the press. And if Mr. 
Eisler is in the gallery, I’m sure he knows that he was misled by 
the Premier, because we have the Premier a short few months 
later, splitting off a section of SaskPower and renaming it 
SaskEnergy and then privatizing it, and trying to make the 
people believe — the farmers who will have to pay higher rates, 
and the home owners who will have to pay higher rates as a 
result — believe that it’s no longer a utility. 
 
What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in their own report in 
1987, and I quote: 
 

The corporation began operating the natural gas utility in 
1952 and by the end of 1984, 410 cities and towns and 
villages were being served. 
 

Their own report refers to it in 1987 as a public utility. And 
now they’re trying to, because the politics dictates them to do it, 
to redefine it as no utility. This, after they’ve lined the pockets 
of many of their friends by selling off the gas fields; this, they 
intend to fill their pockets further by getting rid of the natural 
gas side of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower by any other name — call it what you 
want — is still SaskPower. It’s still a utility. It’s still a utility 
that was built by the people of the province to provide a service 
to them at a very reasonable rate, and that’s why gas and 
electrical charges in this province have been the lowest in 
Canada, bar none — the lowest in Canada. 
 
That’s why in a privatized form SaskPower, the energy side, 
will have to increase rates. There’s no other way of looking at it 
because if you’re going to allow for profits on shares, profits to 
out-of-province companies, then rates  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

356 
 

have to go up. There’s no other way to look at it. 
 
And every person in this province who will be getting power 
bills, gas bills, and see the increase going up, will have to say 
that this government has made a mistake, that they’ve gone too 
far. I say here, Mr. Speaker, there’s no argument here that there 
is a role to play in this province by the private sector. The 
private sector flourished in the 1970s under a New Democratic 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, investment in the 
province in the last three or four years of our government — 
’79, ’80, ’81 — total investment was right around $4 billion or 
over during that time period. That has in fact gone down. 
Private sector investment in this province is not going up under 
the Conservative government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Going under, you’re right. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, it’s a good point, going under is 
right. If you look at the number of foreclosures in this province 
on small business, that has increased from about 400 in 1981 to 
over 1,200 in the last year we have the numbers, in 1987; 1,200 
bankruptcies — three times as many bankruptcies under this 
free enterprise government as was the case under the New 
Democratic government which this government would have you 
believe is opposed to farmers and free enterprise. If the numbers 
simply don’t dictate that there is any truth in that, then why 
would we expect there be truth in anything this government 
says? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The record is clear that in almost every 
privatization that has gone on we have heard the words of the 
government, and the minister again today, promising last year 
we would not lose jobs by privatizing parts of SMDC, 
privatizing that corporation; and then today him standing in the 
House saying, well we didn’t know that circumstances would 
change, and yes in fact, jobs are being lost as a result of 
privatization. 
 
We saw privatization in the highways — 400 employees being 
laid off. We see it with the farm equity purchase program that 
will have out-of-province money buying up farm land and 
leasing it back to farms. 
 
But the minister yesterday says, you don’t have to worry, 
farmers, because we’re going to give you jobs mowing the 
ditches of the highways. That’s what we’re going to do. You 
don’t have to worry about losing your farm. Don’t worry, the 
Premier says, about the fact that his corporation and his lawyers 
are foreclosing on over 1,000 farmers; has legal actions and 
foreclosures on over 1,000 farmers. That’s no problem, no 
problem at all that his lawyers that he hires have people in court 
this very day, or actions before the courts this very day, forcing 
farm families off the land. 
 
The minister of piratization says, don’t worry, there’s no 
problem there because we have another aspect of privatization 
that takes jobs away from people who are  

mowing the roads and gives it to our farmers. I say this is a 
flawed economic development because the farmers don’t want 
to mow the ditches. That’s not what they’re trained to do; that’s 
not what they’re experts at. What they want to do is grow 
wheat, which they did in the 1970s, and all the way back to the 
last time we had a Conservative government in the 1930s when 
that government did nothing to keep the farmers on the land, 
and at that time we had an exodus such that we haven’t seen 
until this year. 
 
But I say to you that it’s a flawed economic strategy because it 
dictates that what was done by previous governments and their 
supporters over the last 50 years, the building of a province that 
was based on co-operation, a society that was built on private 
sector and public sector working together to create jobs, keep 
the unemployment rate low, has been thrown out the window. 
And I want to say very clearly that when we look at what is 
happening in the province, it’s a sad case. 
 
And I think of the Premier of this province as a — when he 
took over — a young man. I compare him to a young farmer 
taking over a farm that is fully paid for. The father has left him 
a large farm, money in the bank, some employees working for 
the farmer. And we have the Premier — or this young farmer — 
going away to university, let’s say an American university. 
 
He comes back with all sorts of bright ideas about what his 
father had done wrong on the farm. No concept that the father 
had built the farm over 50 years with his father. Everything’s 
paid for; things are running along all right. And this young guy 
comes back to the farm — the Premier of the province comes 
back — he’s got a degree, a doctorate in economics. He’s going 
to tell everyone that what they have done for 50 years is wrong, 
on the farm. 
 
So he brings in a concept of agriculture from a foreign land, a 
different place that doesn’t fit the situation, and he starts 
implementing his program. Open for big business, he says. And 
that fails. And the economy starts going down, and the farmer 
starts losing money. And he starts borrowing more and more 
money to keep things flowing along because he wants to keep 
going to Hawaii in the winter the way his father was able to 
afford to do, and he wants to continue having parties with his 
friends. 
 
And before you know it, the banks won’t lend him any more 
money. And then he says, well what we have to do is another 
new initiative. We have to start selling some of the farm 
because we can’t borrow any more money, so let’s sell a quarter 
this year and a quarter next year. And that’s what he does, and 
he starts selling off the assets. 
 
And soon the farm is almost gone, a few assets left. And you 
have this now older, balding farmer who says to himself, what 
do I do to cover up all my mistakes? What do I do? How can I 
avoid the criticism of my neighbours who are now laughing at 
me? How do I avoid that the Toronto Globe and Mail is running 
cartoons where they have an outline of the province with a for 
sale sign in the middle. What does he say? Well, I’ll throw a big 
party. I’ll spend my last money on a big party. Celebrate! And 
maybe my neighbours won’t notice, because I’ll invite them in 
and we’ll have drinks and we’ll have a big party  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

357 
 

with the last few dollars I have. 
 
And his friends say to him, don’t do that. You’re in no position 
to have a big party. You’re going broke. You have no money 
left. Take that money and wisely spend it to try to rebuild the 
province, or to rebuild your farm. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that is where we’re at in this province, 
with privatization. This is no flashy new idea that the TV ads 
are showing, that somehow the province is vibrant and moving. 
There’s not one single economic indicator that would prove that 
to be true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Even today in the House, the Minister of 
Education tried to explain why the drop-out of high schools was 
50 per cent higher than when he became the minister. And he 
listed out a litany of programs that he had introduced: 
NORTEP, SUNTEP, all these programs that he was bringing in 
to innovatively change education. The only thing he didn’t say, 
they were all NDP programs. He didn’t say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The only other thing that he didn’t say, 
Mr. Speaker, and here again the trust factor, is the fact that he 
did not tell you that he had underfunded these programs and 
they were in large part due and responsible for young people 
not staying in school. 
 
But when young people look for jobs, and look for jobs that are 
disappearing because of privatization, they have little hope, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province any more. That’s why, of the 17 per 
cent of those young people under the age of 25 who are 
unemployed, many of them are leaving the province to look in 
Ontario, where there’s a different government that may have 
ideas of how to stimulate the economy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Or British Columbia; dare I say British 
Columbia, where there is some development going on, even 
more than there is here. Even that right-wing government has 
more ideas of how to keep people working. 
 
But they’re leaving this province at a rate of 6,000 people a 
month. That’s a record. I looked back in the records to the last 
time we had massive out-migration. It was back in the 1930s 
when we had a previous Conservative government. Even at that 
time the record of 6,000 a month is not there. 
 
Now if you look back to the 1970s when the population was 
growing — the members like to talk about this — but in 1976 
the population grew by, not 1,000 or 2,000, but 14,000 people 
in 1976. People were coming to the province. They were 
coming home from Calgary, where they had gone to work in the 
late ’60s, and they were coming back to run the farm. And I say 
it’s sad to see young farmers, some of them not so young any 
more, being forced off the land by this government and lack of 
policies and its lack of standing up to the federal  

government demanding those things that should be done in this 
province. 
 
Now obviously not all of it’s due to privatization. Not every job 
that is being lost and every farmer that’s going out of business 
is a loss as a result of privatization. But the people of the 
province now know that there is a direct link, that there’s a 
linkage between the Conservatives’ idea of privatization which 
came in right after open for big business failed, that now they 
have two records to deal with — one, the first one, the new idea 
that big business was just going to come here and set up new 
businesses. That didn’t work. Now we have a concept that we 
sell off all our assets and that big business comes and buys it up 
and they are going to prepare jobs for the people of the 
province. 
 
(1215) 
 
Well it’s now proven that that isn’t working either. 
Unemployment in this province, which ran around 3 and 4, and 
when we left office it was a little over 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
has risen to over 9 per cent after five years of privatization. And 
these people say to you that privatization, Tory style, is 
working, and working well. I say to you there’s no possible way 
that this lack of imagination, lack of creativity, the belief that 50 
years of struggle and turmoil and toil are being thrown out the 
window and we’re going to bring something from Maggie 
Thatcher’s government and implement it in Saskatchewan, that 
it’s going to work. This is a flawed idea of economic 
development. A flawed idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, use the examples, use the 
examples. And the member from Weyburn talks about 
privatization, and I could talk about privatization, Tory style, 
even in his own town where people line their pockets, where 
people line their pockets at the expense of the taxpayers, but I’ll 
talk about that another day. I’ll talk about that another day. 
 
I want to say that there are members of the Conservative Party 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — There are no examples. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh there are many examples. I could use 
the example of Moose Jaw, and my friend from Moose Jaw 
North will be referring to that later in the debate, where 
buildings are sold, where people . . . Buildings — now get this: 
buildings being sold to strong Conservative members; in fact, 
spouses of people who nominate Tory candidates being sold 
buildings much below the market value and then half of the 
building being leased back to the power corporation at a higher 
rate than they had been renting it before it was sold. 
 
And the member from Weyburn says there’s no examples. 
There’s no examples. Yes, I tell you that every instance where 
we have these Tories filling their pockets we are going to be 
exposing as part of the privatization program of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 23, 1989 

358 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — But let’s look at the biggest give-away of 
all. And I spent a few moments on it yesterday, but I want to go 
back to it, and that is the Weyerhaeuser — the jewel in the 
crown of the Tory privatization act of this province. 
 
This is a company that these wizards, I say again, of economic 
development chose to sell when pulp was at its lowest level in 
the very cyclical market that everyone understands who has 
ever been involved in selling pulp. Now what did they do? They 
took a corporation that had been making money but, because of 
the drop in the pulp price, began losing some money. And they 
said, look, this pulp mill is losing money; we’ve got to sell it. 
And they did, and they sold it, and what happened to that 
corporation? What happened to that corporation? And the 
members shout from their seats — the member from Meadow 
Lake who, during the debate, during the debate . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You were a joke to the industry. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we’ll see who’s a joke to the 
industry when we get done. But I want to say to you that this 
corporation purchased an asset of this province which included 
the 7 million acres of forest land, a pulp mill, a chemical plant 
in Saskatoon, and a saw mill in Big River. And what did they 
pay for it? They promised that they would pay for this plant 248 
million if they made a profit of over 14 per cent. Not $1 down, 
not $1 down, a guaranteed interest rate by the province of eight 
and a half per cent, and for that they got all of those assets. 
 
All of the warning signals were there: the price of pulp had 
already started to go up when we were debating it in the House. 
Everyone predicted, Allan Blakeney predicted the price of pulp 
absolutely to the number of where it would go within the next 
year, and it’s there now. 
 
Why do you suppose the profit of Weyerhaeuser international 
went from 120 million in 1985 to over 500 million in 1987? 
There’s a reason for that. Go to the people who run that plant 
today and ask them what they changed, what they changed 
within that pulp plant to make it productive. Did they change 
the people? No, they didn’t; they didn’t change the people. Did 
they change the equipment and buy new equipment and put into 
that plant? No, they didn’t. Go and ask what has changed in that 
plant and why they’re making enormous profits today, and 
they’ll tell you, the only single reason is the price of pulp has 
gone up. That’s the only reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I say, in every other industry that 
they have privatized, they pick the very worst time to sell. 
They’re talking about selling the potash corporation now, and 
how much are they valuing the potash mines at? Well the 
Premier of the province is saying something below $1 billion; 
this is what he’s saying he’s going to sell it for. And that may 
have been what it was worth a year or two ago when the price 
of potash was lower than it is today, but the experts who know 
potash say the corporation is worth $2 billion. 
 
Well why would a government sell off an asset that’s  

worth 2 billion for 1 billion? These are the shrewd business 
people of Saskatchewan. And then we wonder why the deficit 
of the province has gone from 2.5 billion in the Crowns to over 
12 billion, or close to 12 billion in total in this province. 
 
At every turn we’ve made business deals that have been a 
disaster for the people of this province — have been a disaster. 
Unemployment rates have gone up. The debt has sky-rocketed. 
And what about services? 
 
I want to say to you that the minister yesterday neglected to talk 
about the few of the privatizations that have taken place that I 
think the people of this province know about. The most 
interesting and debatable issue of privatization to this point has 
been the privatizing of the dental program. That’s the one that 
most people know about and talk about. The one they want to 
talk about that is going to be in Bill form is privatizing 
SaskPower. That will be the big issue this year. But of the last 
privatizations that went on of the hundreds that have taken 
place, the dental program is the most talked about when I go 
around. 
 
Well it’s interesting that not one word — not one word — was 
mentioned by the minister when he talked about the advantages 
of privatization. The biggest issue in the province that people 
talk about when it comes to privatization was left out of the 
speech. Now why is that? Why did he do that? Well I’ll tell you 
why he wouldn’t do it is because it is so unpopular that this 
government is embarrassed about that privatization. They’re 
embarrassed about it. 
 
But are they going to stop privatizing health? Is that their 
thought? I mean, they are working with Oliver Letwin and 
people like that who come here from other places and talk to 
them behind closed doors about how to privatize. And Oliver 
Letwin will tell them that — and has told them, I understand — 
that the way they went about privatizing the dental plan was one 
of the worst examples that he has ever seen. He says: you don’t 
do it that way. You don’t do it that way. You got to be 
smoother. You got to con the people more. You got to work 
slower. Privatize some other things first and then work your 
way at health once you soften people up. 
 
He says: you made a big mistake, now quit talking about it — 
and what you do is you run these flashy ads. You don’t mention 
the dental plan. Don’t ever mention that in those expensive ads 
that the taxpayers are paying for. Never mention, in your 
millions of dollars you’re spending on advertising, anything 
about the dental plan. Don’t do that because the people may 
forget your blunder and your stupidity when you went about 
and the way you did it. 
 
And the member from Regina South knows full well that many 
of his constituents are telling him that, that you guys blundered. 
So the strategy of Oliver Letwin and the ad companies, the . . . 
Dome Advertising is saying, let’s get about $20 million 
together and we’ll run these slick TV ads that talk about 
something that has no relevance to what the people are 
concerned about with privatization. 
 
For one, don’t mention the drug plan in your million dollar ad 
campaign, and for sure don’t talk about  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

359 
 

SaskPower being privatized. Don’t talk about the big ones. And 
for sure, don’t follow on the stupidity of the Premier when he 
talked about the potash mines being sold to the government of 
communist China, because that is very unpopular, very 
unpopular, especially in the key seats that we have to win next 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other thing we’ll do, Mr. Speaker, 
the ad campaign says is find something that you can blame on 
the New Democratic Party — dig up some document from 
years ago that will embarrass the NDP. So they find a 
document, this brand-new document in a brown bag, and I’ve 
seen them around the building, trying to give it to the press — 
not this week, not last week, but since 1985 they’ve been trying 
to give it to the press. Schoenhals, you remember Schoenhals, 
the minister who was the minister privatizing Saskoil. If you 
read the Hansard, I think you might find this brilliant leak back 
in 1985 speeches given again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s four years old. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — That’s four years old now. And the press 
at that time were told about this very exciting, innovative idea 
the New Democratic Party had. This leak has been going on for 
four years. They pass it around to the press. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Then they say to . . . they can’t get one of 
the press gallery to print a story on it — not one of the press 
would print it. Nobody. Well they find this character in 
Saskatoon, Paul Jackson, former speech-writer for the Premier 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s still speech writing for him. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — He’s still speech writing for him, but he’s 
actually employed by the Star-Phoenix. And he writes a report 
about this leaked document that he had for four years while he 
worked in the Premier’s office that they couldn’t sell to the 
legitimate press. I’ve seem them around the building, Mr. 
Speaker, handing . . . these brown packages laying all over the 
place. It’s laughable, this document that is supposed to be a 
strategy for selling shares in Crown corporations by the New 
Democratic Party. I say to them, of course we had discussions 
about selling all sorts of things, because we were always 
defining the line where the private sector and public sector 
would be involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I want to say to you that it was clear. 
The line was absolutely clear. 
 
In terms of the utilities, SaskPower, SaskTel, and that portion of 
SGI, the auto fund, were sacred ground. We would not duck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In the resource sector, we believed  

we needed a window in the industry and we should have a 
presence in oil, in the uranium, as well as potash, and we did. 
That was our strategy. And in many other areas where the 
private sector didn’t want to get involved, but we felt that 
development should take place, we got involved with private 
sector and joint ventures or went directly with the co-op 
movement and set them up. 
 
Our record on Crown corporations and development of this 
province is so clear as to be indisputable. We knew where we 
were going and we know where we’re going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And it worked very well. The 
unemployment was low, there was no debt, and we has services 
of all kinds that were nowhere else to be found in the world — 
they were here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But now we have this leaked document, 
this famous leaked document that has been slipped to the press. 
A brown package here or one over here. It didn’t work. It didn’t 
work. 
 
Well then they said to themselves, it’s not selling to the press. 
They’re smarter than that, to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Except for Jackson. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Except for Jackson, Paul Jackson, the 
former speech-writer for the Premier. He put something in the 
Star-Phoenix, and none of the other press still picked it up, and 
they kept giving out brown packages all over the place. And it 
still didn’t sell. 
 
So then they’ve decided, well we’ve got to run ads; we’ve got 
to run some ads. We’ve got to run some ads, and we’ll take the 
taxpayers’ money and we’ll run ads about this leaked 
document. And we’ll say that we won’t call it government ads, 
we’ll call them PC ads and we’ll pay for them out of the party. 
But you know how that works with Dome Advertising, who has 
millions of dollars of contracts — millions of dollars of 
contracts — with this government. 
 
Do you really believe that these ads are paid for by the PC 
Party? Tens of thousands of dollars? These ads are, I believe, 
paid for indirectly by the people of the province. Very much so. 
 
So I say to you that this leaked document, this leaked document 
which is so exciting that you couldn’t sell to the press in four 
years, you’re now resorting to the taxpayers of the province to 
sell it for you. 
 
And it’s shameful because why are you doing it? Why are you 
running these ads? Did these ads have anything to do with 
privatization that is going on in this province? Does it have 
anything to do with the SaskPower that we’re going to be 
privatizing here in this province in a few months? Does it have 
anything to do with privatizing the dental plan? Not a thing. 
Does it have anything to do with privatizing SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), which is the first step in getting rid of 
the auto fund? Not  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

360 
 

anything at all, Mr. Speaker. This is an attempt to divert the 
people’s attention away from 1989 back to the 1970s. Why 
would they do that? Why would this government that’s full of 
new ideas and excited about the future want to talk about the 
1970s? Why would they want to do that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why they would want to do that is because they’re 
embarrassed about the fact that they started down a road that 
isn’t working. They’re like the young farmer who came back to 
take over his family’s farm — all paid for — and got into 
trouble and started selling it off, running up debt. 
 
(1230) 
 
And in the end they said, what are we going to do to get off this 
image that we have that we can’t do anything right? Well we’re 
going to do some advertising and throw a big birthday party, 
and maybe people won’t notice what we’ve done. Well I tell 
you, it is not working. It isn’t working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The people of this province know full 
well your record on privatization. They know that it isn’t true. 
They know that you promised not to privatize SaskPower and 
you’re now doing it. And the Minister of . . . the Deputy 
Premier knows full well — and I have quotes from him as well, 
when he said that he would not be privatizing SaskPower — in 
the House — after the Premier denied. Now one of two things 
went on there. Either the Premier misled the House and his 
friend and colleague and desk mate, or there’s a 
misinterpretation of facts. Like, either it’s for sale to the private 
sector or it isn’t. Obviously, the truth is now known that they 
misled the House — very directly and deliberately misled the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order order. I’m sure the 
hon. member knows that that type of accusation is not 
acceptable, and I would ask him to rise and withdraw and 
apologize now. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a difficult time 
withdrawing the remarks, because I’ve quoted from Hansard 
where the minister has said that he would not privatize . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. I 
don’t intend to get into debate with the hon. member, but the 
rules of the House have been long-standing, and an accusation 
of any member deliberately misleading the House is not 
acceptable, and the hon. member knows that. And I would ask 
him to withdraw that remark. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well if I could, Mr. Speaker, I’d like you 
to listen to this quote and then think about reality and see 
whether or not the House was misled. 
 
On November 14, the Leader-Post carries the story about 
SaskPower and the fact that the government is not going to 
privatize SaskPower. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m afraid I’m going to once more have to ask 
the hon. member, and he knows, and I know he  

knows, that the term “deliberately” — order, order, order, order, 
order, order — that the term “deliberately mislead” has not been 
allowed and traditionally not been allowed and is part of the 
rules of our Chamber, part of the rules of the Chamber. And 
therefore I will once more ask the hon. member to withdraw 
those remarks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I really can’t understand what’s 
objectionable about quoting from Hansard and making the 
interpretation, but I will withdraw the words of “deliberately 
attempted to mislead the House,” but I will have to insist that he 
attempted to mislead the House because I firmly believe that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’m afraid that the hon. member has not really 
made a significant change in his wording. “He attempted to 
mislead” and “deliberately misled” is essentially the same, and 
therefore I once more ask the hon. member, with all due respect, 
to withdraw those words and continue with the debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I will of necessity withdraw 
the remark so that I can complete my comments because I think 
they’re important to get on the record today because we’re 
dealing with Bill 1, and I’m supposed to be speaking on Bill 1 
on privatization. I would withdraw those remarks. 
 
But I want to say that I really, really have a difficult time if I 
can’t say that the minister attempted to mislead the House 
because I really believe that he did — I believe that he did. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I think that you have 
withdrawn your remarks as requested, and that’s appreciated. 
And I don’t think you should enter any more debate on that 
particular subject of . . . you can say attempt and this sort of 
thing. This is the rule; it’s been satisfied now, and I just ask you 
to continue in debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the members opposite 
that the quote that I’m going to read, and I’ve read before, 
obviously the minister and Premier were misleading the public. 
There’s no doubt about it. There can be no doubt. How can you 
possibly say that you’re not going to privatize SaskPower and 
the utilities and then set out to privatize the natural gas of the 
province and the distribution system? That is misleading the 
public. 
 
And I want to say to you that it is very, very important that the 
public of the province know, and the press know, that this kind 
of misleading of the public goes on day after day after day on 
every issue that we can deal with. We can’t get straight 
answers, and when we get answers, you can’t believe them. 
You can’t believe what they say. 
 
They get up and say in their speeches, they’re not going to 
privatize the natural gas in SaskPower and then a year later they 
privatize them. And this year they say they’re not going to 
privatize the auto fund. Well who would believe that next year, 
if they’re re-elected, they won’t get around to privatizing the 
auto fund? Who would believe it, given their history? They 
promised not to privatize health care; they promised that. And 
they promised not to  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

361 
 

privatize health care and then end up privatizing important 
sections of the health care system. 
 
So I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that all is not bad about 
privatization, that there are some people who benefit. There are 
people who benefit. The member from Moose Jaw North will 
explain to you how Keith Parker, the member that he defeated, 
benefitted. He benefitted. He has a big job with the liquor 
commission, I understand. I might be wrong on that. Members 
may want to get up — the member for Regina South may want 
to get up and dispute that Keith Parker works for the 
Government of Saskatchewan in the Liquor Board commission. 
 
Now how did he get the job? Did he compete like other 
graduates from university to get this high paid job? Obviously 
not. There’s no work for people who go through the normal 
channels in this province any more. You’ve got to be a friend of 
the Tory party or a defeated candidate or a previous MLA. 
 
Now there’s been a big debate about who works for the 
government. The Tories would have you believe, when we ask 
questions about all these pop-em-up ministers who, you defeat 
them and then they get a job with the government — you knock 
them down again and then they get even a bigger job — that 
this is somehow indicative of what has gone on in the past. Well 
the difference is that when our members become members of 
the legislature, they move out of the ranks of government, 
working for the government, into these benches, not the reverse. 
That’s quite a difference. 
 
I want to say as well that philosophically we believe in a mixed 
economy. We believe that some people should work for the 
government. This is the difference. It would be normal . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — It would be perfectly normal, it would be 
perfectly normal for New Democrats to work for the 
government, because they believe in a mixed economy. Let’s 
say you have a third by co-ops, a third by private, a third by 
government. When we believe in that, a third of the NDP 
throughout the province somehow should be involved in the 
government. 
 
What I find hypocritical is this. What I find hypocritical is this. 
We have these birds over there talking about how government 
is bad; how, given a chance, you should privatize and get the 
highway workers back working in the private sector and the 
dental technicians should work in the dental office. But what do 
they do when they get defeated? Do they go start up a small 
business entrepreneur and get out there and compete? What do 
they do? 
 
What does Paul Schoenhals do? Does he go and set up a 
consulting firm and hire staff and go out and compete like 
ordinary people would? What does he do? He has no experience 
in potash, zero experience in potash. Where does he end up? 
Does he start out mining, competing for a job, and then work 
his way up the ladder? This defeated cabinet minister ends up at 
the top. 

Now you can say that this is not hypocrisy, but many people in 
the province believe very much — and I’m sure the member 
from Regina South would agree — that when he’s defeated that 
he will have the honour to go back to the private sector and not 
get a job with the government. He’ll accept that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But I say to you, the list is very long, the 
list is long of defeated candidates and ministers and MLAs and 
MPs who have moved directly from defeat to the public trough, 
at big money. 
 
The member from Wascana, who worked for a Crown 
corporation, should know better. The member from Regina 
Wascana would have you believe that only lazy people work for 
Crown corporations or governments. Well I say, where did you 
get your job? Where did you work? And I say that probably 
when you’re defeated, probably . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I worked as a free-lance commentator 
under contracts for 21 years. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member for Regina Wascana says 
that he’s a free-lance reporter. Well I’ll tell you, he will be back 
to that in the very near future if we have an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say a few words about 
advertising and the waste and mismanagement that is involved 
as well with privatization, because this is a key that many 
people are talking about. And we will be bringing this up over 
and over again, the tens of millions of dollars spent on 
advertising by this government, and it’s directly linked to 
privatization. 
 
Anyone who’s been watching TV lately will have watched the 
glitzy ads that are produced by people who are involved with 
the Conservative Party and run their ad campaigns at election 
time, running these glitzy ads that gloss over what is really 
happening in the province. 
 
I say again, Mr. Speaker, that this money is being wasted, being 
wasted when in fact it should be spent on education for young 
people so that the drop-out rate wouldn’t be 50 per cent higher 
than it was when these people took over. It should be spent on 
such things as transportation subsidies for Northerners who 
interestingly enough, get their liquor subsidized by the 
government but not their milk and potatoes and fresh 
vegetables. That’s an interesting proposition of privatization. 
 
And I want to say to you that my final remarks will be once 
again about the heritage of this province. And in conclusion, I 
want to say this about Saskatchewan and where it has come 
from. I want to refer back to my family who are not political at 
all. My mother and father were not involved in any political 
party, and I don’t think that my grandparents were either. 
  



 
March 23, 1989 

362 
 

Now the member from Regina South can laugh about that from 
his desk, but I say to you this — that the people who came to 
this province tried the private operation. It was tried before the 
Depression in 1929. The people who came here believed that 
they needed to work together. The province was not easy to get 
along with; the climate was tough; there was wide distances 
between neighbours. They had to get together to build their 
houses and homes, schools and churches. That’s what they did. 
And there was created in this province a co-operative system 
that is based in 50 or 60 or 70 or 80 years of heritage. It wasn’t 
an idea that was brought here; it was created out of necessity. 
 
Agrarian socialism was created here because it was necessary to 
get along in order to survive. I say to you that the hated 
railways at the time were a problem for the people. The grain 
exchange was a big problem for the farmers. They don’t want to 
go back to the free grain exchange, as these people would have 
them. They got rid of that. They set up the wheat board and the 
wheat pools. 
 
And when they needed power in rural Saskatchewan . . . and the 
member from Morse will have many of his supporters who will 
understand how SaskPower was created. The people in that area 
came to the government and asked them to set up a Crown 
corporation to deliver power. And they did. And the farmers 
and the farm families from the towns got together and actually 
helped the power company set the poles in the ground, and we 
built a power corporation that was second to none anywhere in 
the world. 
 
And we set up a medicare system, not because the government 
went out and pushed medicare down people’s throats. It was 
started in 1946 in the south-west corner of the province when 
region no. 1 was set up. Several R.M.s got together and hired a 
doctor. This was the beginning of medicare — people working 
for themselves together. And then medicare came because the 
government was pushed by the people to set up a medicare 
system. 
 
Even a political party came out of that group of people who 
started this province. The Liberals and Conservatives weren’t 
meeting the needs of the farmers and the working people, so 
they set up a progressive party that went on to be the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and later the NDP. 
 
(1245) 
 
So at every turn we’ve created a province that’s based on the 
mixed economy. It works. The simple fact is that in 1982 it was 
working. Housing was at great numbers. We were building 9 to 
10,000 houses a year. People were building in the province. The 
province was growing. The population was going up. 
 
Members shake their heads. They obviously can’t read. The 
statistics are clear. The statistics are clear; you can’t argue with 
them. House construction was around 10,000 units a year. The 
unemployment rate was about four and a half per cent. The debt 
was non-existent in the Consolidated Fund. In fact, your own 
report . . . and the  

minister of Finance from Kindersley will recognize that because 
he signed the document that said there was $139 million in the 
till the day he took over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now things weren’t perfect, things 
weren’t perfect. Obviously there was some unemployment and 
we would have wanted more wealth. But social programs were 
here second to none across Canada; this in a province that had 
few advantages over other provinces in Canada. 
 
And where have we gone? Where have we gone? Where have 
we gone? We have now become so bankrupt of ideas that we 
say that people who owned the pulp mill, the people who 
owned the pulp mill shouldn’t own it any more. We’ve got to 
get Americans in. And we brought in Americans to run our pulp 
mill and our forests in northern Saskatchewan. It was said, but 
we have a role to play for our people, and the minster referred 
to it yesterday — they’re important enough to cut the ditches 
along the highway; that’s their job. 
 
And when we want to run the power company, the people aren’t 
good enough to run it. They don’t know how, even though 
they’ve been running in and built it, and it’s been providing 
power for 50 years, that’s not good enough. Get rid of it; get rid 
of SaskPower. 
 
And the insurance company that was set up and operated by 
private insurance agents around the province and the people had 
control through their government, that’s not good enough. 
 
So the idea isn’t that we should have everything in government 
hands, nor did we. Our record was clear. We had a flourishing 
private sector, flourishing Crown sector, and the co-operative 
movement was working. Interesting that we have for the first 
time, no minister of co-ops in this Assembly, but for the first 
time we have a minister of privatization — first time. That tells 
you something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — That tells you we’re putting our eggs all 
in one basket, not that that basket is bad because a private sector 
is important and we believed in that. But the simple fact is that 
it’s a recipe for disaster in the economy of Saskatchewan, and 
the previous five years are proof of it. 
 
We don’t have to do any more to know that we’ve gone too far. 
That’s our point. Our point is not that everything should be 
owned by the government or everything owned by the private 
sector, but a mixed economy working together to bring about an 
economic structure that will provide services for the people. 
 
But the idea of hiding behind the skirts of Maggie Thatcher 
when you have no ideas of your own, when you have no ideas 
of your own, and implementing programs directly from Great 
Britain and England and expecting them to work here, is not an 
answer, nor is it a new idea. This idea is a century old — a 
century old. It was kicked out. It has been modified, and we’ve 
built a better system,  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

363 
 

and you people who want to march back to the past are going to 
have to repeat all of those problems and all of those errors that 
had to be lived through by previous generations. 
 
So I say to you in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting 
the Bill, and in fact, will be working hard to see its defeat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is a proud day for the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
because this Act is one of the proudest pieces of legislation that 
has ever come before us. 
 
I call it proud, Mr. Speaker, because it reflects and promotes so 
much of what this province is about, so much of our history, 
and so much of the essential meaning of our citizenship in a 
land which was born through the enterprise and will of its 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation is one great stage in the 
historic development of Saskatchewan. It is a natural 
progression of our economic and social development from the 
time we were a beginning province through to the 21st century. 
An understanding of this, Mr. Speaker, will help members 
opposite understand why the people of Saskatchewan are so 
supportive of the public participation policy of this government 
as embodied in this legislation. 
 
I urge the members to reflect on our history — not with a 
jaundiced, partisan eye that they seem so possessed of, but with 
a non-partisan, interested examination. They will see that we 
have evolved from a purely aboriginal society to one engaged in 
moderate trade with the outside world. And in that first 
transition from isolation to a wider perspective, the very root of 
our economic history was born, and that strong route is trade. 
 
The pioneers came to this territory and, without government, 
imposed structures. They worked hard, worked hard, and in 
co-operation with their neighbours, and they built themselves 
farms and towns and schools and growing communities with 
hope for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as those communities grew, so did the complexity 
of their relationships with the outside world. And in dealing 
with those complexities, and in order to have some security in 
their communities, they built institutions such as the credit 
unions and the co-operatives. And members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, had better not be quite so hot-tongued on this subject 
as they (are) wont to be. 
 
The fact is, I believe the first co-operative legislation in this 
province was passed in its first year as a province, 1905. At that 
time no one had even heard of the CCF, let alone the labour 
NDP. It was people like those who sit on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, who started co-ops and credit unions, and that 
should be reflected clearly and unequivocally on the record. 
 
They built these institutions because they wanted growth. They 
wanted to maintain opportunities for their families.  

They wanted to build their communities in the most effective 
ways possible, and the co-operative movement provided such 
tools. 
 
Our history also reflects, Mr. Speaker, that it was not the NDP 
that first saw Crown corporations as a useful means to help our 
economy grow and provide opportunities for our families. 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, that happened many decades before the 
NDP was even a twinkle in the eye of the Waffle movement, 
many decades before the CCF was imagined by the 
intellectuals. 
 
The first Crown corporations were created, Mr. Speaker, by 
people who were members of my political party, the 
Progressive Conservative Party. And indeed the big start to 
government working in the economy in this country came with 
the country’s first prime minister, a Conservative by the name 
of John A. Macdonald. 
 
In building our country, our provinces, and our communities, it 
served us well to have government build a national railway, to 
have government fund canals in the Maritimes, and build the St. 
Lawrence Seaway, through which our prairie farm families 
could transport their grain to market. 
 
And these were important and historic contributions of the 
Conservative Party, contributions through the use of 
government in the economy. And we have progressed ever 
more, Mr. Speaker, and the economy has continued to evolve. 
And this legislation is like those other major contributions; it 
represents a historic contribution to the development of our 
province. And I am pleased and proud, once again it is a 
Progressive Conservative government that is advancing the 
historic interests of this province and her people. 
 
And in each case, Mr. Speaker, you look at what happened and 
you ask: why? And in each case the answer is a straightforward 
and easily understood one. In each case the mechanisms that 
were chosen were those that suited the economic circumstances 
of the day, the historic needs of the province. When the country 
was barren of development and the people were subject to the 
whims and dictates of a people far removed and beyond the 
reach of ready communication, the people turned to the 
co-operative movement as the mainstay of their communities. 
 
And the co-operative movement and the credit union movement 
have tremendous importance to our people to this day for 
similar but slightly different reasons. And, Mr. Speaker, when 
massive amounts of capital were needed and there was no 
capital in the province to support the building of a railway or 
the construction of a seaway, it was capital beyond what we 
could even do with the co-operative structures, and in those 
economic circumstances the government was given the role to 
make the investment and take the province forward. 
 
And today Crown investment still has a similar, if somewhat 
different, role and that is reflected in the construction of the 
NewGrade heavy oil upgrader as a partnership between the 
government and the Co-op. But the central point, Mr. Speaker, 
the central point is that today we have come to a new reality, a 
new economic  
  



 
March 23, 1989 

364 
 

idea. And those new circumstances are best met with the 
participation of the people themselves, with their own stake in 
the future, and of the businesses they work for and obtain 
services from. The reason is there and it is clear. 
 
It is not, Mr. Speaker, as members opposite would have you 
believe. It is not a matter of ideology or partisanship beliefs, it 
is a matter of joining with the people and continuing to build 
our province, our communities, and our families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beseech the opposition to join with us, to join 
with the people and work with us in building this province. We 
are here approaching the year 2000, and it is time that all 
politicians came to the realization that the old dogma of the ’60s 
and ’70s will not work and has not worked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — As I’ve pointed out earlier, Mr. Speaker, 
the Conservative Party is no stranger to Crown corporations; we 
invented them. But the former NDP government did not 
understand the purpose of Crown corporations, and instead we 
had a government run amok, government buying out farmers 
and businesses and buying and buying and buying and buying 
for the sake of buying, and it just simply did not work. Mr. 
Speaker, I say to the members opposite, it is time for the 
government to build, not buy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to show the members opposite that 
the vote on this Bill and the issues I have been addressing are 
not partisan, and I make a heartfelt effort to do so. I give them 
the advice of their own compatriots, New Democrats. I quote 
the NDP’s own veteran strategist and former national party 
director, Gerald Kaplan, a fellow we see regularly representing 
the NDP on CTV’s Canada A.M., and I quote Mr. Kaplan: 
 

The field of public ownership and nationalization is 
outdated. In places where it’s been tried, it hasn’t worked 
with the success we thought it would. The market seems to 
be the best way of producing wealth, yet there’s no doubt 
that New Democrats are suspicious, even hostile to 
business. 
 

Gerry is telling his own party it is time to recognize the 
historical evolution of modern economies; that if this province 
is to diversify, to create jobs, to pay for health care and special 
programs if we are to accomplish the prosperity and security for 
our people, then we must go forward to the policies of public 
participation and not hang on to the outdated ideas of 
government ownership and control. This is not the time, Mr. 
Speaker. It is Gerald Kaplan of the New Democratic Party 
providing this informed advice to his compatriots. 
 
Another New Democrat also wishes his party to join with us in 
public participation and, by extension, in supporting this 
legislation. This is a man who understands the history of the 
NDP because he is an NDP historian, and members opposite 
will recognize his eminent name — Prof. Desmond Morton. 
Prof. Morton says, the NDP — and I quote: 
 

We must abandon the policy of mass public ownership in 
favour of alternative forms of worker involvement such as 
profit sharing and employee stock options. 
 

Profit sharing and employee stock, Mr. Speaker, are a big part 

of what this legislation is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more to say, but noting the time, I 
would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Resignation of Deputy Chairman of Committees 
 
The Speaker: — Prior to adjournment of the House, which I 
assume will be very, very shortly, I wish to inform the House 
that I have received a communication from the member for 
Rosthern which reads as follows: 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: I respectfully ask the Legislative 
Assembly to allow me to resign from the post of deputy 
chairman of committees, a post which I have felt greatly 
honoured to have occupied. Yours truly, the member from 
Rosthern. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Deputy Chairman of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, in light of 
your recent announcement, I would like to move, seconded by 
the Deputy Premier, and with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That Donald James Toth, Esq., member for the 
constituency of Moosomin be deputy chairman of 
committees of this Assembly. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that 
this House do now adjourn. Prior to that, I would like to, on 
behalf of this side of the House, wish the members of the 
opposition and the public of Saskatchewan a very happy and 
safe Easter weekend. And I now move to adjourn the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort, the Minister of 
Highways, has moved that this House do now adjourn. Before 
reporting the question, I would also like to join with him and 
wish all members of the Assembly a very, very pleasant Easter 
weekend. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would just like to join with Mr. Speaker 
and the member opposite to wish the staff and employees in the 
building, as well as the members of the government, and my 
colleagues as well, a happy Easter, and look forward to being 
back Tuesday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 p.m. 
 


