


















































May 9, 1989 Hansard


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 9, 1989 
 
 

1013 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the 
Assembly of 500 names of residents of Saskatchewan. These 
petitioners are urging the government not to privatize 
SaskPower but to keep this major public utility in the service of 
all Saskatchewan people. These petitioners are from the 
communities of Pense, Val Marie, Nipawin, Avonlea, Dysart, 
Porcupine Plain, Drinkwater, Lumsden, Odessa, Bethune, and 
Asquith. I so table. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to 
the Assembly of more than 1,000 residents of Saskatchewan. 
These petitioners are urging the government not to privatize 
SaskPower. They’re expressing concern about the fact that 
privatization will lead to higher utility rates. And, Mr. Speaker, 
these petitioners are from a number of communities and they 
include Tisdale, Porcupine Plain, Hudson Bay, Prairie River, 
Welwyn, and my own home community of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise also pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly from 500 residents of 
Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging the government not 
to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major public utility in 
the service of all Saskatchewan people. These petitioners are 
from a number of communities such as Lumsden, Martensville, 
Quinton, and Fairlight. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
on behalf of in excess of a thousand people in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, they exercised one of the most basic and ancient 
rights that people have, the right of petitioning their government 
in the hope that their government will listen. They ask that 
SaskPower not be privatized, and they ask that there be no 
sell-off. These people come from a variety of communities: 
Melville, Pelly, Martensville, Yorkton, Fort Qu’Appelle, and 
Lemberg. Indeed, the good folks from Lemberg ran out of paper 
and started gluing paper on. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 on 
behalf of a number of people from Balgonie, Lumsden, Earl 
Grey, and Fort Qu’Appelle, and just looking through here — 
farmers, working people, small-business people who are 
opposed to the government’s privatization of SaskPower — I 
want to say on behalf of these people that they’re indicating 
here their opposition to the privatization and are asking us to 
stop it on behalf of their children and grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I also rise 
pursuant to rule 11 on behalf of several hundred people to put 
before this House a petition which they have signed to urge the 
government of Saskatchewan not to privatize the  

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, SaskEnergy, because of their 
concern for the future of Saskatchewan and for the future of 
their children and their children’s children. 
 
I do so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these citizens who have 
signed this petition from Saskatoon, North Battleford, Yorkton, 
and Watrous. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly of several hundred people 
from across Saskatchewan, and, as has been indicated, the 
petition is urging the government not to privatize and sell off 
SaskPower. 
 
The petition that I will be submitting are for communities of 
Neilburg, Lloydminster, Langham, Saskatoon, and Wakaw. 
 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly of more than a thousand 
residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging the 
government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major 
public utility in the service for all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities, Mr. 
Speaker, including Regina, Mossbank, Watrous, and Rockglen. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule no. 
11 to lay on the table a petition containing 500 names. These 
people, who solemnly signed their names to this petition, in part 
say that the privatization of SaskPower will lead to higher 
utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will benefit only 
wealthy investors. And they conclude by petitioning: 
 

   . . and humbly pray that your honourable Assembly may be 
pleased to urge the provincial government to stop the 
privatization of SaskPower Corporation. 
 

These people come from many places in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, but just to give you a sample, they come from 
Coronach, Swift Current, Maple Creek, Broadview, Wilcox, 
and my own city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present the same petition from over 500 
Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, all of whom ask that this 
government stop its privatization of SaskPower and keep this 
basic utility in service for all Saskatchewan people. Among 
other places, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Duck 
Lake, Nipawin, Codette, Choiceland, Melfort, Mayview, 
Wakaw, Prince Albert, Kinistino, and others. And I’m very 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf, to present this petition to 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition on behalf of several hundred residents of 
Saskatchewan. The people from Saskatoon, Melville, Yorkton, 
Ernfold are urging the government not to privatize SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation). They  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1014 
 

want SPC to remain a public utility under the control of all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 as well, to the traditional and ancient right of 
Saskatchewan citizens to petition the government, and these 
petitioners are petitioning the government to ask them not to 
privatize Saskatchewan Power Corporation, because it’s in the 
public interest. They’re asking that the sale of SaskPower 
constitutes a sell-off of a major public utility which serves all of 
Saskatchewan people, and that the privatization of SaskPower 
will lead to higher utility rates for Saskatchewan people and 
benefit only wealthy investors. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, has been signed by residents from 
Bienfait, Estevan, Bulyea, Craven, Strasbourg, Hepburn, and 
Borden. I present this petition to the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule no. 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging the government not to sell off SaskPower, that it is not in 
the public interest to do so, and that we keep this major public 
utility owned and controlled by all of the people of 
Saskatchewan and in the service of all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners are from Coronach, Glenavon, Avonlea, 
Central Butte, Earl Grey, Rouleau, Truax, Saskatoon, Big 
Beaver, Semans, and from Regina as well. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I rise to 
present a petition of over 500 people from the communities of 
Wynyard, Glaslyn, Fairholme, Wadena, Yorkton, Radisson, 
Cudworth, Whitewood, Moosomin, and Saskatoon. This 
petition represents signatures of people of all political 
persuasions, Mr. Speaker, and they are all opposed to the 
privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 also, to present a petition to this Legislative Assembly from 
over a thousand residents of Saskatchewan from both urban and 
rural Saskatchewan, urging the government not to privatize 
SaskPower. 
 
There are many communities in this package of petitions, Mr. 
Speaker. Some of them are: Radville, Gravelbourg, Balcarres, 
Cadillac, Lumsden, Kinley, Lampman, Swift Current, Govan, 
and Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to present a petition on behalf of over a thousand people 
who, when given the right to partake in the democratic process, 
have signed their names to this petition opposing the sale of 
SaskPower, for many, many reasons. And these people are from 
Mossbank, Kyle, Watrous, Plunkett, and my home town of 
Young. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present a petition signed by over 500 residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan. In this petition they urge the 
government not to privatize SaskPower on a number of 
grounds, including that the  

privatization would benefit only wealthy investors. These 
signators are from many Saskatchewan communities including 
Halbrite, Weyburn, Shellbrook, Holbein, Weirdale, and 
Smeaton. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions with 600 names, asking 
the Government of Saskatchewan not to privatize SaskPower. 
These people, from all political stripes, want to ensure that 
SaskPower continues to be a public utility, owned by the people 
of Saskatchewan, owned by all residents of Saskatchewan. 
These 600 names are from the communities of Milestone, 
Punnichy, Raymore, Redvers, Hafford. It is my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to present these names on their behalf, and I salute 
these democratic efforts. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too join 
with my colleagues in rising to present to the legislature today a 
petition which calls for the government to stop the privatization 
of SaskPower or of any of its wholly owned subsidiaries, 
including SaskEnergy. 
 
The petitions presented today come from communities such as 
Saskatoon, Regina, Gravelbourg, Tisdale, Hepburn, Waldheim, 
and join in the democratic and ancient right of seeking redress 
from a government who is doing them grievous injury. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise under rule 
11 to present a petition, this petition from 500 Saskatchewan 
people who make their homes in Carrot River, White Fox, 
Nipawin, Codette, Aylsham, Choiceland, and Colonsay. And 
these 500 people join with the thousands of others across 
Saskatchewan, calling upon the government to cease their plans 
to privatize SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of 500 
Saskatchewan residents. These people are urging this 
government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep this utility 
to ensure a future for their children in Saskatchewan. 
 
Among the communities that are represented in this petition are 
Estevan, Landis, Herbert, Pangman, Lafleche, Kincaid, and 
Melaval. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly join my 
colleagues in rising pursuant to rule 11, presenting a petition to 
the Assembly of nearly 400 people, residents of Saskatchewan. 
These petitioners  . . or these petitions, rather, are all about the 
future for themselves, for their children and their 
grandchildren’s heritage, and these petitions are urging the 
government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major 
public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from a number of 
communities including Regina, Meadow Lake, Pilot Butte, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Craven, and Weyburn. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition to the Assembly on behalf of 500 residents of  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1015 
 

Saskatchewan who are supporters of all political parties. They 
are urging the government not to privatize SaskPower but to 
keep this corporation intact as a major public utility in the 
service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
These petitioners know that the privatization of SaskPower will 
lead to higher utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will 
benefit only wealthy investors. They are from a number of 
communities in the province including Moose Jaw, Watson, 
Medstead, Sandwith, Sparling, North Battleford, Glaslyn, and 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly for several hundred residents 
of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging the government 
not to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major public utility 
in the service of all Saskatchewan people. These petitioners are 
from a number of communities including Delisle, Biggar, 
Martensville, Asquith, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I rise pursuant to rule 11 to table a bundle of 
petitions from Saskatchewan residents petitioning the 
government to stop the privatization of SaskPower. These 
individuals come from communities as diverse as Pilot Butte, 
Raymore, Southey, White City, Lemberg, and Craven. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave to introduce 
some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
students from Collège Mathieu in Gravelbourg. Accompanying 
them are Rosemarie Brown, a teacher, and Cleophas Bouvier, 
the bus driver 
 
I’d also like to remind all members of the Legislative Assembly 
of the terrible fire that occurred at Collège Mathieu last year, 
and I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the province on 
behalf of the people of Gravelbourg, the students of Collège 
Mathieu, and the francophone community of Saskatchewan for 
its efforts in rebuilding Collège Mathieu. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well to beg leave to 
introduce guests who were in attendance in your Chambers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would welcome the recognition 
of the Legislative Assembly of the visit of 42 grades 4 and 5 
students from William Grayson School in  

Moose Jaw. With their visit here today in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, they come accompanied by teachers Di Hicks, Jan 
Rowlinson, and Pat Barbier. 
 
I met with them a little earlier, Mr. Speaker, and had a most 
invigorating discussion with them. And I would ask that all 
members recognize their visit to this Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to rise pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions 
from 500 people from the communities of Weyburn, Blaine 
Lake, Swift Current, Fillmore, Prince Albert, and Shellbrook. 
 
These Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, 500 in number, are 
petitioning all members of the Legislative Assembly, asking 
that Saskatchewan Power Corporation not be privatized, not be 
sold off to wealthy investors, but be kept as a public utility. I’m 
pleased to present these petitions on behalf of 500 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant also to rule 11 to 
present petitions from approximately 500 residents of 
Saskatchewan who have been very concerned about the 
privatization of SaskPower, and through these petitions they are 
urging, particularly the government opposite, not to privatize 
this utility so that it can be used for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from such places as 
Martensville, my city of Saskatoon, Dalmeny, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
on behalf of approximately 500 people in the province of 
Saskatchewan who ask this government not to privatize 
SaskPower. The petition states that the privatization constitutes 
a sell-off of a major public utility. 
 
These people come from Edam, Mervin, Medstead, Glaslyn, 
and one from Regina, Mr. Speaker. I left a blank copy of the 
form in the law office, and before I knew it, it was filled out. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a thousand 
names on a petition that argues with the government that the 
privatization of SaskPower should not go ahead. 
 
They are also telling us that they oppose very much the concept 
of power being taken out of the hands of the people and having 
a profit motive tied to SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
pursuant to rule 11 to present another several hundred petitions 
to the Assembly signed by residents of Saskatchewan who are 
also concerned about the sell-off of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and the SaskEnergy portion of it. They’re 
concerned about what may happen to the price of, and the costs 
of, natural gas and electricity. They’re concerned about what 
kind of  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1016 
 

future there will be in Saskatchewan. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, are from Willow Bunch, Coronach, 
Herbert, Broadview, Grenfell, Saskatoon, Rush Lake, and the 
city of Estevan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present another petition to the Assembly for several hundred 
residents of the province. These petitioners are urging, as the 
others have, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite not 
privatize SaskPower but keep this major public utility in the 
service of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In this petition are people from Fort Qu’Appelle, Lipton, 
Balcarres, Battleford, Bengough, Weyburn, Pangman, and 
Assiniboia, amongst others. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to present a petition to the Assembly for some 500 
petitioners from across Saskatchewan, and these petitioners are 
urging the government not to go ahead with the privatization of 
SaskPower. They have indicated solidly the support of 
SaskPower as it existed and the services that were provided to 
the people under its mandate in the past. 
 
These petitioners are from the communities of Shellbrook, 
Qu’Appelle, Punnichy, Wolseley, Ogema, Kisbey, Pangman, 
Rocanville, to name a few of the communities. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition containing 500 names of Saskatchewan 
residents who are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. 
These petitioners are from such places as Milestone, Melrose, 
St. Brieux, and Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule no. 
11 to present a further petition with another 500 names on it. 
These are people of Saskatchewan who solemnly signed this 
petition, and when they signed the petition, they were agreeing 
with the petition which says in part: 
 

 That the privatization of SaskPower constitutes a sell-off of a 
major public utility which serves all Saskatchewan people. 
 

These 500 people that signed this petition believed in what they 
were signing, and it’s my pleasure to present the petition in the 
legislature today. They come from such varied communities — 
to give you an example, Mr. Speaker — as Yorkton, Canora, 
Churchbridge, Kamsack, Veregin, Langenburg, Rose Valley, 
Calder, and my own city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again pursuant to rule 11, I rise to 
present in petition the names of over 500 Saskatchewan 
citizens, all of whom wanted to have their names recorded in 
public document as being opposed to this government’s 
privatization of SaskPower. And it is my honour on their behalf 
to present this petition, Mr. Speaker, to these citizens from 
communities such as Wakefield, Weyburn, Lumsden, Regina, 
Dunsmore, and  

others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition on behalf of several hundred communities 
from the towns of Wadena, Melfort, Delisle, and Star City. 
These several hundred residents of these communities are 
strongly opposed to the privatization of SPC . They are stating 
very clearly that it is not only the rich and wealthy that should 
benefit from our public utilities. They want to see a future for 
our children and the grandchildren, and they want to save our 
public utilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 this 
afternoon in the Legislative Assembly to present a petition 
signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan who are 
opposed to the privatization of Saskatchewan Power. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the names of the petitioners cross all 
political boundaries, and it’s a sign of the large public outcry in 
 . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I believe the hon. 
member there is treading on the edge of debate, and I think we 
want to keep that out of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I 
certainly wouldn’t want to tread on the bounds of debate in this 
Assembly. 
 
I do present this petition on behalf of the petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker. The signatures on the petition come from residents of 
the communities of Meacham, Porcupine Plain, Hudson Bay, 
Choiceland, Rush Lake, Viscount, and Colonsay. And there are 
several hundred names here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 once 
again to present a petition to the Assembly for several hundred 
more residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners oppose the 
sell-off of SaskPower and SaskEnergy to out-of-province 
investors and to private wealthy investors throughout the 
country. They object strongly to the PC government’s 
privatization policies. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from, among other places, 
Veregin, Milden, Weyburn, Outlook, Spalding, Loreburn, 
Dinsmore, my community of Regina, and almost all of Lucky 
Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I rise once 
again to present a petition on behalf of over 500 people, mostly 
from rural Saskatchewan, from the districts of Tisdale, 
Ridgedale, Sylvania, Shellbrook, St. Louis, Birch Hills, 
Weirdale, the James Smith Reserve, Kinistino, and my home 
city of Prince Albert. Every one of them signed, proudly 
exercising their democratic right in voicing serious opposition 
to the privatization of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to present a petition signed by some 500 Saskatchewan 
residents who are speaking out, Mr. Speaker, against the 
privatization of SaskPower. Some of the communities involved 
are Weyburn, Warman, Blair Lake, and Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1017 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again pursuant 
to rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of some 500 people — 
from farmers, working people, and professionals in the farming 
communities of Weekes, Hudson Bay, Duval, Tisdale, 
Mistatim, Neudorf, and Porcupine Plain, among others. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present the petition of more than 500 residents of 
Saskatchewan who, among other things, point out that the 
privatization of SaskPower is not in the public interest. The 
people signing these petitions are from Montmartre, Cupar, 
Mervin, Douglas, Veregin, Lintlaw, Melville, Kamsack, 
Regina, and other places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions with over 500 
names of Saskatchewan residents. These citizens eagerly signed 
the petitions with full awareness of just how important 
SaskPower has been and will continue to be to the province of 
Saskatchewan. The 500 names, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of P.A., Canwood, Weldon, and Lang. 
 
These residents urge the Government of Saskatchewan to listen 
to them and not to privatize SaskPower, SaskEnergy division. 
They want all residents to benefit from this valuable public 
utility, as has been the case up till now. I respectfully urge the 
Government of Saskatchewan to listen to this overwhelming 
message from all across Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to put forward to the House petitions from 500 residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan urging that the provincial 
government not privatize SaskPower, and that it is not in the 
best interest of the people of the province to go ahead with the 
sell-off of this utility. 
 
People or names on the petition come from Melfort, Quill Lake, 
Gronlid, Blaine Lake, Marcelin, many hundreds from Melfort; 
and I notice that almost the entire hamlet of Fairy Glen is on 
this petition as well. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, under rule 11, I rise to present 
yet another petition with yet another 500 names. These are 
senior citizens, these are working people, these are farming 
people who make their homes in communities like Shellbrook, 
Parkside, Spruce Home, Yorkton, Melfort, Naicam, Watson, 
Stump Lake, Debden, and Beechy. 
 
And these people in part are saying that the privatization of 
SaskPower constitutes a sell-off of a major public utility which 
serves all of Saskatchewan’s people, and so they pray this 
Assembly be pleased to urge the provincial government to stop 
the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to rule 
11 to present petitions on behalf of over 500 Saskatchewan 
residents who urge this government to cease the privatization of 
SaskPower, because they feel it will lead to higher utility rates 
and will benefit only wealthy investors. These people are from 
North  

Battleford, Biggar, Saskatoon, Cochin, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
rise a second time pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition 
which is: 
 

To the honourable the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan in legislature assembled. The petition of the 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly showeth that the privatization of SaskPower is not 
in the public interest; 
 
that the privatization of SaskPower constitutes a sell-off of 
a major public utility which serves all Saskatchewan 
people; 
 
that the privatization of SaskPower will lead to higher 
utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will benefit only 
wealthy investors. 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower, and as in duty-bound, your petitioners will 
ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these 500 names have been amassed from the city 
of Estevan, from the towns of Fillmore, Wishart, Invermay, 
Bienfait, Torquay, North Portal, Rockglen, Pangman, Wadena, 
Dysart, Aneroid, and the cities of Melfort, Saskatoon, and 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again pursuant to rule 11 to 
present another set of petitions to this Assembly on behalf of 
another 500 residents of the province of Saskatchewan. These 
residents are urging the Assembly, all of us here, to urge the 
provincial government to stop the privatization of SaskPower. 
Privatization of SaskPower will lead to higher utility rates for 
Saskatchewan people and will benefit only wealthy investors. 
 
And people are signing petitions from Saskatoon, of course, my 
home city, but also from Warman and Rosthern, from Biggar 
and Landis, from Tisdale, Naicam, Delisle, and Vanscoy, 
among other communities. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly for several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging the 
government not to privatize SaskPower, but to keep this major 
public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan people. These 
petitioners are from a number of communities including Moose 
Jaw, Choiceland, Snowden, Star City, Chaplin, Rosetown, 
Saskatoon, Wynyard, Dafoe, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
table a petition to the Assembly urging the government not to 
privatize SaskPower. What is notable about this particular 
group of 500 signatures is that 18 of the 20 pages come from 
the community of Estevan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1018 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise for 
a third time pursuant to rule 11, Mr. Speaker, to present 
petitions on behalf of 500 Saskatchewan residents. They’re 
from the communities of Debden, Parkside, Shellbrook, 
Paddockwood, Prince Albert, and my home community of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These petitioners are urging this Assembly and urging the 
Government of Saskatchewan not to privatize Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation but to keep it as a public utility serving the 
interests of all the people of Saskatchewan and not to be sold 
off for the benefit of a few wealthy investors. I’m pleased on 
behalf of these petitioners to present these 500 signatures to the 
Assembly this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once more pursuant to rule 
11 to present to the Assembly the names of approximately a 
thousand people from the province of Saskatchewan who are all 
concerned about the privatization of SaskPower and what it will 
do to SaskPower rates in the future. They would like to keep 
SaskPower in the hands of all the people of Saskatchewan and 
have eagerly signed these petitions. 
 
These people are from such places as Beechy, Shaunavon, 
Wynyard, Tompkins, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
to present petitions signed by approximately 500 people who 
petition the government not to privatize SaskPower or sell off 
the gas portion of the utility. 
 
Some of the communities, Mr. Speaker, on this petition, are 
interesting. Some are major centres — Saskatoon, Melville; 
communities close to major centres — Indian Head, White City. 
Some are not. Some are outlying areas who would not have got 
natural gas or electricity at the time they did had a government 
of this ilk been in office. I refer then to the communities of 
Pelly, Lambton, Kelliher, Waldron, Hubbard, and Wadena. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again pursuant to rule 
11 to present about 500 signatures on a petition. These people 
are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower and they come 
from a variety of towns, and I’d just like to list them out — 
most of them, I think, represented by Conservative members: 
Kipling, Weyburn, Estevan, Outlook, Perdue, Big River, and 
Leoville. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present this petition of over 500 names. They’re 
residents of Saskatchewan who are urging the government not 
to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major public utility in 
the service of all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m honoured on their behalf to present this petition here today. 
They represent a wide cross-section of people from many parts 
of Saskatchewan which includes places such as Cochin, Landis, 
Wymark, Assiniboia, Lumsden, Gronlid, Yorkton, Raymore, 
and my own city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to  

rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for some 1,000 
petitioners from the various centres in my part of the country — 
from Annaheim, from Marysburg, from Humboldt, Lake 
Lenore, Davidson, Lanigan, Middle Lake, Watrous, Muenster, 
Jansen, Young, Englefeld, and Watson. The petitioners are 
urging the government not to privatize SaskPower. I so submit. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 
pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions containing 400 names of 
Saskatchewan residents who are also opposed to the 
privatization of SaskPower. These petitioners are from such 
communities, Mr. Speaker, as Regina, Saskatoon, Rosthern, and 
North Battleford. Thank you. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, under rule 11 I have 
already tabled two petitions of 500 names each. To that 1,000 
names I wish to add another 1,500 for a total of 2,500 names 
that I will have tabled today. 
 
The people that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, among other 
things, said that the privatization of SaskPower is not in the 
public interest. And these petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Assembly, us, may be pleased to urge the the 
provincial government to stop the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am merely an instrument of the desires of these 
people and it takes great pleasure to lay this petition of 1,500 
names on the Table. These people come from varied 
communities in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, such as 
Preeceville, Assiniboia, Gull Lake, Duck Lake, Kronau, 
Carnduff, Nokomis, Oxbow, Alameda, Indian Head, 
Strasbourg, Melfort, Melville, Rosthern, Lloydminster, and my 
own city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to rise 
again pursuant to rule 11 to present a package of petitions with 
an additional 500 names — these people, Mr. Speaker, coming 
from communities such as Naicam, Saskatoon, Vibank, Central 
Butte, Martensville, Willow Bunch, and others. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to present a 
petition on behalf of over a thousand residents from the 
communities of, and city of Regina, Indian Head, Lanigan, 
Odessa, and many others. 
 
And the petition states that the privatization of SaskPower is not 
in the public interest; that the privatization of SaskPower 
constitutes a sell-off of a major public utility which serves all 
Saskatchewan people; that the privatization of SaskPower will 
lead to higher utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will 
benefit only wealthy investors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like, because of this historic occasion, 
also to translate that back to the people of my own constituency 
and for other constituencies in the province. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1019 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I must admit that I don’t 
have the pleasure of understanding the Cree language, which I 
assume is the language he’s speaking. However, petitions are to 
be placed briefly. And without, as I said, understanding what 
the hon. member is saying, it sounds very much like he might 
be going beyond that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order, 
order. 
 
I think that in the best interest of the House, we should just 
carry on with the presentation of petitions, and if the member 
from Cumberland wishes to make a few remarks saying he is 
now presenting the petition, we will carry on. But like I say, to 
me it sounded like you were entering debate. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the people from 
the communities that I so named, I thus present the petition. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’re doing a fine 
job here this afternoon. I can understand the sensitivity of some 
members in the presentation of these petitions here today. 
 
I would like to rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition 
signed by several hundred residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan in the traditional and ancient right of their ability 
and their right to petition the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And in this petition, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have 
signed it feel strongly that the privatization of SaskPower is not 
in the public interest and that the privatization of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation constitutes a sell-off of a 
major public utility which serves all people of the province of 
Saskatchewan very well for a number of years. 
 
They also fear that the privatization of SaskPower will lead to 
higher utility rates for Saskatchewan people and will only 
benefit the wealthy investors who have the money to buy off a 
company such as the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The 
individuals strongly stressed that they want we in the 
opposition, in this legislature, to stop the obsession with 
privatization of the government. In this particular case, they 
single out the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and do not 
want that particular Crown corporation sold off to the detriment 
of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The several hundred signatures that I have on this petition are 
from residents of the communities of Prud’homme, Bruno, 
Vonda, Melfort, Lestock, Smeaton, Kamsack, Wapella, Pilot 
Butte, Foam Lake, Spiritwood, and Esterhazy. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I have had the honour to present over 
2,100 petitions in this Legislative Assembly, and I want to 
assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll be presenting more  

petitions in this Legislative Assembly on this very important 
issue. And with that, I would like to present these several 
hundred petitions to you now, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant, for a third time, 
to rule 11 to present a petition to this Assembly for over 500 
Saskatchewan residents. These Saskatchewan people are not 
pleased with the sell-off actions of this PC government, and beg 
the PC government to reconsider their short-sighted action of 
selling off SaskPower and the future of the young people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from a number of 
communities including Lang, Coronach, Ogema, Wolseley, 
Shellbrook, Henribourg, Rockglen, Nipawin, Kisbey, Pangman, 
Lumsden, and Holdfast. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Pursuant to rule 11, Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present petitions signed by some 1,500 people here from 
various communities in Saskatchewan, including Elstow, 
Clavet, Hanley, Allan, Rosetown, Colonsay, Bellevue, Parkside, 
St. Benedict, Hoey, Wakaw, Domremy; also from some smaller 
communities, and I believe there’s some people from Richard, 
Speers, Hafford, Whitkow, Eltkane, Mayfair, Yellow Creek, 
Meskanaw, and St. Louis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every one of them fears higher utility rates and they oppose the 
sell-off of SaskPower. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to table a petition in the Legislative Assembly speaking out 
against privatization of SaskPower. 
 
There are approximately 446 signatures on this petition, and the 
people who have signed the petition come from communities 
such as Regina, Moose Jaw, Lintlaw, Melville, Tisdale, 
Balgonie, Broadview, to name a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present petitions on behalf of people from many 
communities, some 3 or 400 petitioners who join with the 
thousands and thousands of other people who, simply put, do 
not agree with the government’s actions of privatizing 
SaskPower. 
 
These people are from such areas as Swift Current, Estevan, 
Cabri, Pilot Butte, among others. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again pursuant 
to rule 11 to file a bundle of petitions, this time signed by 1,500 
residents of Saskatchewan who are all opposed to this sell-off 
of SaskPower. 
 
The people signing the petitions that I now present are from 
communities such as Melville, Wilkie, Foam Lake, Grayson, 
Invermay, Wadena, Kindersley, Moose Jaw, Balgonie, Estevan, 
Kayville, Avonlea, and Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
respectfully rise again pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions 
with names of 550 Saskatchewan citizens. These 550 
individuals urge the Government of  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1020 
 

Saskatchewan not to privatize and sell off SaskPower. These 
citizens are from the rural communities of Duval, Southey, Pilot 
Butte, and Windthorst. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, I presented over 1,700 names today. 
These residents want to continue owning Saskatchewan Power 
for the benefit of all citizens today and for future generations. I 
am honoured to present these petitions today and urge the 
government members to listen to Saskatchewan’s message and 
not to dismiss it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to table petitions requesting that the Government of 
Saskatchewan not proceed with the privatization of SaskPower, 
that it is not in the public interest, and that it serves only a few 
wealthy investors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here 1,500-plus petitions signed by people 
in communities such as Kuroki, Wadena, Kelvington, 
Moosomin, Yorkton, Ebenezer, Wroxton, Stornoway, 
Bredenbury, Hardy. I also notice that there’s close to 200 
signatures from the community of Rose Valley, as well as a 
great number of signatures from the area that I happen to 
represent in Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again pursuant to 
rule 11 I rise to present hundreds more petitions calling upon 
this government to stop its privatization of SaskPower. These 
petitions have been circulating in the communities of Blaine 
Lake, White City, Radville, Swift Current, and my home 
community of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
can assure you that there will be many, many, many more of 
these from the community of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present, on behalf of over 500 people 
from Saskatchewan, petitions protesting this government’s 
plans to privatize the Sask Power Corporation. They are 
indicating that they would like control to remain in the hands of 
Saskatchewan’s people, and it is with pride I present these 
petitions to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11. I’m proud to share the concerns of this batch of 1,000 
petitioners who’ve signed this petition that appeals to the 
government opposite to hear the people of Saskatchewan and to 
stop the senseless sell-off of SaskPower. These petitioners 
understand the SaskPower sell-off is not in the interest of the 
people of Saskatchewan and will result in loss of control of our 
future in increased utility costs and a loss of a major part of our 
Saskatchewan heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these thousand signatures come from the villages 
and hamlets of Tantallon, Dubuc, Stockholm, Kuroki, Atwater, 
Norquay, Churchbridge; and of some note, I think that the town 
of Canora may have twinned with Kenora, Ontario, because 
there’s a huge number of signatures from Canora, 
Saskatchewan, that is here. Almost one would think that they 
had to recruit outside people, but I assure you that’s not the 
case. 
 
(1500) 
 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present another set of petitions, another 500 
signatures opposing the privatization of SaskPower. And I 
emphasize again that these petitions have been signed to deliver 
a message to all of us here in this Assembly, to the members 
opposite as well as to those on this side of the House, urging the 
provincial government to stop the privatization of Sask Power. 
They don’t want this utility sold off. It’s a major utility which 
serves all Saskatchewan people, and its privatization will lead 
to higher utility rates and will benefit only wealthy investors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions that I have, have been signed by 
people in Watson, Pilot Butte, Hammond, Melfort, Englefeld, 
and Regina. And I’m proud to present them to this Assembly 
with their urging not to privatize SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly for several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are urging the 
government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep this major 
public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities including 
Carrot River, Prince Albert, Mayfair, Balgonie, Biggar, Melfort, 
Watson, Redvers, Maryfield, Gull Lake, St. Brieux, Hafford, 
Wapella, Kipling, Hudson Bay, Tisdale, Saskatoon, Melville, 
North Battleford, La Ronge, Whitewood, Moosomin, Redvers, 
and Elrose. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to table 75 pages of petitions, some 1,500 names of 
Saskatchewan individuals asking the government not to 
privatize SaskPower. Almost the entire bulk of these names 
come from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
also pursuant to rule no. 11 to present a petition to the 
Assembly for several hundred  . . actually I should say several 
thousand. This one I think has about 4,000 — 3,500 
approximately — petitioners, residents of Saskatchewan who 
are urging the government not to privatize SaskPower, but to 
keep the major public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The communities represented, sir, are, amongst others, 
Colonsay and Asquith and Martensville; Melfort, Biggar, 
Cudworth, Kindersley, Davidson, Lake Lenore, Lanigan, 
Weyburn, Colgate, Coronach, Minton, Pangman, Moose Jaw, 
Kronau, Kerrobert, Gravelbourg, amongst those that are listed 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I simply want to close by informing you, sir, and 
the members opposite that this is not the last of the petitions on 
this issue; that thousands more Saskatchewan people will be 
protesting the government’s actions in the days ahead. We’ll be 
using this forum to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we have tabled petitions signed by more 
than 50,000 Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1021 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Grants in Lieu of Taxes 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question today, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier and it deals 
with the proposed privatization of SaskPower, SaskEnergy. And 
I have here in front of me, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, a letter 
dated November 20, 1987, from the Deputy Premier, your seat 
mate, to the then mayor of Regina, Mr. Larry Schneider, 
regarding SaskPower grants in lieu and surcharges, which says 
in part that the corporation will honour the agreements and 
payments, and they’ll be continued as per the terms and 
conditions of the agreements. 
 
Now at the same time, Mr. Premier, we have here section 43 of 
Bill 22, which was tabled yesterday, which says that all grants 
in lieu and surcharges paid by the gas utility are going to be 
summarily cancelled, thereby raising the prospect, raising the 
prospect of yet additional tax burdens to property owners. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, on the one hand we have a commitment from 
your Deputy Premier that these terms and agreements will be 
honoured; the Bill, of course, breaks that commitment. How do 
you explain yet this major breach of promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I had a news conference 
prior to the session today, and I outlined to the public the terms 
of reference of the commission on SaskEnergy and several 
questions that they will be asking the general public and issues 
that they can review. The last one, as a matter of fact, was the 
impact of a public share offering in SaskEnergy on 
municipalities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And I went on to say that  . . and pointed out to the members of 
the media, and they asked me, with respect to the impact on 
rural and urban, there’s a net gain as a result of the legislation to 
rural municipalities because of the tax base, and there is a 
potential for a net loss in urban municipalities. And what I said 
to them, Mr. Speaker, what I said to them, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we would make sure that there is no net loss in this transition 
process and we will keep it whole, Mr. Speaker, so that in fact 
the urban municipalities, as we go through this process, can 
suggest ways that we can provide them with equal benefits, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One possibility is obviously lower gas rates and lower electrical 
rates, and the other is an increased tax base. So the combination 
of those two could be of significant benefit to not only rural, but 
urban municipalities. And in the interim we said that we would 
keep them whole; that is, not have any negative impact to any 
of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, isn’t it a fact that if this legislation noted 
in section 43 indicates in fact the cancellation of all these 
agreements, surcharges, and payments, isn’t it a fact that what 
really has happened here is that the revelation of the letter by 
your Deputy Premier on November 20, 1987, promising that 
there would be no terms and  . . conditions in the terms and 
conditions of the agreements, that really that amounted to a 
betrayal when the Bill was tabled; because under clause 43 of 
the Bill, in fact, all of the agreements are cancelled, summarily 
cancelled, and that what you’re really saying here now is the 
explanation that you give, having been caught red-handed in 
this betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan, both rural and urban  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think before the Premier gets into his 
remarks, I’d just like to bring to the hon. members’ attention 
that he’s going to answer the question, but he can’t do it if he’s 
going to be interrupted. I ask the courtesy of the members to 
allow him to carry on his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan, both rural and urban, would like to see lower gas 
rates and lower electrical rates, Mr. Speaker, and lower taxes at 
the municipal level. Through the provision of lower gas rates 
and an increased tax base, Mr. Speaker, that is broader industry, 
as we’ve seen across Saskatchewan and in other jurisdictions, in 
fact that you can have exactly that. 
 
And when you provide them with an opportunity to reduce the 
electrical rates for rinks in communities; when you can reduce 
the gas rates for people, rural and urban, and you can increase 
the tax base because of new industry, we’ve seen in other cities, 
in other urban places, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for 
significant benefit to those communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I said, as I did in the news conference today, 
that we would make sure that there is the same financial 
revenue going to the urban municipalities as we go through this 
transition, so that in fact they can have a net gain, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have seen that, obviously because of the increased tax 
base at the rural level, and we look forward to that at the urban 
level as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Premier, and I hear the Premier’s answers with respect to my 
questions. But I’m speaking here to the question of the 
Premier’s — or I’ll put it not on a personal basis — the 
government’s word and its commitments. And the fact is that 
when these Bills were tabled, they countermanded — the Bills 
did — the words of the Deputy Premier, the minister in charge 
of the Power Corporation, in each and every one of these areas, 
which if it hadn’t have been for the outrage of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, exhibited by the 50,000-plus 
petitioners  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1022 
 

that we signed today, which if it hadn’t have been for that, 
would not have resulted in this countermanding of word coming 
to light. 
 
I mean, my question to you, sir, is: can you not admit that your 
Deputy Premier has badly mishandled this whole file? He has 
not been telling the people of the province of Saskatchewan the 
truth, and that really what you ought to be doing is asking for 
his resignation under the circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that it’s fair to say 
that none of the benefits, Mr. Speaker, or perceived costs 
associated with the legislation takes place until the legislation is 
addressed and the legislation is passed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that if you’re going 
to introduce legislation that has an impact on rural 
communities, whether it is the rat eradication program, or 
whether it is rural gas, the irrigation programs, or with respect 
to water programs, obviously the legislation has to pass. And 
during that process, Mr. Speaker, you do the kinds of things 
necessary so that the local communities, whether they’re rural 
or urban, can respond to that. 
 
And this is the case here, Mr. Speaker. We’ve only introduced 
the legislation, and we’re into a situation where we have public 
hearings with respect to the process. And if I might, I think it’s 
fair to say that the opposition has stood up, and even prior to us 
tabling the legislation, and said, well my gosh, that this is going 
to be something terrible, prior to even seeing it, let alone letting 
the legislation be addressed. 
 
So that there’s no change in urban municipalities at all right 
now, none at all. And this legislation, if they want to debate it, 
will be here. 
 
One of the questions you can ask is: what kind of an impact 
might you have on urban municipalities because of a new tax 
base? What could you do with lower rates, increased industry, 
and a change in the tax base that allows taxes, say in the city of 
Regina, to come down to be comparable with other jurisdictions 
across Canada, Mr. Speaker? That’s really possible. And in fact 
we might be able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have here the terms of 
reference that your government has laid out for the special 
panel. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s unusual when the 
terms of reference are handed to the press before they’re shared 
with the House while the House is sitting. I say to you that yet 
another attempt by this government showing their arrogance — 
their arrogance — and how out of touch they are. And I want to 
say to you, Mr. Minister  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. The noise 
level is a bit high, and I’d also like to remind the hon. member 
that his preliminary remark sounded much like a debate to me 
and to get to the base of his question. Order, order. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask the Premier, it seems very 
strange the way you’re running this Bill through the House in 
attempting to whitewash the people of the province. The terms 
of reference are basically the same terms of reference that your 
minister of privatization, in a very expensive dog and pony 
show, took out to the people of the province — exactly the 
same. And you came back here and you presented the Bill after 
the money was spent. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I believe the hon. 
member should get to his question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I would have an 
opportunity to go through the terms of reference, I have a 
question to ask about  . . 
 
(1515) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have given the hon. member 
ample opportunity, as I’m sure he realizes, and I believe by now 
he should be to his question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question is this: after months of 
spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars on advertising public 
participation Tory-style, a travelling road show by the minister 
to many communities with the same terms of reference  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. If the hon. member does 
not state his question at this time, we will go to the next 
question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask the Premier: after all those 
millions of dollars have been spent, 70 per cent of the people 
are opposed to your plan. Are you rejecting your minister, and 
are you saying that he has done such a terrible job that you have 
to go through the whole process again, spending millions more 
of taxpayers’ money to make them believe something they 
already know they are adamantly opposed to? Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the media asked the similar 
question with respect to the public hearings. And I responded to 
them by saying, because of the circumstances, that we could not 
table the legislation here which described the economics of it — 
that is, lower rates and diversification for the people of 
Saskatchewan in rural communities as well as urban — that I 
suggested that at least we should be able to give them the facts 
and the information. If we couldn’t do it in here, we’ll at least 
do it outside. 
 
And I’ve invited, and I think the hon. member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, knows we’ve invited them to participate. And he is 
quoted in saying that they will not participate in this 
independent panel. And I quote him out of May 5. He just said, 
the issues cannot be resolved by numbers or facts or figures. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the commission has been asked to look at 
the numbers and the facts and the figures. And the fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, the truth is that we are not going to  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1023 
 

sell SaskPower. In fact, SaskPower is a major shareholder and 
will benefit as a utility in this operation, and we want the people 
of Saskatchewan to know the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I realize that in the asking of questions and in 
the answering of questions there is a great deal of information 
that can be introduced. However, I’d just like to draw it to the 
hon. member’s attention that long questions will no doubt 
inevitably invite the long answer. And that’s not the purpose of 
question period. And I’d just like to ask your co-operation on 
both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier, a new question. And I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: 
you have stated that you invited us to be involved in your 
whitewash, and I say we reject it now and rejected it before. 
We’re not having any part of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: can you 
outline for us a budget that should be attached to the terms of 
reference, i.e., can you tell us what your chairperson is being 
paid for doing the commission on the special panel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I raise  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I raise the point, Mr. 
Speaker, in response to the hon. member saying that this is a 
whitewashed panel. The Leader of the Opposition on television 
calls it a major coup for the opposition because the panel will 
be going across the province of Saskatchewan. If it is a major 
coup that people are going to be participating in this, Mr. 
Speaker, how can it be a major coup and a whitewash at the 
same time, Mr. Speaker? Pretty difficult. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think the facts, to be fair to the hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member wants information — at 
least he says he wants information — on what the SaskEnergy 
Bills mean. They wouldn’t allow us to table them here, Mr. 
Speaker, so we’ve taken the public participation panels out to 
the public so that they can ask questions on dollars, cents, rates, 
what it does to SaskPower, and what it does to SaskTel, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the Premier. Mr. 
Minister, I want to know from you, having spent millions of 
dollars of taxpayers’ money advertising public participation, 
how much more are taxpayers going to be called to pay for this 
whitewash that you have set up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker  . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, please. If 
those hon. members wish to debate, I think this is not the forum 
for it right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it was the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, it was the Leader of the 
Opposition in 1981, when he was deputy premier, when he was 
asked what the bell ringing cost, and he said, Mr. Speaker, 
$20,000 a day in 1981 for every six hours. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the opposition has been out for two weeks, so 10 working days 
and at constant dollars, Mr. Speaker, it’s about $30,000. That’s 
$300,000 they’ve cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, since they’ve been out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is hiding from 
the very fact of what we’re here for. He’s hiding from the 
people of Saskatchewan how many millions of dollars he will 
be spending on advertising and his dog and pony show to try to 
sell privatization of SaskPower. 
 
I want to ask the Premier for the third time: how many millions 
of dollars in advertising and how many thousands of dollars 
will your panel cost the taxpayers of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP are costing the 
province of Saskatchewan $2 million a month by holding up 
Rafferty, and you’re going to be held responsible for that, and a 
power project, Mr. Speaker  . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And a power project, Mr. Speaker. 
SaskPower wants to build Shand and cool it by a water project, 
Mr. Speaker  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s important that information be given to 
members of the Legislative Assembly. That’s why we have a 
task force on health, Mr. Speaker, and Dr. Bob Murray is 
heading that up, and he’s travelling all across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, as will Dr. Lloyd Barber on this task force on 
SaskEnergy. People want to know the truth, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to know something that is important about rates and 
structure and electricity and gas, Mr. Speaker, and they will 
receive that from this commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask the Premier: why are you 
afraid to admit to the public and to this Assembly what you are 
going to be paying in advertising and paying out in terms of this 
special panel that the taxpayers have to pay for? Why are you 
hiding that information? Can you tell us that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1024 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I raise with you and with 
the media again, the Leader of the Opposition says this is a very 
good thing. It’s a major coup that the panel goes across the 
province. I have not limited the number of hearings. They can 
have as many hearings as they like; it’s open-ended. They can 
go to as many towns and places as they like. 
 
I’m not sure how much that they will do, Mr. Speaker, and how 
many towns and villages, how many cities. I mean they’ll come 
back and say, well, you’re going to spend money having this go 
to the people in rural communities and urban communities and 
he says it’s such a great thing, and now  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’d like to address 
myself to the member from The Battlefords who is hollering at 
the Chair from his desk in a very, very loud voice, and of course 
that is not acceptable in this House. Challenging the Chair is not 
acceptable. I ask the hon. member to now rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I’ve offended the  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member will 
rise and apologize without any equivocation or further 
explanation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I apologize. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. And I think his 
answers indicate why it is that the province’s debts and 
financial picture is so dismal. There’s nobody in charge there 
when the Premier doesn’t know the number of this budgetary 
expense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Nobody in charge. Nobody in charge. Just 
simply going ahead with this mania of privatization while 
everything else  . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I realize that the hon. members 
might be a little edgy today. We’re having difficulty hearing the 
Leader of the Opposition who’s trying to put his question, and I 
ask the co-operation of the House to allow him to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a very simple question 
which I will ask the Premier on the terms of reference. Of all 
the Bills that you have identified here, you do not have 
identified The Public Utilities Easements Act. Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, it’s not part of it, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why it isn’t there. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker  . . I’ll go back and say to the hon. 
member, with respect to the cost of these panels, I’ve given it 
open-ended to the chairman to hold meetings wherever he 
wants, whenever he wants, Mr. Speaker, and to report back by 
October. So if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 
many places he’s going to be and how many town halls he’ll be, 
and obviously with the  

health care commission they’ve had free rein. 
 
So when they do that with the blessing of this administration, 
they can hold their hearings and then we’ll come back in, Mr. 
Speaker, and that will be the summary of the costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Impartiality of Members of Panel of Inquiry 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, my question today is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
your so-called unbiased panel of prominent citizens are made 
up of people clearly which have an ideological basis to them. 
 
I refer, first of all, to Mr. Lloyd Barber, who as you know is a 
well-known member and a leading member of the Tory front 
group called the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise. Kathryn 
Ford, another member of this so-called independent panel, is 
part of a law firm which does a land-office business with the 
government and which has been a major contributor to your 
party. 
 
Mr. Premier, the question to you is this, sir: how do you expect 
anybody in the province of Saskatchewan to take you or this 
panel seriously, given its obviously biased nature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is common 
knowledge in this Assembly, and certainly across 
Saskatchewan, that the former premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Tommy Douglas, was on the board of directors of Husky Oil. 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, he was not criticized by the NDP 
being biased because he was on the oil company’s board, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And yet they can come back now and take the president of the 
University of Regina, who was the dean of commerce, Mr. 
Speaker, at the university of Saskatoon, the dean of commerce, 
and say, because he’s president of the U of R and he’s a dean of 
commerce at the University of Saskatchewan, therefore he must 
be biased. 
 
But it was quite all right for a former CCF-NDP premier to be 
on the board of directors of Husky Oil. I don’t think they’re 
being fair, Mr. Speaker, not at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, before moving into 
introduction of Bills, I would ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce some guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of my seat-mate, the member for Melville, the 
minister in charge of Human Resources,  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1025 
 

Labour and Employment, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the 
legislature, a group of grade eight and nine students from 
Grayson, Saskatchewan, and the Grayson school. I understand 
they total 42 in number. They are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ben Appell 
and Fay Appell — pardon me if I didn’t pronounce that quite 
correctly — and as well, their chaperon, Laurie Berezowski. 
 
I do understand the students are here for some time today. I will 
be pleased to meet with you on behalf of my good friend and 
colleague and seat-mate for pictures and drinks a little later on. 
And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the 
legislature join with me on behalf of my seat-mate, the member 
for Melville, to welcome all of these students to the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: —Mr. Speaker, I hear members opposite 
asking from their seats that we go to interim supply. We’re 
quite prepared to do that if we have leave to. If we have leave to 
go to interim supply, we’ll do that now, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Membership of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like to make this statement 
before orders of the day. Before orders of the day, I would like 
to make a brief statement. 
 
In view of Mr. Goodale’s resignation from this Legislative 
Assembly, I would like to inform members that his name is 
dropped from the membership list of the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations. 
 
I’d like to make a further statement. 
 
The Deputy Premier has indicated that they’re prepared to go to 
interim supply if the House agrees. Is that agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum 
of $336,400,300 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
might add, for the benefit of the minister and members 
opposite, it’s our intention to spend some time on this matter. I 
indicated, when the budget was introduced, that we had major 
concerns about a number of aspects of the  

budget. You now want one-twelfth of that budget. We have 
some questions with respect to the money that you’re requesting 
this Assembly grant you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to say initially that the delay, which now 
stretches into 10, 15 minutes, is yet another illustration of a 
government which is in almost complete disarray. 
 
Mr. Chairman, going backwards, we have today a government 
which brings in interim supply and is not ready for it. Last night 
we had a government which has been crying like a stuck pig 
because the Assembly was not in progress. The Assembly 
comes back and there aren’t sufficient members here to keep a 
quorum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is in disarray. It doesn’t know 
where it’s going. Regrettably, the public of Saskatchewan think 
they know where it’s going and they don’t like the direction. 
Mr. Chairman, they don’t like the complete fascination and the 
complete holding on privatization to the exclusion of all else. 
As we have tried to point out to some of the members opposite, 
there are other issues in the province of Saskatchewan besides 
privatization, some other things that need some attention. And 
these interim supply  . . this matter of interim supply brings up 
some of those questions which need to be discussed and from 
which some answers should be given. 
 
(1545) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I expect we’ll be on this for 
the best part of today and perhaps longer than today. I do not 
expect this interim supply to pass very quickly  . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Stonewalling. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No indeed, I’m not stonewalling. I will  . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes you are. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’m getting some assistance from the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloyd who, in his own inimitable way, 
is assisting the progress of the business in the House. I say to 
the member opposite, if we get information from the minister 
we may move along, but if past experience is anything to go by, 
we get very little information from this minister. His efforts are 
a study in obfuscation, a study on how to avoid giving 
information. 
 
Mr. Minister, we believe  . . when you brought in your budget 
we stated that it was cooked, that it was cruel and that it was 
incompetent. The information, Mr. Minister, which we have got 
since that time has only confirmed that view. It confirms the 
view that you and your officials didn’t think this out. And that’s 
the charitable view. The charitable view is you didn’t think out 
what you were doing. 
 
A less charitable view is that you did. You ignored the real 
needs of the public of Saskatchewan and you went and you 
barrelled ahead in any event, proceeding in a fashion which is 
contrary to their best interests, which they believe to be contrary 
to their best interests, and which surely you must know leads 
you to a path of political  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1026 
 

destruction. 
 
Well it’s interesting the Minister of Finance leaves the 
Assembly. This is a Committee of Finance, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman; I have the right to ask the minister questions. I 
would appreciate it if the Government House Leader would tell 
me, in the absence of the Minister of Finance, who I direct my 
questions to. He just walked out of the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll write it down. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t expect a great deal from the 
member from Lumsden by way of courtesy; I do expect that 
during Committee of Finance he’s got to be here. 
 
The member from Lumsden strolls back in again. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member from Regina Centre is 
not to make reference to members’ absence or presence, and I 
would ask him to refrain from doing that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make this point 
while the minister’s in the House. This is not the Legislative 
Assembly; it’s Committee of Finance. It’s an opportunity for us 
to ask the minister questions. When he leaves the House, I do 
not know who I ask the question to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Members are not to make reference 
to absence or presence of members in the House. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The Minister of Finance seems to think this 
is a Bill. I may have mistaken your role, but I assumed you 
were in that chair as chairman of Committee of Finance. That 
being the case, this is not a sitting of the Assembly; this is a 
committee of the Assembly. We have the right to debate. We 
also have the right to ask the minister questions. I can assure the 
member from Lumsden and the member from 
Souris-Cannington that there’s going to be a bit of each. And if 
we don’t get some information, if we don’t get more 
information than we have in the past, there is going to be a fair 
amount of each. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things I raised when you introduced 
your budget was the accuracy of your projection with respect to 
the transfer payments. Mr. Minister, in 1987-88 the equalization 
payments were stated to be 400,600,000. You project them this 
year to be 427,600,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s become apparent since then that the 
federal government is cutting back on the transfer of payments, 
and I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would give us your revised 
figure on what the transfer of payments are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The  . . I assume I’m closing debate on the 
resolution. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. It’s Committee of Finance. The 
member from  . . the opposition members, or any members are 
allowed to ask questions of the Minister of Finance, and it’s a 
question/answer in Committee of Finance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The answer is that our estimates on the 
change to EPF (established programs financing) as a result of 
the federal budget will have no impact in the next fiscal year. 
You may recall that the federal budget says that the changes 
will take place the following fiscal year, so there’s no impact 
for this fiscal year at all. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I also understood, from 
information that’s been gained since, that you were made aware 
that there would be no increase for this province for these 
transfer payments; you would get the same figure you did last 
year. I wonder if the minister would comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What I explained once before was that on 
the estimates — blue book to blue book — we put in an 
increase. The increase was based on the last fiscal year’s actual 
payments as opposed to blue book payments. So in fact we put 
in a decrease on next year’s blue book from last year’s actual. 
So that’s all I can tell you, as I had explained it once before. A 
fair comparison to say blue book to blue book, but we take into 
account the actuals in doing next year’s estimates, and we’re 
showing a reduction on next year’s blue book from last year’s 
actuals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How much of a reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ll get my officials in and get you the 
specifics. I don’t have them handy, but we’ll get the officials in 
and give you the information. We had given it before, but we’ll 
get the officials in. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think it would be very useful, Mr. 
Minister, if you did get the officials in. I think this process is 
going to take a very long time if you don’t. This is information, 
Mr. Minister, which we indicated we had some concerns about. 
 
I take it that the minister is going to get his officials, and if he 
is, I may move on then to a less technical subject. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re coming. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well that’s both courteous and kind to the 
member from Meadow Lake, but the question though was 
addressed to the Deputy Premier, or Government House Leader. 
Are the officials coming? If they are, I’ll get on to a different 
subject. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me just clarify “and transfer payments,” 
because the debate had been on EPF, established programs 
financing. Okay. The equalization is totally different and 
unrelated to, you know, any reduction in transfer payments. 
There’s been no change in the equalization formula as a result 
of the federal budget, nor would we have expected one. 
 
So we will have increases. We expect an increase actually on 
some later figures on equalization, but that, I think in fairness, 
was beyond the federal government’s power to unilaterally 
change the equalization. Normally when we talk to transfer 
payments  . . If you and I are talking the same item, I’m 
referring to established program financing when we’re talking 
transfer payments. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1027 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might direct 
a question to the minister with regard to a statement that he 
made earlier. Now I may not have completely understood his 
statement, but I’ll read him a clipping from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, May 2, ’89, “Budget Costs Saskatchewan at least 
50 Million:” 
 

The federal budget will force Saskatchewan to rework its 
own budget to find at least another 50 million, says deputy 
finance minister, Art Wakabayashi. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, I believe you said the federal budget would 
have no impact on the Saskatchewan budget. If that is the case, 
why is the contradiction here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The question was on the transfer payments. 
You will note in the federal budget that there is a change on the 
crop insurance, and the crop insurance details are being worked 
out as part of a comprehensive program for farmers so that we 
get away from the ad hoc-ery — to use the opposition’s phrase 
— on programs. And that’s part of that process. And there will 
be adjustments and negotiations going on. That’s where that 
figure comes from if you take a look at the changes on the 
proposals for crop insurance, part of an overall package. The 
question was on transfer payments. And I think I’ve explained 
that, that the transfer payment impact, which will be $8 million 
in the next fiscal year, it doesn’t come into account in this fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Then perhaps, Mr. Minster, you will 
clarify for me that the $50 million rework of the Saskatchewan 
budget will fall solely in the area of crop insurance, or could 
you identify the areas where that 50 million cut will fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s crop insurance. But understand what 
I’ve tried to explain on the crop insurance is that it is part of an 
overall package that is being developed between the federal 
government, provincial government, and several other 
provinces for a comprehensive insurance package for 
agriculture. So that is one part of that package. And we don’t 
have the final details of that and we won’t have it probably for 
the immediate future, as negotiations are still going on. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Regardless of when the 
transfer payments take effect, regardless of when the reduction 
in transfer payments to the provinces take effect, take effect 
they will. I wonder if the minister would agree with this 
Assembly that that’s a most unfortunate way for the federal 
government to be balancing their budgets, at the expense of the 
province. 
 
That is not saving — as any number of editorial writers in 
Canada have pointed out, and as any number of writers have 
pointed out — that does not save the taxpayer any money at all. 
It simply transfers the problem from one level to another. And I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would agree that a reduction in 
payments to the provinces is a most unfortunate way for the 
federal government to attempt to solve its mismanagement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well you can’t say regardless. It doesn’t 
take into effect  . . it doesn’t come into effect in  

this fiscal year for us to affect our budget. So having said that, I 
indicated publicly that I didn’t like it, that I would prefer that it 
be maintained at previous levels. 
 
Now the difficulty with the argument is we’ve had the debate 
on EPF before, is that the inflation factor was maintained in 
EPF. You may recall the debate a couple of years back in this 
Assembly where the federal government capped or reduced the 
rate of growth of the established programs financing. It was 
negotiated through the leadership of Saskatchewan that at least 
it couldn’t fall below the rate of inflation. So the inflationary 
protection was maintained in this federal budget. 
 
So if the rate of inflation is 5 per cent, for example, the growth 
in EPF will be 5 per cent. So there may not be a reduction, 
depending on the rate of inflation. I mean that’s the difficulty 
with saying that there absolutely is a reduction. There may not 
be an absolute reduction through the process. 
 
Having said that, do we wish that the previous formula that had 
been there three years ago is maintained? Of course, and we 
said that. And we wish that, at an absolute minimum, there had 
been no change in the second formula that was adjusted two or 
three years ago. 
 
So the difficulty I have in saying absolutely there’s going to be 
a reduction, I can’t say that, simply because the inflation factor 
was maintained, and in fact there still may be an increase. But it 
won’t be higher than the rate of inflation which, in many of 
these programs — health and education — are in some cases 
increasing at a rate greater than inflation. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister is playing with words, and 
well the minister knows it. If you talk about constant dollars, 
which is the only sensible medium in which to talk about, then 
your transfer payments from the federal government are going 
to go down. If you talk about absolute dollars, you might be 
right, but in constant dollars the money’s going to go down, 
adjusted for inflation. So let’s do away with the ballyhoo about 
the problem with this being that inflation was  . . that there’s an 
inflation factor. 
 
The problem you’re having, Mr. Minister, and the only problem 
you’re having, is that there’s a Conservative government in 
Ottawa which has got you people on a short leash, and that’s 
why you’re not making effective representation on behalf of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what representations  . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . . well I’m getting some assistance 
from the member from Maple Creek again. The member from 
Maple Creek may get up on her feet and ask these same 
questions, and I think a fair number of your constituents wish 
you would take a more active role in criticizing this 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell us what representations 
you’ve made to the federal government in an effort to forestall 
the reduction of transfer payments to  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1028 
 

the province. Mr. Minister, it may well be that the federal 
government thinks that their mismanagement has been so 
horrendous that the problem should be transferred, because 
nobody else can have as bad a problem as they got. 
 
Well I got to say, Mr. Minister, you ought to make a 
representation to the federal government that your 
mismanagement is even more calamitous and that they ought 
not to be transferring the problem here because you’ve made a 
bigger mess yourself here. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ve gone to Ottawa and said, Mr. 
Minister, the mess we’ve made is much worse than the mess 
you’ve got and you shouldn’t be transferring the problem here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I mean, you want to attack the 
member from Maple Creek. No wonder your own constituents 
are saying you ask some of the silliest questions in the history 
of this legislature. 
 
So all I suggest to you, and we’ve been through the debate 
before, and I said the last time that because you were making 
the allegation, if I recall, on the budget, that I had misled 
because the federal government were going to reduce transfer 
payments  . . That’s what you said. It turns out that they didn’t 
reduce the transfer payments, so you’re wrong. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, they did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, they didn’t. They didn’t. 
 
So having said that  . . And you said that my budget was phoney 
because I didn’t take into account the reduction of the transfer 
payments that didn’t happen. Okay, so having said that, there 
wasn’t a reduction in EPF for the fiscal year that we’re in. 
Understand? 
 
I’ve indicated that in the future year, next year, it’s going to be 
our estimate about $8 million. We’ll have to adjust that in next 
year’s budget. No question about that. But I’m suggesting to 
you as well the inflationary factor may come into play. It may 
be higher and there may not be that reduction. 
 
Having said that, you asked prior to, or at the time of the 
budget, did we make representations to the federal government 
opposing any effort to transfer  . . or to reduce transfer 
payments, as was speculated, and I said yes, we had. I said that 
along with every other provincial Finance minister we had 
delivered on a personal basis to the federal Minister of Finance, 
that it was not fair for the federal government to transfer its 
deficit problems onto the province that didn’t have the fiscal 
capacity to deal with the problem. 
 
I’ve said that. I’ve said publicly, after the federal budget, that 
the future year reduction in EPF which, if it holds at $8 million, 
that I didn’t like it. I said that. So to say that we didn’t make 
representations or to say that we just endorsed it is not fair, and 
it’s not accurate. We did, and we did express our opposition to 
any reduction in transfer payments to the federal government. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — What I said, Mr. Minister, is you haven’t 
made very effective representations. I think that’s patently true. 
Maybe one of the reasons why you’re not listened to with great 
respect is that you’ve been doing the same thing to the 
municipalities. You have been doing to the municipalities, Mr. 
Minister, precisely what the federal government is doing to you. 
You have been reducing the money available to them, and that 
is true in a great number of areas. In some areas, it’s true in 
absolute figures; in some areas, it’s true in constant dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve attempted to transfer the consequences of 
your mismanagement onto the municipalities. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you think that’s not perhaps part of the reason why 
the federal government thought it fair game in dealing with you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it strikes me, if I either read correctly 
or it was reported correctly, that the NDP government in the 
city of Regina said it wasn’t having a tax increase this year. So 
they didn’t have a tax increase; they must have been able to 
manage with the amount of money that they had. I mean, that’s 
your mayor’s words. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister calls the Regina city council 
the NDP government of the city of Regina. Mr. Minister, I 
don’t know if they think that’s fair. But I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
if you think there’s any conclusions to be drawn from the fact 
that the people of Regina elect a city council you don’t like and 
elect an overwhelming number of MLA’s you don’t like. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if that tells you anything about the 
success of your policies so far as they affect people living in an 
urban environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Okay, we’re getting that actual information 
on the question that you had asked earlier with regard to the 
actual EPF and the blue book EPF. I’m sure we gave them 
during the last interim supply. 
 
I mean, I’ve made my comments with regard to the city of 
Regina. They spoke; they said that they’re not going to have a 
tax increase. And I think that speaks for itself. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’ll admit that in constant 
dollars the amount of money which you’ve made available to 
urban governments has gone down. Indeed, Mr. Minister, in 
absolute dollars the money which is the portion of the funds 
spent by this government on urban municipalities has gone 
down. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the ’87-88 year, $94,176,000 was voted for 
urban municipalities. In the upcoming year only $89,390,000 
has been voted for the urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, the urban revenue sharing in constant dollars is 
down, if not in absolute dollars. The grant to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority in constant dollars is less than what it was. 
The grant to the Wakamow Valley Authority in constant dollars 
is less than what it was last year. The grant to the Wascana 
Centre Authority in constant dollars is less than what it was last 
year. 
 
The grant to the city of Swift Current for Chinook Parkway is 
less in constant dollars than what it was. Grants to the 
municipalities and organizations for local studies and  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1029 
 

research is less in absolute dollars than what it was. 
 
The grants to municipalities under the municipal transit and 
transit assistance in constant dollars is less than what they got 
last year. Last, but certainly not least, the northern revenue 
sharing is static. One figure which isn’t static, I note, is the 
money you vote to the Saskatchewan Assessment Authority 
which, now that I look at it, in constant dollars is also less, 
actually. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have in effect frozen the funding to urban 
municipalities. You have frozen the grants that they’re getting. 
You have frozen the grants, and with respect to the money 
which is being paid in program services, you are spending less. 
Mr. Minister, by spending less on the municipalities you are in 
effect transferring the effects of your mismanagement to the 
urban municipalities, and you’ve been doing that, Mr. Minister, 
for the full eight years you’ve been in office. 
 
One of the first things you did, Mr. Minster, one of the first 
things your government did when you came into office was 
amend the revenue sharing. Revenue sharing, as you will recall, 
was set up in the ’70s, provided the urban municipalities with a 
fixed percentage of provincial government revenues. If that 
formula had been left intact, they’d be getting far, far more 
under revenue sharing — tens of millions of dollars more under 
revenue sharing than they’re getting now. Mr. Minister, all that 
remains of revenue sharing is the name. That’s all that’s left of 
the program. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say again that it ill behoves you to complain 
about the federal government when you’ve been doing the same 
thing to the municipalities for the full term you’ve been in 
office. I don’t have all of the estimates laid out before me here 
now, but if my memory serves me correct, not once in the seven 
years that you people have been in office, going almost eight 
years you people have been in office  . . over eight years I guess 
you people have been in  . . seven. In the seven years you’ve 
been in office, not once in those seven budgets have 
municipalities ever been accorded an increase in their revenue 
sharing which is equal to the rate of inflation. I think that’s an 
accurate statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you expect to effectively and with 
credibility go to the federal government and say, you shouldn’t 
be transferring the results of your mismanagement to us, when 
you in effect have been transferring the results of your 
mismanagement to the municipal governments for the last 
seven years. You’ve done it every year. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, how do you expect to have any 
credibility on the subject of fair and equal treatment between 
different levels of government when you’ve treated the 
municipalities in the fashion that you have over the last seven 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think the hon. member should take 
into account that part of the expenditures this year for 
municipalities include a recreation facilities program, capital 
programming, a major expenditure in Cumberland House in 
northern Saskatchewan — specific projects. 
 

To argue that every budget, every department, and every 
expenditure should increase by the same relative amount is 
really, really a rather strange argument. That, in effect, means 
you can’t do anything new. 
 
And there have been some major new initiatives. For example, 
rural municipalities for the first time in this province’s history 
are going to be able to participate in a capital program. Never 
happened before. 
 
So there are specific items. And we made changes to local 
government financing which from, I gather, the applications 
already in from local governments, that the changes are being 
extremely well received. 
 
So certainly the hon. member can make his arguments with 
regard to transfer payments, but to look at the whole question of 
funding for local governments, I think, would be a better 
argument to make. 
 
I do call to the hon. member’s attention the fact that some local 
governments have indicated that they are not raising taxes. 
Others are making strong applications under the new changes to 
municipal financing — welcomed. And I just have some 
difficulty with the hon. member’s argument because we’ve 
made our representations. 
 
I think in terms of this fiscal year, with a great deal of success, 
and having made our arguments with the federal government, to 
at least maintain an inflation factor in transfer of payments was 
to great effect. 
 
(1615) 
 
So having said all of that, again I just  . . we have a difference 
of opinion but I disagree with your argument. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, my question  . . let me then sum up 
my question in a more concise fashion. Mr. Minister, what’s the 
difference between the way the federal government’s treating 
you and the way you’ve treated the municipalities over the last 
seven years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Go ahead. Sorry. Can you repeat the 
question? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well my question is a very simple one, Mr. 
Minister. What’s the difference between the way you’re treating 
the municipalities and the way the federal government’s 
treating you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we increased expenditures in several 
different areas and I’ve just talked about some of the capital. 
And I’ve talked about some of the capital, and I’ve talked about 
some of the special projects and the easing of the ability to 
finance, to be able to finance over a longer period of time with 
support for government. So it wasn’t just, as the hon. member is 
arguing, a reduction or restraint exercise. It was far more than 
that. 
 
We certainly did shift expenditure items to different areas; I 
acknowledge that. And we did ease the ability of local 
governments to access capital so that they could begin to 
accelerate some of the infrastructure rebuilding which they had 
asked for. So it’s far broader exercise than  



 
May 9, 1989 

1030 
 

what went through at the national level. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’re being very, very 
generous to yourself. I’m looking at the Urban Affairs 
estimates. Not a single one of these items goes up at a rate equal 
to inflation. About half of the subvotes have a decrease in 
expenditure, about half have a very modest increase less than 
the rate of inflation, and none exceed the rate of inflation. Mr. 
Minister, I think you’re being very generous to yourself. I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, that you are being treated by the federal 
government exactly as you have treated the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are  . . The system in this country of trying to 
straighten out your affairs at the expense of everyone else is a 
very short-sighted system. It’s, I suppose, what one might 
expect when one has Conservative governments in office both 
federally and provincially. But, Mr. Minister, you’re both being 
short-sighted; you’re both making a very serious mistake in the 
conduct of this country’s public affairs. The way to solve your 
problems are to get your own waste and mismanagement under 
control and not to try to pass that on, and that’s what you’re 
doing, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ll admit that just as you ought 
to be treated more generously by the federal government, so 
you ought to be treating the municipalities more generously. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ll admit that what’s sauce for the 
goose should also be sauce for the gander. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I mean, I’m reluctant to tell the hon. 
member that the world is changing out there and that there are 
different priorities from time to time. And you don’t make 
mention in the budget of additional expenditures for distance 
education and a new communications network for 
Saskatchewan, and you don’t make mention of increased 
funding for day care, something sadly neglected by your 
government when you were in office. 
 
And when I talk about special funds for education, never done 
before by any other government in Canada — done by this 
government. So I could go on. And doubling expenditures on 
education in the last eight years — doubling — doubling the 
expenditure on education. Nearly doubling the expenditures on 
health care — in eight years. So there are new projects, new 
hospitals. There’s some changes. We talk about the breast 
cancer screening. There are some new priorities and some new 
expenditure areas that this government tried to address. 
 
So to say that things are static and that you are going to lock 
yourself into the same amount for everybody every year plus 
inflation, you can’t make any changes, and I don’t think that 
that’s right. So what we did with the budget this year, as we 
have done with others, is we try and address the priorities as the 
government sees them. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member that when you try and 
address other priorities, not everybody’s going to get all of the 
money they want. And I’ve acknowledged that on several 
different occasions. So to state that you should just keep static 
and you just add inflation and that’s the way it is year after year 
after year, then you will never be able to  

address the changing priorities that the public feels are 
important. 
 
So we’ve tried to do that. I think we struck a fair balance in the 
budget to address some of these other priorities, some of them 
certainly new, but the fact that there are new problems or new 
issues to be addressed should not be ignored. And I don’t think 
you should lock yourself into the position where everybody is 
guaranteed X amount of money so that you can’t shift your 
priorities to respond to society’s needs or the public’s needs. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, this could go on for 
some time. I think your spectacular lack of electoral success in 
urban areas speaks volumes about your treatment of people who 
live in an urban environment. 
 
Almost from the beginning, Mr. Minister, you’ve had almost a 
guerrilla war on with people who live in urban areas. It is of 
course your crass and cynical view that you can divide up the 
province into rural people and urban people. You can tell the 
rural people to go jump in the lake, which would be harmless 
enough now because they’re virtually all dry; you could tell 
urban people to go jump in the lake, and the rural people will 
still elect you. All I can say is, Mr. Minister, we’ll see; we’ll 
see. 
 
You were challenged to call an election by the opposition leader 
a few days ago. I noticed a discernible lack of interest in that 
alternative. All I can say is, Mr. Minister, we’ll see. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get back to the question of the transfer 
of payments where this began, and I want to tell you now that 
you’ve had apparently some information from your officials 
who have been in and out. I want to know if you can tell me 
how the changes in the transfer payments are going to affect the 
province this year and next year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already indicated there’s no change in 
this year. The next year I indicated that our estimates, assuming 
that we’re below the rate of inflation, will be $8 million next 
fiscal year. 
 
But let me respond to the hon. member’s accusations. I don’t 
believe that the people of this province see the home program as 
a rural program. I suspect that there are literally thousands of 
Saskatchewan home owners that live in the cities, that have 
taken advantage of that program. To say that they’re ignored 
through the home program I think is just not correct. 
 
To say that the home owners in this province getting nine and 
three-quarter per cent mortgage protection on the first $50,000 
mortgage for their home and their residence is ignoring city 
people I think is not true and it’s not accurate. 
 
To say that new sewer and water programs for cities and 
municipalities is ignoring the cities, is simply not true. 
 
To talk about new job creation activities in cities, like upgraders 
and projects and Ipsco and Flexi-Coil, and wherever it may be 
in Saskatoon, to say that creating jobs in the cities is ignoring 
city people, is not right. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1031 
 

To say that we ignore things like Saskatchewan Place in 
Saskatoon, the new facilities in Regina, recreational facilities, is 
ignoring them, I think is not true. 
 
Talk about a new bridge in Saskatoon — is that ignoring 
Saskatoon? No, it isn’t. There are things that needed to be done; 
they were projects that needed to be done. In some cases they 
were projects that were refused to be done by your government. 
Let me talk about the 42nd Street bridge. You may not have  . . 
you may have taken your kayak across that point, the hon. 
member from Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Now let me talk about the  . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You just opened it, that’s all you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh no, we did not. We built that. We built 
that and we funded it, and Saskatchewan Place in Saskatoon I 
think was well received. 
 
Let’s talk about some ignoring of the cities like the new City 
Hospital in Saskatoon, major expansion to the University 
Hospital in Saskatoon, major expansion to the St. Paul’s 
Hospital in Saskatoon, new nursing homes in Saskatoon — 
major new nursing homes — Frank Eliason Centre in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And we talk about Regina, and we talked about the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Hospital in the city of Regina. Is that ignoring 
the city of Regina? I think not. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, when we take a look — and 
you’re talking about the lack of support for urban centres, and I 
talk about those projects. And I didn’t talk about the other urban 
centres that the hon. member says that we’ve had a lack of 
electoral success so we’re dividing them. And I don’t hear that 
when I talk about Yorkton, and that’s a city in this province, 
okay, that happened to elect a Conservative. And I take a look 
at Lloydminster, and I happen to take a look at Weyburn and 
Estevan and Swift Current and Melville and Melfort. 
 
So I take a look around at cities that haven’t been ignored. So 
you can make your statement, but I suggest to you that your 
statement is not accurate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, any time you want a 
by-election anywhere in urban Saskatchewan, I think we 
wouldn’t particularly object. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get back to the question of the transfer 
payments. You say it will be $8 million. Is that  . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The following year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The following year, yes, 1990-91. Do I 
take it — and this is just for clarification; I’m not being 
argumentative right at the moment — do I take it that this 
counts inflation? That’s $8 million, assuming zero inflation, 
that’s $8 million — or what precisely are you saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s my advice, yes, that it’s  

assuming no inflation, no change over this year rate  . . Let me 
put it this way. No change in this year’s rate, okay — no change 
in the rate, we would have a loss of $8 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now I assumed you were talking about 
established programs financing. Does the minister anticipate, as 
a result of the federal budget, any decrease in any of the other 
receipts from other governments? I’m on page 10 of your 
Estimates. They’re all from the federal government: Canada 
assistance plan, economic development agreements, 
equalization payments, statutory — I’ll ignore that one — other 
federal-provincial programs. Do you anticipate any reduction in 
any of those other items as a result of the federal budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. And were you talking about 
equalization? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’d mentioned that as one of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We actually expect an increase in the 
equalization over our estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I take it then that the economic health of 
the province is worse than what you anticipated it was when 
you drew up these estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Ontario and Quebec’s are better. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask 
the minister if there’s anything in the interim supply before us, 
because certainly it wasn’t there in the budget, and I wonder if 
there was any correction at this point in your interim supply 
which might help to improve the province’s bond credit  . . or 
the credit rating that the province has. 
 
Is there anything in these interim supplies which will tend to 
improve the credit rating of the province? I point out that the 
Canadian Bond Rating Service gave Saskatchewan a AA-minus 
rating which, as I understand, is some points lower than it has 
been in previous years. Is there anything in this interim supply 
which would help to improve the province’s credit rating? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve had no change in our rating. We’ve 
had, I believe, one meeting with S&P, Standard and Poor’s. We 
indicate that on their review that they see no change. We 
haven’t met with the others. 
 
Understand that the interim supply is simply one-twelfth of the 
budget amount, and in interim supply there’s no policy change, 
that it’s just straight one-twelfth of the budget. So we wouldn’t 
expect on this year’s budget that there would be any change in 
any of the rating changes. Again, I’ve indicated to you we 
haven’t talked to a couple of them yet. We wouldn’t expect any 
change. 
 
I can’t frankly tell you what the impact of a drought would be 
on the ratings. If we did not have a drought and had a return to 
normal cropping, I would think that the movement would be 
towards an upgrade rather than the other way, and I say that if 
we return to normal cropping. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1032 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, credit ratings in 
Saskatchewan started to slip much before last year’s drought, 
and has been attributed by many observers to be a reflection of 
the fiscal management, or more appropriately, the fiscal 
mismanagement that you and your predecessors have displayed 
in the office of Minister of Finance, and generally is an 
indictment on the fiscal management of the province by the PC 
government. 
 
You say that Standard and Poor’s indicated that there would be 
no change during the course of this year. Can you tell us what 
steps Standard and Poor’s outlined which might see the credit 
ratings in Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan, improve. Did they 
outline any measures or steps that you should be taking to 
improve the situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, none at all. They’ll simply judge that 
now on the state of the economy and whether agriculture comes 
back. That’s what they’re primarily going to watch for. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you will know that on 
April 19, the city of Regina announced that the Canadian Bond 
Rating Service gave the city of Regina a AA-plus rating. Mr. 
Minister, considering how many times you have made 
disparaging remarks about the city’s ability to handle its 
finances, how do you feel about the fact that its credit ratings is 
two steps above that given to your government? And the 
question I have: who’s the bad manager here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I simply indicate to the hon. member 
that if you want to take your argument to the point that you’re 
quite satisfied with the operations of the city of Regina, then 
perhaps the city could have reduced business taxes, for 
example, which are I think acknowledged by all except for a 
few councillors as being extremely high, and there were some 
options that the municipal government had. 
 
And so having said that to the hon. member, the debate as to 
how the government’s credit rating  . . we’ve been through that 
again over the last couple of years. There’s been no change over 
the last couple of years. That depending on the state of the 
economy — and I very carefully said that as opposed to the 
question of government management because that’s not a 
factor, in their view, in terms of whether it will be upgraded or 
downgraded — they will watch the overall state of the 
economy. And the assessment will be based on, in my view, 
whether agriculture comes back. 
 
We’ve made it clear to all concerned, and we’ve said it 
publicly, that if we are into another drought, there will be a 
response from the provincial government. We may or may not 
end up debating the adequacy of the response, but certainly we 
will try to assist. That will be a factor. 
 
That will be a factor, as I have said publicly on many occasions, 
that will be a factor in our economic track to reduce the deficit. 
It will be a factor on how outsiders see the economy of the 
province. But we will simply have to await that event and see 
whether we return to normal crop or not. 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me see if I’ve 
got this clear now. The city of Regina’s credit rating is 
AA-plus. The credit rating of the province of Saskatchewan is 
AA-minus. So the city of Regina’s credit rating is two points 
higher than that of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I asked you the previous question, you went on to 
indicate areas in which you felt the city of Regina might 
improve in, and you were pointing to aspects of civic 
management that you felt should be improved. Am I to assume 
from that, Mr. Minister, that there are areas of provincial 
management that might be improved, given a credit rating that 
is even lower than the city of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already indicated that what they will 
watch is the overall state of the economy, and I’ve indicated the 
potential difficulties with regard  . . I mean, we can get into the 
comparison of the city of Saskatoon and the city of Regina if 
the hon. member wants to get into that. I believe Saskatoon’s is 
considerably higher than the city of Regina. 
 
And so you can make those comparisons if you wish, but we 
should keep in mind that underlying all cities’ credit rating is 
the province. And overall, the policies obviously of the 
provincial government have been of some assistance to the 
cities, notwithstanding what your colleague the Finance critic 
said, to allow them to be in that position. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, in fact the city of 
Saskatoon has an even better credit rating at a AAA, a step 
above that of Regina’s. Regina’s is a AA-plus, which is two 
steps above that of the province of Saskatchewan. You say that 
the credit rating agencies are reluctant to improve the 
province’s credit rating because of the provincial economy, yet 
two of the major centres in this province, which I assume are 
part of his overall provincial economy, have better credit ratings 
than the province does itself. Now to me, Mr. Minister, that 
suggests that you should be sitting down with the mayor of 
Regina and the mayor of Saskatoon, that you should be sending 
your officials to sit down with the treasurers of Saskatoon and 
Regina to see how you might improve the fiscal management of 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I want to ask you, have you 
taken steps to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I find it a little surprising, it’s now the 
second member from the NDP that has stood up in the House 
and said that life revolves around Saskatoon and Regina, and 
that that’s what is judged on the provincial economy. 
 
And we have tried to respond, and we’ve tried to respond in this 
budget to some difficulties in areas beyond Saskatoon and 
Regina with a five-point program to try and help the viability of 
some of our smaller communities, and that’s a factor in the 
provincial economy, as opposed to a city economy. And the 
efforts of the government to help diversify the economies of the 
cities is helpful to the cities, and I refer to things like an 
upgrader in the city of Regina. I see efforts to expand the 
business opportunities in Saskatoon, many of which you 
opposed. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1033 
 

So the economic diversification and development efforts of the 
provincial government help the cities, help diversify the 
economies of those cities and help expand their tax base. And 
we as a province have to recognize that there are some areas 
that are having some very severe difficulties, and we’re going to 
try to respond to them. 
 
As I say, we’ve set out a five-point program this year of rural 
capital financing; some cultural and recreational programming 
that is designed to assist those communities; the investment 
fund for the Saskatchewan government growth fund; the fact 
that we’re going to allow business associations to get set up in 
areas outside of Saskatoon and Regina so that the small 
businesses in the smaller communities can get together and 
identify what type of business would be helpful to them, that 
would help make their community viable or diversify the 
community. 
 
So I could go on and on and on of the problems that we’re 
trying to address that are not uniform across the province. And 
every provincial government has to have the same obligation, 
so they take into account the overall effect of the economy. 
 
We’re trying to help the cities in terms of job creation activities, 
new businesses, new corporations, new manufacturing, new 
processing. And it helps them, and it should help them. 
 
We’re not concentrating all our efforts on the areas that most 
need the help. We do have a plan; we’ve laid it out. But we are 
judged as a government and as a province on the totality of the 
whole province. And I hate to tell the hon. member, I hate to 
tell anybody, but outside the city of Regina agriculture is having 
some very difficult times — very, very difficult times. 
 
And you can say it’s the fault, as the hon. member has in 
Regina Elphinstone, that it’s the government’s fault that 
agriculture’s having difficulty. Many farmers may not believe 
that; many farmers may not believe that. 
 
But having said that, we’re judged on the broader economy, not 
the specific economy, and we have tried to help the cities. We’ll 
continue to try and help the cities diversify, improve their tax 
base, create the jobs, create the opportunities, create the 
stability, create the viability, and it will help them. And I hope 
that it continues to improve their credit rating every time we try 
and help. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, you choose to 
explain the province’s abysmal record when it comes to credit 
rating. You choose to blame economic conditions, you cry 
economic conditions. But you know, in spite of the fact that 
successive budgets by your government have reduced the 
amount of money available through urban revenue sharing to 
cities such as Regina and Saskatoon, the finances of Regina and 
Saskatoon are in a better condition than that of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And despite the fact that you have given this province massive 
tax increases every year since you took over the portfolio, you 
have not controlled the waste and mismanagement enough to 
reduce the accumulated  

deficit by one penny — by one penny, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — To the contrary, you’ve increased it, and 
you’ve increased it in a magnificent way I might add, Mr. 
Minister. You know, despite the fact that Regina and Saskatoon 
have had to suffer through the same tough times in agriculture 
because those cities’ economies are very dependent on what 
happens across the province, what happens in agriculture — 
despite that fact, they are managing and they are not blaming 
everyone else for their troubles. 
 
Mr. Minister, the impression that I receive, the impression that 
people across Saskatchewan receive, is that you are 
incompetent. And it’s because of your incompetence and 
because of your mismanagement that the credit rating of the 
province has slipped. And therefore we are having to spend 
more to borrow money. That is a fact, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I guess what the people of Saskatchewan want to know, 
what concrete plans do you have now? Put aside all your words 
about we’re going to do this, we’re going to do that. Where are 
your concrete plans to stimulate the economy, to restore some 
confidence in the economy of this province and also to restore 
the credit rating in this province? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve indicated some of them, and I’m 
pleased to be able to respond to the hon. member. 
 
Let me first of all clarify and clear up a belief that the hon. 
member has that it costs the province more to borrow. If in fact 
you check the borrowing rates of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and you can check your 30-day treasury Bills or 90-day treasury 
Bills if you want an immediate one, we are borrowing at 
virtually the same rate as the province of Alberta, virtually the 
same rate as the province of Alberta. 
 
We have within one or within a basis point  . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . Well one one-hundredth of a per cent I think is 
really a massive expenditure  . . (inaudible interjection)  . . Well 
except that if you’re prepared to take that argument, then we’ll 
take you and table you some borrowings where we borrowed at 
a better rate — a better rate  . . (inaudible interjection)  . . Yes 
we have. And we have done some borrowings at a better rate 
than the province of Alberta. 
 
So having said that, I suggest to the hon. member, we did a 
borrowing, I believe, a year ago in the Euro-Canadian market at 
a better rate — major borrowing, $350 million — better rate 
than the province of Alberta. So all I’m telling you is that to say 
that the credit rating changes have impacted on the cost of 
borrowing, it’s simply not true. 
 
And I’ll take it further and give you the argument of how it 
works against Saskatchewan. You can take Manitoba, 
long-suffering Manitoba, trying to get its house in order after 17 
years of NDP government, has a lower credit rating than the 
province of Saskatchewan — lower credit rating than the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1034 
 

An Hon. Member: — That’s because they haven’t got any oil. 
That’s the difference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, no. They have hydro. They have hydro. 
They have a large city  . . a much more diversified economy 
because of a large city, hydro, massive hydro projects. So I 
suggest to the hon. member, they’re able to borrow at virtually 
the same rate as Saskatchewan and Alberta. So don’t make the 
argument, because it’s not a correct one that the credit rating 
has affected borrowing. It has not. 
 
Having said that, you ask what we’re trying to do. I’ve 
indicated what we put out in this year’s budget a five-point plan 
to try and help the smaller communities. We’ve allowed the 
rural municipalities to have a capital program. We’ve allowed 
the cultural and recreational facilities grant program which will 
be designed to assist — not totally, but in part — the smaller 
communities. 
 
We’ve allowed the establishment of business associations so 
that businesses in the smaller centres can get together, try and 
attract new businesses to diversify and stabilize themselves, 
remain viable, and the government will guarantee the loan. 
 
We can talk about the changes to the venture capital so that 
smaller communities  . . the rural development corporations, 
which are very popular in rural Saskatchewan because they’re a 
vehicle to let people try and diversify their economy and 
stabilize their economy, will now be eligible for the venture 
capital programs. 
 
We talk about public participation, and we have debate of trying 
to get Saskatchewan people to invest in their own province. 
You don’t like that. That’s your choice. Nearly 80,000 people 
— nearly 80,000 people — have chosen to try and invest in 
their own province, be they Power bonds, SaskTel bonds, be 
they Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan, be they employees in 
WESTBRIDGE, employees in other activities. When we put 
them all together, nearly 80,000 people have chosen. We’ve 
given them the vehicles to do that, to help them participate in 
their economy and in the economic development of this 
province. 
 
We’ve set up the venture capital, the stock savings plan. We’ve 
also set up programs to attract business. And you say we 
shouldn’t be going out advertising to try and tell people about 
Saskatchewan. Last year we had more applications on tourism 
than in any other time in our province’s history, and I think it 
fair to say that everybody was expecting after Expo ’86 that 
there would be a drop-off. In fact there was an increase. 
 
And we’ve talked about the efforts to process our agricultural 
products here. And we’ve done it with Intercon and Gainers and 
Yorkton — progressive meats, I believe, in Yorkton — Canada 
Packers in Moose Jaw. 
 
And we talk about processing our forests, and we announced a 
paper mill. You said it wouldn’t happen. You’re welcome to go 
to P.A. You can judge whether it’s operating or not yourself. 
We’re trying to process our oil and gas here in the province. 
We’re trying to process our  

resources here in the province. So you ask what our plans are. 
That’s a rather broad scope right there. And I could go on and 
on and on and list some of the projects if you want that. 
 
Now am I standing up and saying that the problem is solved? 
Not in the least. Am I standing up and saying that processing 
our resources here in the province is the right thing to do? I am, 
and I believe it is the right thing to do. And is it the right thing 
to do to try and process our agriculture here? I believe it is; the 
government believes it is. And we’re trying to do that and 
we’ve had some successes. Is it the right thing to do, in our 
view, to try and get the people to participate? This government 
happens to believe it is the right thing to do. 
 
So to say, you know, that we haven’t done anything  . . you may 
disagree with what we’ve done — that’s your affair and that’s 
your position; that’s what this legislature is all about — but 
we’ve laid it out, and there’ll be more, and there’ll be more 
announcements coming. But I mean, we have a long way to go 
to diversify the economy, and this government fully recognizes 
that, but I think that we have taken steps to move the process 
along and to try and diversify the economy. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, when you look at all 
the economic indices — let’s take, for example, the net 
out-migration, the people that are leaving the province in 
droves, or whether you want to take housing starts in 
Saskatchewan as an index of economic activity — and then one 
listens to your words, the conclusion that the people of 
Saskatchewan have come to: too little, too late; step aside; let 
someone else do the job and do it better. That’s the conclusion 
that the people of Saskatchewan have come to. 
 
I just want to deal one point, Mr. Minister, one point. When I 
asked you about borrowing, about borrowing, you said, well, 
there’s no difference in terms of Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
Then you qualified it, and you said, well, virtually no 
difference. Then you said, on a given a day we might be able to 
get a better rate than Alberta has on the market on that 
particular day. And I don’t quarrel with that. I would also say 
that there probably days that Alberta and other jurisdictions do 
better than Saskatchewan in terms of borrowing on that 
particular day. 
 
But overall, overall there is a virtual difference, there is a virtual 
difference, and even if it’s one one-hundredths of a point, Mr. 
Minister, when you start talking about millions of dollars, it 
begins to add up, it begins to add up. 
 
You know there’s an old saying, an old saying: penny wise, 
pound foolish. I think the saying that they can apply to you and 
your government is penny foolish and pound foolish. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to direct your attention 
to the taxation policy that you have put forth here, and I want to 
ask you a very straightforward question regarding how you 
work with the federal government. Do you believe that your 
system of taxation should parallel the federal government’s 
system of taxation? That is, if you have a deduction for a 
married  
  



 
May 9, 1989 

1035 
 

equivalent, for example, should you have the same kind of a 
deduction on the provincial level as well? Is that a general 
principle that you’re trying to follow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would wonder, Mr. Speaker, why you 
wouldn’t. I would wonder why you wouldn’t, Mr. Minister. 
 
There’s two issues here that I want to bring to your attention: 
one with respect children who are 18 years of age, who this year 
got a deduction at the federal level but not at the provincial 
level; and secondly, a deduction that’s available to people at the 
federal level, a disability for dependants other than spouses. 
 
Now in both cases we’re talking about families, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re talking about families. Your government has tried to 
make a lot about how you are favouring families. Here we have 
a situation where you have two, what I think are glaring 
omissions, very glaring omissions — very glaring omissions. 
 
One case where the federal government is obviously treating a 
family of somebody up to 18 years of age and you aren’t, and 
allowing a deduction and you’re omitting, and you already  . . 
you could have fixed it up, because we brought it to your 
attention. 
 
And the second case where — and I draw your attention 
directly to page 3 of the income tax book, page 3, where there is 
a non-refundable tax credit available to a dependant other than a 
spouse, line 318 at the federal level. And yet when you go to the 
provincial tax level, what do you do? You omit it. There is not a 
thing there in terms of a deduction for a family member other 
than the spouse in the case of disability. There are many people 
in this province who are supporting family members that are 
disabled, and it would be just  . . well, it would serve a good 
purpose, Mr. Minister, if you had a parallel system. 
 
You know what you’re doing? Not only are you penalizing 
families when you’re not providing that kind of a deduction, but 
you’re also penalizing somebody who is disabled or somebody 
who is trying to help disabled people. Why didn’t you put into 
the Saskatchewan income tax deductions an amount for a 
family member who is supporting a disabled person other than a 
spouse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I don’t know if the hon. member  . . 
you asked the question at the outset, are we trying to have a 
parallel system? Understand that under our tax collection 
system, all provinces except the province of Quebec have the 
federal government collect the personal income tax. Two 
provinces have their own collection system on the corporate 
side. Within that, there are some parameters established by the 
federal government as to what variations from the system the 
federal government will allow. Okay, they’re fairly limited, 
because they can’t, in their view, have a system which in effect 
allows each province to set up it’s own system — one of the 
constraints we have on tax reform here. Having said that, I’m 
not disagreeing with the point you make with regard to the 
disability exemption. You have a fair point. Whether the federal 
one is adequate or not is something  

I’m prepared to take a look at. 
 
With regard to the change — and we had discussed this earlier 
in the session of the raising the age from 17 to 18 — as I 
indicated, all of the provinces, because it came late in the year, 
were unable to make the adjustments. I’ve already undertaken 
that in our amendments to the legislation this year, of The 
Income Tax Act, we will make the adjustment so that we’re in 
compliance with the federal government. It did come late, and 
my understanding is that no province was able to comply as a 
result. 
 
But take a look on the other side what we’ve chosen to do 
within the federal system. We have the only tax credit for single 
parents. No other province has that. We have a seniors’ tax 
reduction which no other province has to my knowledge. We 
have the low income tax reduction which in effect is savings of 
about $42 million, which affects the tax level at which income 
tax comes into play. So it may come into play at a lower rate on 
the federal and at a higher level of income for the province. 
 
So you ask if we were going to have an absolutely parallel 
system, or a parallel system. I said no. We’re within the federal 
system, but certainly we have chosen where we could, with the 
changes, to recognize some of the issues that we wanted to deal 
with. And I’ve indicated seniors and I’ve talked about the single 
parents, which I think the hon. member would support me on, in 
terms of having a special tax deduction there which no other 
province has. I’m prepared to take a look for next year’s at the 
point you make. 
 
On the other, I don’t think your position’s unfair. Whether we 
will be able to do it or that will be the area chosen to try and 
help the disabled, that’s a matter of some debate  . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Being 5 o’clock, the committee is recessed 
till 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


