


















































June 14, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 14, 1989 
 

1883 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to you and through you, on behalf of the 
Deputy Premier, the member from Souris-Cannington, 32 
students from Carlyle public school, seated in the west gallery. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Sharon 
Kish and Miss Deborah Petruic; chaperons, Mrs. Heather 
Mitchell, Mrs. Joanne Brown, and Mrs. Whitehouse; bus driver, 
Ms. Valerie Gallenger. 
 
We welcome you to the Assembly today. I trust you’re having 
an enjoyable time in the city. May you find the proceedings 
informative. I look forward to meeting you at 3 p.m. out on the 
lawn out front. 
 
Would you join me in welcoming the guests this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, a group of 52 students from Arcola School, 
which is located in Regina Victoria constituency. These 
students are from grades 5 and 6. They’re accompanied by Mrs. 
Laurie Koepke, Mr. Kelly Maupin, and Mr. Eric Ingham. I’ll be 
meeting with the students after the question period for 
questions, pictures, and drinks. I look forward to that. 
 
And I ask the members to join with me to make these students 
feel welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a delegation of 13 
persons sitting in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, these are faculty 
members and students of the University of Utara in Malaysia, 
and the University of Saskatchewan, faculty of Commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan has had a long 
history of involvement in international development, and the 
university has received, over the years, scholarship students 
from various parts of the developing world and has collaborated 
with institutions in developing their world. The proposal that 
the two faculties will be dealing with originates from the 
University of Saskatchewan, College of Commerce, Mr. 
Speaker, and even though as a faculty unit this will be the first 
college’s formal application to the Canadian International 
Development Agency, they have been involved in various other 
economic development areas. 
 
We will be hosting a number of students here at the University 
of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, and later this year a number of 
our students will be going over to help  

set up the University of Utara in Malaysia. 
 
I would ask all members to please welcome not only our 
students from our country but our international students and 
faculty members. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
this Assembly, 80 grade 7 and 8 students from the Elsie 
Mironuck School in Regina North West. They are seated in the 
east gallery. They are accompanied by Mlle. Notenboom, Mrs. 
Wright, Mrs. Gunnlaugson and Mr. Nelson. 
 
I want to tell the students that at the International Childrens’ 
Festival yesterday I ran into Elsie Mironuck herself, and had a 
very pleasant, short visit with her. And I’d like to say, Mr. 
Speaker, to this Assembly that I look forward to meeting with 
you after question period to discuss issues which you believe 
are important. And I hope that you enjoy your tour today, and I 
wish you a safe journey home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
welcome the second group of seniors from Indian Head that are 
taking part in the seniors’ fitness course over at the Paul 
Schwann Centre. 
 
We have eight of them in here today with us. They’re seated in 
the front row of your gallery. They are Mr. Ben Hewson, 
Mandy Krofchek, Lionel Smith, Cliff Kinney, Gordon Smith, 
Vivian Dorn, Eleanor McLean, and Terry Glass. 
 
I would like the residents of Indian Head to stand and everyone 
welcome them. I’ll meet with you after question period to 
discuss what you’ve seen here today. Welcome to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Loan to Ken Waschuk 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Justice, and it concerns the GigaText scandal. Minister, on 
June 2 in this House we raised the question of a no-interest loan 
of $150,000 paid by Mr. Guy Montpetit to your PC 
government’s pollster and friend, Ken Waschuk. 
 
At the time, your colleague, the minister responsible for 
SEDCO, said that this money was not GigaText money and that 
it did not come from Saskatchewan taxpayers. Is that also your 
contention, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, that question has been 
raised in that form before, and the response I gave at that  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1884 
 

time is that that matter is subject to the investigation by the 
RCMP, and that report is to be coming down very shortly. And 
let’s leave it to that investigation to determine that question. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Justice. Minister, we’re not asking you at this time about the 
status of the RCMP investigation, although we hope that a 
report on that investigation will be presented to this House in 
the very near future. What we are asking you about is your 
government’s knowledge, or a lack thereof, about the spending 
of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Minister, my question is this: are you familiar with the report 
compiled by the court-appointed inspector of Mr. Montpetit’s 
companies, presented in the Montreal court case, which clearly 
shows that the $150,000 loan received by your pollster, Ken 
Waschuk, came directly from GigaText money, channelled 
through the Montpetit controlled or operated companies, Lisp, 
Edubi, and Koyama? Are you familiar with that report, and 
when did you become aware of both that loan and its sources? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the question was advanced 
earlier on. What I indicated at that time, and I indicate now, is 
that the government became aware of some allegations last 
October or November, and the response, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Department of Justice was to refer this matter to an RCMP 
investigation. And that’s exactly what we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I am advised that the RCMP are close to concluding that 
investigation and will report accordingly. And I simply say, that 
is part of the gamut of that investigation. I think it’s only proper 
that we wait and see what the outcome of that will be. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
What we’re trying to find out, Mr. Minister, is how you spent 
the money and who was accountable. 
 
Mr. Waschuk, when interviewed in Montreal regarding this 
scandal that your government is involved in, said that he, at the 
request of Senator Michel Cogger, who’s a mutual friend of 
both he and the Prime Minister, facilitated getting Mr. 
Montpetit and your government together to discuss his proposal 
for a translation service. 
 
Can you tell us if Mr. Waschuk made that approach to you, the 
Deputy Premier, one of your Executive Council colleagues, and 
when he made that approach? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated again that it 
was under the parameters of the investigation by the RCMP. 
With regards to any allegation, the questions that they ask — 
did Mr. Waschuk make any representation to me, and that’s the 
only one I can respond to — the answer is no, he made no 
representation to me whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. My question, 
very simply, Minister, is: you seem to be the senior member on 
the benches this afternoon; you are  

sort of the acting premier. We in the opposition want to know 
who Mr. Waschuk contacted in your government. Was it the 
Deputy Premier, the Premier, or was it one of your cabinet 
colleagues, and when did he do this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, what I indicated before to 
the question is, did . . . the question was asked to me, did he 
make representation to me? And the answer was . . . I said no. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. members are requesting that, did 
Mr. Waschuk make some representations to the government? I 
indicated to you that this matter was referred to the RCMP, is 
going to be investigated. Any improper activity will be 
investigated by the RCMP and will be reported accordingly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I think my question is to the Minister of 
Justice, but if he’s not answering for the government as a senior 
minister, then I would like to address this question to whoever 
is answering for the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, will you tell this House: when was 
the last time anyone in your government commissioned Mr. 
Waschuk to undertake any poll or conduct any other research 
for your government? And secondly, can you tell us when was 
the first, or, for that matter, the last time anyone in your 
government discussed with Mr. Waschuk the propriety of his 
accepting this loan from Mr. Montpetit, this loan which was 
paid by Mr. Montpetit’s Bermuda company to Mr. Waschuk’s 
Bermuda company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
question, is that I can advise the hon. member with regards to 
myself, and that is I’ve had no contact with Mr. Waschuk. I am 
not familiar with any work that has gone to Mr. Waschuk since 
such and such a time. I don’t have that information available, 
Mr. Speaker. I will take notice of the question and I will bring 
the answer back to the House. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister. 
Minister, I want to refer you to the October 20, 1988 memo 
from Dr. Douglas Young, in which he sets out his concerns over 
the way GigaText finances are being handled. And during a 
conversation with Mr. Montpetit that is related in this memo, 
Dr. Young expressed his objections to giving up his shares in 
Norlus to meet certain commitments, at which time he says he 
was told by Mr. Montpetit: unless I agreed to this, unless I 
agreed to give up these shares, the agreement with 
Saskatchewan could not be achieved because he — that is 
Montpetit — would not be able to honour the promises he had 
already made to certain individuals. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, have you undertaken to determine, as part 
of your responsibility for taxpayers’ money, if there were 
considerations paid to Mr. Waschuk? 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1885 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, my responsibility on this 
particular matter was when there was allegations made of 
criminal activity, then it was my obligation to refer that matter 
to the RCMP, and that’s in fact what I did. That is exactly what 
I did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the hon. member has posed many of those questions in the 
House before. The Deputy Premier has indicated that he is 
responsible for that file and will respond to those particular 
questions, Mr. Speaker. And I simply take notice of any further 
question that is not a duplication of ones asked before, and the 
Deputy Premier will in fact respond to those questions. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister. 
Minister, the RCMP are concerned only with the question of 
whether a crime was committed. What we’re concerned with in 
our questions in this House is the taxpayers’ money. In short, 
we want the taxpayers’ money back, and the RCMP aren’t 
going to be able to achieve that. Now that’s the object of our 
questioning. Now Mr. Montpetit got Mr. Young to put up some 
of his shares in Norlus to raise cash for these considerations. To 
quote Dr. Young, he said: 
 

He (meaning Montpetit) also said that he would hold the 
shares in trust, although he may dispense some to the 
named persons, and that one person in particular had to 
receive only cash. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, are you not interested at all in knowing who 
it is that demands a cash payment to set up deals with your 
government, or is it possible that you do know and you’re just 
not prepared to share that information with us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now the hon. member poses a question, 
and he is an hon. member and a practising lawyer in this 
province — he makes a statement with regard to somebody 
demanding payment. Now if somebody has in fact demanded 
payment to arrange for meetings, then I suggest that that falls 
into the purview of a criminal investigation, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s where it should properly be left. That was where it was 
referred by the Department of Justice. I am advised by the 
RCMP that they are very close to completing their investigation 
and will respond accordingly. 
 
I would say to the hon. member, as an hon. member of this 
House and as a practising lawyer, that is a proper course to 
follow, and I think it is proper that we let the course of justice 
follow its course. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well let me ask a new question, Mr. Speaker. 
Let me ask this just simply, Minister, because we’re dealing 
with taxpayers’ money here: have you made any effort 
whatever to recover this $150,000 from your pollster Mr. Ken 
Waschuk? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will respond again in this 
way: that the allegations were referred. If there is wrongdoing, 
then appropriate action will be taken. It will  

be taken either on the criminal side or it will be taken on the 
civil side. Now I simply say to the hon. member that let the 
course of justice take its course. 
 

Trips to Boston and Regina By Deputy Premier 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
question to the same minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to deal 
directly with another aspect of this scam, this GigaText scandal, 
and one which speaks directly to your credibility, your 
government’s credibility in the answers that have been 
presented to this House. 
 
On June 5 we asked in this House whether or not the Deputy 
Premier flew to Boston with Montpetit in a private jet. He chose 
not to answer by saying he once flew back from Montreal to 
Regina with Montpetit to save the cost of an Air Canada ticket. 
He may have saved the cost of an Air Canada ticket, but that 
junket ended up costing the taxpayers about five and a quarter 
million dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have evidence here filed in court, a passenger list 
for a private jet, which shows clearly that the Deputy Premier, 
Montpetit, and two others on September 16, 1988 flew from 
Montreal to Bedford, Massachusetts, just outside of Boston, on 
to Peterboro, New Jersey, and then back to Montreal. 
 
I want you to answer to this House, Mr. Minister, why did your 
government hide that information last week, or is the RCMP 
just investigating that too? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me respond in two ways, Mr. 
Speaker. The hon. member says that five and a half million or 
five and a quarter million dollars has been lost. I think that still 
remains to be seen with regard to whether or not this system 
will work. And I think it’s appropriate to look and wait and see 
if that particular system will work. 
 
Now I recall, Mr. Speaker, the questions and answers in the 
House here a week to 10 days ago, and I remember the hon. 
member posing questions to the Deputy Premier and the Deputy 
Premier responding. Now what exactly was that question asked 
to the Deputy Premier, I would like an opportunity to review it. 
The Deputy Premier will be in the House tomorrow, and the 
Deputy Premier can respond to that particular question. 
 

Trip to Winnipeg by Cabinet Ministers 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Minister. I also see 
from those aircraft records that the Deputy Premier, Mr. Leier, 
and Mr. Montpetit did indeed fly from Montreal to Regina on 
September 20 of last year and that the cost of the flight was 
$11,014.92, or about $3,672 per passenger, and that it was 
billed to GigaText, and GigaText was using taxpayers’ money 
to fund that. If that’s a saving to Saskatchewan over a regular 
Air Canada one-way ticket between Montreal and Regina, I 
think you better talk with your buddy, the Premier, and your 
friend Ken Waschuk. 
 
Would you confirm that in April of last year Mr. Montpetit used 
his private plane to ferry the Deputy Premier, the  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1886 
 

Minister of Justice, the Minister of Science and Technology, the 
minister responsible for SEDCO, and Mr. Leier to Winnipeg 
and back? And why didn’t you mention that flight in this 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the 
question about a trip to Winnipeg by the Deputy Premier, the 
minister of consumer and corporate affairs, and myself, that 
clearly happened, and I have nothing to hide with regard to that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happened, Mr. Speaker — if the hon. members are 
interested in a response to the question — what happened is that 
three or four of us went over to Winnipeg in the morning and 
came back at noon to look at the particular computer system 
that was there and came back, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, went 
over to see a computer system in Winnipeg and came back, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now you could either go over there and look at it; you could 
take the government aircraft; you could take a commercial 
aircraft; you could take this aircraft. At this point in time there 
was no agreement, Mr. Speaker. There was no company or 
anything else, and I saw nothing wrong with doing that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can you 
tell this House how many ministers it takes to blow five and a 
quarter million of taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. members 
posed that question, and the response by the Deputy Premier a 
number of days in question period was, let’s give the system a 
chance to see whether it works or doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. If 
it doesn’t work, the Deputy Premier indicated in this House that 
he takes responsibility for that, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s just 
proper. 
 
I think, if I recall the date, it was June 17 or somewhere close to 
that day when it was to determine whether or not this system 
would work or not, Mr. Speaker, and I think we should just be 
patient and see if that in fact does work. 
 

Payment by GigaText to Terry Leier 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister in charge of SEDCO. Madam Minister, you said in 
this House when we first started questioning about GigaText 
that the Deputy Premier respond to questions that were taken 
notice of then. We’re still waiting and still the Minister of 
Justice is taking more notice of more questions, and we’d like 
you to stick to your word and eventually answer the questions 
that you’ve taken notice of. 
 
I’ll try one on you now, Madam Minister: since you claimed 
that the $5,000 paid by Giga Text to Mr. Leier was an advance 
on legitimate board expenses including travel, and since Mr. 
Leier availed himself of Mr. Montpetit’s private plane on at 
least three occasions for  

travel, would you table all the receipts that Mr. Leier claimed 
against the advance of $5,000 so that the legitimacy of the 
expenses can be proven? Or is this solicitor for the Crown 
investment corporation also under RCMP investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it was 
clearly indicated by the Minister of Justice that when the 
allegations first arose in Montreal, the whole matter of 
GigaText — the expenditures, the purchases, every penny — 
was referred to an RCMP investigation. And I also indicated, in 
answer to the very same question a number of weeks ago, that 
all payments to and from GigaText were under investigation. 
 

Trip to San Francisco and Other Places 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A new question to the same minister, or the 
Minister of Justice, or the Premier, if the Premier cares to get 
involved in the scandalous activity of his cabinet ministers. 
 
We also see from the flight records that Mr. Montpetit last 
August took a brief, two-day trip to San Francisco, 
Minneapolis, and back to Montreal, with one Grace Sim, and 
that amount was billed to GigaText. Incidentally, Madam 
Minister, this was on a weekend. 
 
The day before, Mr. Montpetit, Ms. Sim, Mr. Leier, Mr. 
Waschuk used the jet to fly to Saskatoon. One would assume 
that in the course of that day’s flight Mr. Montpetit’s plans for 
use of the jet the next day would have come up in conversation. 
Why did such a stalwart civil servant such as Mr. Leier and 
your good buddy Ken Waschuk, why wouldn’t they advise and 
report to you that taxpayers’ dollars were being used for a little 
jaunt to the Golden Gate for what — to inspect the streets of 
San Francisco? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member some time ago, I have only had responsibility for 
GigaText through SEDCO’s involvement late November, or 
some time around then, when we were sent in to run the daily 
workings of GigaText. But what I would point out, Mr. 
Speaker, is that here we have the NDP, knowing full well there 
is a complete police investigation on; knowing that there is a 
trial, I believe it’s a civil trial, on in Montreal. They bandy 
about names of Ken Waschuk, of Terry Leier, of Mr. Montpetit, 
Dr. Young. 
 
These people are more interested in character assassination than 
waiting for the normal steps to proceed and the investigation to 
be complete and tabled with the Minister of Justice. They are 
more interested in innuendo, allegation, and character 
assassination. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, same minister. We understand 
the RCMP investigation is very important. We anxiously await 
the report of the RCMP to come into this House. It doesn’t 
excuse you, Madam Minister, of being  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1887 
 

accountable for taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Madam Minister, it’s all too apparent that this 
Quebec high-flyer had you and your government bamboozled 
with his private jet and his fast life-style, to the extent that you 
didn’t care where the taxpayers’ dollars went. In fact, whenever 
there was a flight going they must have just asked, how many 
cabinet ministers want to get on board? Four want to go to 
Winnipeg today as computer experts? 
 
Madam Minister, is that all it takes to distract you people from 
doing your job as watch-dogs over the money of the taxpayers 
of the people of Saskatchewan? And can anyone with a smooth 
line and a private jet come into this province and do the people 
of Saskatchewan out of five and a quarter million dollars 
without any sort of accountability on the part of your 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we also indicated in the 
same line of questioning a number of weeks ago that we have 
given the company until June 17 to demonstrate that the 
technology is valid. We will wait, and we have a high degree of 
confidence, Mr. Speaker, that the technology will work, the 
technology will work. 
 
And I suppose, Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas had just as much 
fun flying on Husky’s jet as we did on whatever. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary to a previous question, Mr. 
Speaker. The flight that I referred to where Mr. Montpetit and 
Ms. Sim went on a weekend from Regina to San Francisco . . . 
it cost for that day flight down there, $5,385.89 of taxpayers 
money. 
 
The next day they came back — same people, Guy Montpetit, 
Grace Sim — at the end of the weekend, that is, Madam 
Minister, from San Francisco to Minneapolis to Montreal. That 
cost of that flight was $9,901.24 — over $15,000. Now, Madam 
Minister, could you tell us, aside from the RCMP investigation, 
aside from translating services, could you tell what business on 
behalf of the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan with 
GigaText that those two individuals were doing on a weekend, 
costing us $15,000 just for travel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, what I can confirm is that 
since SEDCO has gone in to do the daily management of 
GigaText, all payments from GigaText were deemed to be 
legitimate and were confirmed to be legitimate. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question. Madam Minister, do you give 
us your undertaking you will find out the reason for that trip, so 
these two individuals go off to San Francisco, come back at our 
expense, the taxpayers’ expense. It cost us $15,000 plus. Will 
you find out the purpose of the trip, and if you can’t prove it 
was GigaText business, we’ll get our money back? 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I will 
neither confirm nor deny the allegations made by the hon. 
member, but what I can say is that all payments that were made 
after SEDCO took over the daily management of GigaText 
were validated as being legitimate payments. As to the 
allegations made by the hon. member that so and so, and so and 
so flew here and there, I don’t have knowledge of that. And I 
will undertake to see what he asked. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Supplementary. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting Personal Care Homes 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Personal Care Homes. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me today 
to rise before the Assembly and propose second reading of a 
Bill to introduce The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1989. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to provide some background 
regarding the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
ACS, and I will explain the intent of the amendments to this 
Act, which will ensure this government can continue its 
commitment to provide farm families with financing options 
and indeed more protection. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1888 
 

First let me say, Mr. Speaker, the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan was formed by this government 
in January 1984 in response to the fact that we had very high 
interest rates. ACS was to provide low interest rate loans to 
farmers with intensive agriculture operations, primarily 
livestock and irrigation — both for diversification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During the past seven years of this administration, we have 
provided Saskatchewan farmers with total interest savings of 
over $327 million under the ACS production loan and cash 
advance programs, plus interest rate rebates under the farm 
purchase program. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, $327 million in 
money saved by Saskatchewan farmers as a result of ACS. Mr. 
Speaker, that is 327 million of interest rate savings directly to 
Saskatchewan farmers in just seven years. 
 
The farming community of this province is advising this 
government that it believes this kind of interest rate protection 
and financial assistance is extremely important to them, and it 
should continue. As a result of the advice we’ve received and 
are continuing to receive from farmers, the government is 
furthering its commitment to agriculture by providing 
innovative new financing options and financial assistance for 
families involved in farming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1989, has been developed to 
enable ACS to broaden its mandate and to provide alternative 
financing services to farmers and ranchers without discouraging 
the continued participation of commercial lenders in agriculture 
financing. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the amendment to the 
agricultural corporation Act in 1989 is a delicate balance to 
encourage financing for farmers from lending institutions, but 
to provide the back-up and the safety net to farmers when they 
need our help. 
 
The expansion of the ACS mandate includes provisions to do 
the following, Mr. Speaker. One, provide financing for the 
purchase of the home quarter, which is very important. And as 
our ministers travelled across Saskatchewan and MLAs 
continue to talk with people, they said, please protect the home 
quarter and do whatever you can to make sure the home, the 
livestock operation, the dairy operation, the feed lot, or the 
garage, or whatever it might be, that it’s part and parcel of the 
home, the family home is protected. 
 
Secondly, to finance the purchase and construction or 
renovation of buildings and improvements including the 
existing house on the home quarter; and three, provide loans for 
farmers who are able to provide adequate security to 
re-establish, re-establish their farm operations following a 
negotiated debt settlement agreement with their existing 
lenders. In other words, Mr. Speaker, we will be there to help 
people start again where it is at all viable to protect their home, 
and indeed, not only the home quarter but other land as well. 
 
To be eligible, once the legislation is approved, the farmer must 
have negotiated a settlement as a result of an involuntary 
appearance before the Farm Land Security  

Board, Farm Debt Review Board or mediation services. 
 
Eligible items would include existing livestock, the home 
quarter or yard site, and any or all of the land that form part of 
the settlement agreement with his existing lender. 
 
Farmers who have negotiated settlements prior to this 
legislation being approved, or who are continuing to farm, may 
be eligible as well, Mr. Speaker, if they have not been able to 
obtain financing from some other source. 
 
In addition, the following changes will be made to the lending 
program: firstly, non-farm income will be eliminated as an 
eligibility criteria. Farmers with off-farm income will be 
eligible for loans under the capital loan program. 
 
Up till now, Mr. Speaker, if people had off-farm income they 
were often not eligible to get loans for farming. As you know, 
many, many young people are forced to work off the farm as 
well as on the farm. Some are driving a school bus, some are 
doing some work in town, some work in the winter-time, some 
do custom work. We think that’s a good idea, and in fact if we 
can encourage young people to work, then in fact you can help 
pay for the land. We’re not going to discriminate against young 
people who are prepared to do some off-farm work to save the 
family farm. Secondly, the maximum net worth to qualify under 
the program will be increased by $50,000, from $450,000 to 
$500,000. Third, provisions will be made to capitalize start-up 
costs to intensive livestock operations financed through ACS. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, we’re finding that the balance, and 
the better balance, improved balance between grain and 
livestock has helped deepen and broaden the Saskatchewan 
economy. And certainly in agriculture it’s worked. So to the 
extent that we can help diversify the agricultural sector by 
expanding the livestock industry and intensify those operations, 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that it’s a good idea. 
 
Fourth, the corporation will provide financing to an existing 
farm without the requirement that an expansion be undertaken. 
This change will allow ACS to finance, for example, 
renovations or improvements to an extensive, intensive 
livestock facility without the requirement that the operation be 
expanded, so we can improve the quality of the operation and 
not just expand the operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And many people have said that if they can have more 
efficiency and better economy of scale through diversification 
and intensification, they can do a better job of the size they have 
as opposed to just growing larger. And farmers have given us 
that view and expressed that view time and time again, Mr. 
Speaker, and this legislation will accommodate that wish. 
 
And fifthly, farmers whose net worth exceeds $500,000 will be 
able to obtain loans for the purchase of a home quarter and the 
purchase of construction or buildings and permanent 
improvements on the home quarter as well. 
 
A third aspect of this amendment, Mr. Speaker, is an interesting 
program that was suggested to us by farmers  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1889 
 

and moms and dads that want to see the land and the farm 
passed on to the next generation but don’t necessarily want to 
go to a bank at all or a credit union or the farm credit or 
anybody else. A program called the guarantee vendor mortgage 
will be introduced to increase the availability of capital and 
reduce borrowing costs to farmers while encouraging residents 
of Saskatchewan, especially retiring farmers, to invest in 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people know that the average age of the 
farmer in the province of Saskatchewan has been increasing 
because it’s been difficult to pass the land on to the next 
generation. Because of the fear of high interest rates, because of 
the loss of cash flow, and because, Mr. Speaker, frankly it’s 
difficult to get operating money and borrow money from 
financial institutions in many cases, farmers have been unable 
or unwilling to transfer the land to the next generation. They 
said, could you help us do that and avoid the financial 
institutions. And we said, perhaps we can. 
 
This option, this alternative, I believe, will be increasingly 
popular across Saskatchewan. The program conditions will be 
as follows: first, ACS will guarantee 100 per cent of the 
principal on land mortgage carried by the vendor. In other 
words, if a father or mom or farmer who thinks about retiring 
wants to sell to the young people that are coming up, the 
government will back up that sale 100 per cent under certain 
conditions. 
 
Two, the interest rate is agreed upon by the vendor, that is the 
seller and purchaser, and cannot exceed 1 per cent below the 
5-year Bank of Montreal GIC (guaranteed investment 
certificate) rate. In other words, if it’s a fair deal for both 
parties, Mr. Speaker, we’ll back it up. The rate is fixed for five 
years so that we know that the young people will have a chance 
to make the payment, and the people that are selling also feel 
confident that it’s a fair return for them. 
 
Three, the maximum loan guarantee will be $500,000 for 
individual operators. In a multiple operator unit, the maximum 
loan guarantee would be the same as the capital loan program. 
This means that multiple operator farms will be eligible for a 
maximum aggregate amount of up to $2 million based on the 
number of operators times $500,000. 
 
Fourth, the loan is amortized over a minimum of 10 years and a 
maximum of 25 years. 
 
Five, the vendor must hold first mortgage on the property 
purchased as security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure there is a minimal interference in private 
agreements, the program will be constructed in the following 
fashion. The payments are made directly from the buyer to the 
vendor with a copy of the receipt provided to the lending 
institution, that is ACS. The guarantee vendor mortgage 
program is structured to allow for flexibility within the 
program. 
 
(1445) 
 
I’ll give you another example. Either the vendor or buyer may 
transfer the agreement with the guarantee subject to  

prior approval to an individual, a co-operative, a farm 
partnership, or farm corporation who meet program eligibility 
criteria. And I ran this by the credit union, a couple of hundred 
members last night in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. And many 
people there were saying that, you know, it’s just to the point 
where if you’re going to have to pay interest to somebody, 
many farmers are saying, I’d like to have it paid to the family, 
not to the financial institution, but indeed to the family. 
 
And if in fact we can back up that process and that alternative, 
so if you want to sell to somebody in your community or to 
your son or to your daughter or somebody else, and you want 
the interest to go to the family and go to the young people and 
stay in that family unit, then in fact the government can back it 
up and it’s a win-win situation for both the buyer and the seller. 
 
And frankly, the credit union and other financial institutions 
have said: look, if people want to sell to one another, I mean, 
fair enough. There’s an awful lot of opportunity to provide 
credit to people, but if that’s the way they want to do it and save 
the interest rate for the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers 
of Saskatchewan, I give you a bouquet; I think it’s a good idea; 
let’s see if it will work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new and growing markets throughout the world 
provide both challenges and opportunities for agriculture and 
food producers in Saskatchewan. If we can design new 
instruments, financial instruments, in our province to help 
protect them, to help save the family farm, the home quarter, 
help them refinance, help them build better livestock 
intensification operations, irrigation operations; if we can help 
transfer the land from one generation to another and avoid 
interest payments — and what I mean avoiding them, the 
interest stays in the family and we can back that up by 
government. 
 
A combination of those alternatives will now be available to the 
people of Saskatchewan. They can go to the credit union, they 
can go to farm credit, they can go to a bank, they can go to a 
combination of various agricultural programs in government, or 
they can just do it themselves with the back-up and the 
guarantee of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1989, allows this government, 
for the first time in Saskatchewan history, and I believe one of 
the first times . . . possibly the first time in the country, to 
continue to enhance its commitment to provide financial 
assistance and interest rate protection locked in — some of 
these rates are at nine and three-quarters — for Saskatchewan 
producers, and allow for the growth and the strengthening of the 
family farm in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have almost half the farm land in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
We have 65 or 60-some thousand farmers in the province. Mr. 
Speaker, I take a great deal of pleasure in moving second 
reading of an Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 1989. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1890 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a few 
moments before I adjourn the debate on second reading of Bill 
41 and hold it over for my colleague from Humboldt to make a 
few comments about a couple of items in the Bill, and more 
items that are not in the Bill that I think are of concern to farm 
families and to rural communities. 
 
I want to say, first of all, that I guess we’re disappointed, Mr. 
Premier, that you’d choose day 56 of the session to give second 
reading to a Bill that you say is so important to the farmers and 
to the people of the Assembly. I want to say that day 56 is 
hardly appropriate when for the last two weeks you have 
hijacked the legislature dealing with a bell-ringing a motion, 
that every day of that two-week period you chose not to deal 
with Bill 41 even though we urged the government and moved 
motions to that effect that we deal with this Bill, that the 
government chose to deal with the bell-ringing motion, and then 
in the end, moved the bell-ringing motion to a committee 
anyway and made the farm families of this province wait an 
extra two weeks, closer to a month in fact, while they hijacked 
the Legislative Assembly in order to jam rule changes that 
should have been done in committee. 
 
Well you want to talk about the Bill; I intend to talk about the 
Bill. But I want to say, first of all, that many farm families have 
been talking to us — farm families in Maple Creek when we 
were there the other night, in Shaunavon, farmers all over the 
province — talking about why this government has chosen to 
deal with privatization for the first 56 days of this session. Why 
is Bill No. 1 on the order paper, the privatization Bill, rather 
than the agricultural Bill, Bill 41? Why aren’t they in the 
reverse? This is what farm families are asking us. 
 
Now the member from Shaunavon will well know that in his 
area farm families are asking him: why is privatizing 
SaskPower take precedent over bringing forward farm Bills? 
And they ask that. And they worry a great deal. They say, how 
is it if you’re concerned about farm families, that you choose to 
privatize the power corporation, and that the gas lines that they 
gave a right to run across their land, that you would choose to 
support them being owned by a private company? That’s what 
they’re asking. And I’ve got a number of letters that I will enter 
in the debate at an appropriate time. 
 
But what I want to say to the Premier who elaborated on many 
items that are not included in the Bill, because I’ve read the 
Bill, and some of the things that he was talking about 
implementing, are nowhere to be seen in the written legislation. 
I ask him whether or not he will table the regulations that go 
along with the Bill so we can have the full impact, because 
there were some things that he was mentioning that simply 
aren’t mentioned in the Bill as it is written that will have a great 
deal of impact on farm families. 
 
But I also notice, Mr. Speaker, that one of the things that is 
bothering farm families a great deal is the doing away with and 
the privatizing of the dental program which was done in recent 
years by this very government. And farm families are concerned 
that Bill 41 does not deal with those kind of issues, that it 
doesn’t deal with it. On the one hand you take away social 
programs that directly affect  

farm families, and then you bring in what can only be described 
as a very weak piece of legislation to deal with the crisis that 
has, in the first few months of this year, 12,000 people more 
leaving the province than are moving in — 12,000 people. 
 
In fact, since this legislature began sitting a few months ago, 
over 3,000 people have left, and the total priority of this 
government has been privatization. Only today, day 56, do we 
have the Premier coming to deal with this weak-kneed 
legislation which will not do the job in protecting farm families. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s talk about the Bill. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’m talking about the Bill. I’m saying it’s 
a weak-kneed attempt to deal with the problem that you people 
have created over the last seven years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Farmers have never been worse off in my 
living memory — in my living memory — and I got my first 
quota book back in 1967. In 1967 the first quota book. And I 
lived under a regime of Ross Thatcher and it was tough then, 
but he at least had an administration that was balancing the 
budget and doing some things for the people of the province. I 
hate to admit that. 
 
But since I have received and worked on the farm in 1967 and 
got my first quota book, I have never seen such a disaster as 
there is after seven years of this Premier and this Conservative 
government. It’s never been as tough. 
 
And the member from Yorkton knows that. He was in the 
machinery dealership business. He was in the manufacturing 
business back when Allan Blakeney was the premier, and he 
will remember the boom days of that time when Morris Rod 
Weeder was expanding all over the place, instead of shutting 
down. He would remember that. He would remember the days 
when places like Frontier and Friggstad Manufacturing, back in 
the good old days in the 1970s under a New Democratic 
government, when it was expanding and we had local industry 
producing machinery. 
 
Well what has happened to those implement dealers and 
manufacturers? Well look at manufacturers and look at 
implement dealers. They’re going broke at record numbers . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Rosthern who 
knows a lot about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I think we should 
allow the member from Regina Elphinstone to carry on with his 
remarks. Constant interruptions are not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member from Rosthern, who has a 
great deal of experience driving tractors, and I won’t comment 
on how he backs up tractors, but everyone will know what I talk 
about in the Rosthern constituency, and that was before the 
rains of recent times; this is when it was dry everywhere. But I 
won’t comment on that about the member from Rosthern, but 
his credibility is not all that great. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1891 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order, 
order. Perhaps the member from Rosthern could refrain from 
interrupting the member. On the other hand, perhaps the 
member from Elphinstone could deal with the Bill, and the 
member from Rosthern’s problems are his own concern. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that tractors 
and manufacturing and farm equipment and the dealerships are 
very germane to the debate of Bill 41. It’s got everything to do 
with agriculture. And what I want to say is just make a few 
comments before I adjourn the debate, about how this Bill fails 
miserably with the situation that the member from Morse and 
this group of people have put onto the farmers of this province. 
 
Now the member for Morse will know that his neighbours are 
suffering more than they have ever suffered as farmers. He will 
know that, that it’s tough times, that you would have to be an 
old, old farmer to remember back to the 1930s and the previous 
Conservative government of Mr. Anderson to remember such 
tough times on the farm — such tough times on the farm. 
 
And I say that is why in the last federal election, last fall, the 
majority of farmers in this province voted against the federal 
Conservative government — the majority voted against the 
Conservative government in Ottawa because of their deception 
with the agricultural industry. And since that time it has gotten 
much worse. 
 
And since that time, the Premier did not call a session in the fall 
when he should have dealt with these agricultural programs and 
policies. And he didn’t deal with it in the spring of 1989. He 
chose day 56, when an ordinary session would be winding 
down, to bring forward what he says is the most important Bill 
in the session. I say that is a Premier who is deceiving farmers, 
and that’s the reason why we have record numbers of young 
people leaving the farm. 
 
We have disaster in the farm economy. How many times have 
members of this side of the Assembly and members of that side 
of the Assembly gone to young farm families, sat at the kitchen 
table and seen desperation in the eyes of those farm families 
because there’s no government policies that will deal with 
interest rates that are driving off the farm at record numbers . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I want to say something to the 
member for Morse about 13 per cent interest today compared to 
18 per cent back in 1981. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty-two. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, 18 was the highest I ever paid, and I 
had loans at the time. But I want to tell you that in 1981 with 
wheat at $6 a bushel and interest rates at 18 per cent, there isn’t 
a farmer in this province that wouldn’t tell you clearly they 
were better off in 1981 than they are today at 13 per cent 
interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You know that. I know that. It’s that kind 
of deception and deceit that will in the end defeat you people. 
That’s the problem. 

I want to say as well, that when you look at the recent federal 
budget, and this commitment by the federal Conservative Party 
to end the fuel rebate for farmers with not a whimper or a sound 
from this Premier, this agricultural Premier with the permit 
book, not one whimper or one sound of defence for the 
Saskatchewan farmers as the fuel rebate was done away with. I 
say that is a Premier that is ready to have the farmers vote 
against him at the time of the next election. 
 
Not standing up for farmers when Ottawa comes into play to 
destroy agricultural programs. What does he say? Farmers have 
to be part of paying off the national debt. That was his defence. 
You know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The one other point that is even more disastrous to farmers is 
the idea of the national sales tax which will come into place in 
the very near future — I say, too near the next provincial 
election. If you think that you’re going to get away or distance 
yourself from the federal government on the implementation of 
a 16 per cent federal sales tax near the next provincial election 
and use Bill 41 to say, we did this for the farmers while we 
allowed Brian Mulroney and the federal party to implement a 
16 per cent sales tax on agricultural industry, then you’ve got 
another thought coming, because we’re going to make the direct 
link between the lack of a premier who will stand up for 
Saskatchewan and the national sales tax. 
 
Just think about it for a moment. The member from Shellbrook 
has a large farm. He has a four-wheel drive tractor. The engine 
in that tractor probably is worth 15 or 20,000 to rip down and 
repair. After the sales tax comes into place, do you know how 
much extra you will pay to do a motor job on that tractor 
because the service will be taxable at 16 per cent? Just figure it 
out. What do you think 16 per cent on half of that bill, if they 
charge only on the service, 16 per cent on 10,000? An extra 
$1,600 to the federal government on one tractor engine. 
 
You haven’t told the public that. You’re deceiving them on the 
national sales tax and the Minister of Finance knows it. And 
when we get into interim supply, my colleague will probably be 
asking questions about the repercussions of that national sales 
tax when it takes place. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now you may disagree with the federal government, but you’re 
not saying it. You’re not standing up for Saskatchewan and for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Let’s say — and I address this to the member from Melfort who 
has a thriving auction business — is it true or not that after the 
national sales tax comes into place, that when you go out and 
auction off a farmer’s equipment, who may be going bankrupt 
or who may be retiring, that the 16 per cent will apply at 
auction sales? Will it, or will it not? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member from Morse. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I’d like to raise a point of order. I don’t 
believe that this discussion about the federal finances has 
anything to do with Bill 41, and I would like to ask the  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1892 
 

Speaker for an opinion of that. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order, and we are discussing Bill No. 41, and the hon. member 
from Regina Elphinstone is raising other issues. However, as 
before, I believe he has to make it relevant, and a long and 
far-ranging discussion of agriculture without relating to the Bill 
itself, as he knows, is out of order. So I ask him to do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, that I didn’t 
relate the national sales tax directly to the lack of any initiative 
in Bill 41, but I intend to do that at the conclusion of my 
explanation of how the national sales tax is going to harm 
farmers. Because I think if you put the two positions, Bill 41, 
which is a weak-kneed, nothing Bill when it comes to saving 
farmers, against what their colleagues and friends are doing in 
Ottawa, to put more taxation on the back of farmers in one fell 
swoop than any other government in the history, then there’s a 
problem. That’s the connection. 
 
And I well know why the member from Morse doesn’t want to 
hear it. I understand that, because it’s very difficult to defend 
when he goes out to his constituency. When he goes to church 
on Sundays, the people who are there want to talk to him. How 
is this national sales tax going to be implemented? Do I have to 
pay it on a used grain auger motor when I’m at an auction sale? 
They want to know that. They will want to know on Bill 41, can 
I go out and buy land? What’s the interest rate? They’ll want to 
know these details. 
 
I’m saying today that on the side of Bill 41, it’s a shame that 
we’re dealing with it today on day 56 of the session. But what’s 
even more important, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 
this government is totally silent as the federal government rips 
apart the very fabric of farmers who these people are pretending 
to defend. That’s the point I’m trying to make. And I want to 
say that there is a link between the national sales tax and the 
lack of any initiative in Bill 41. 
 
I say in closing, because I know my colleague from Humboldt 
will want to elaborate and will do a much better job than I on 
going through the details of the Bill, but it’s disappointing, to 
say the least, when you think about the fact that we have had 56 
days of debate virtually totally on privatization. True, 
SaskPower has now been deferred. Bill 1, we haven’t seen for a 
while. We then had the bell-ringing and the changes that were 
supposed to change the rules unilaterally, where the government 
hijacked the legislature for over two weeks and every day 
brought in a rule change to try to jam it at the opposition. 
 
They chose to bring it, rather than choosing Bill 41. They set 
the agenda. Everyone knows that. I say hijacked the legislature 
for over two weeks to deal with the rule change unilaterally 
when, in the end, they had to refer it to the committee as we had 
suggested initially, rather than dealing with Bill 41. That’s the 
point I want to make. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’m very disappointed with this 
government and its approach to farmers — the deception, the 
fact that we have record numbers going broke. I think this Bill 
will do little to help solve that  

problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Ready for the question? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone . . . 
Order, order. Order. Order. The member did sit down, and 
according to the rules of the House he in fact doesn’t have the 
opportunity unless the House grants it. So I would recognize the 
member for Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Leave is 
granted? Okay. Leave has been granted. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, last night the Legislative Assembly passed spending 
estimates for Energy and Mines. Can you advise us whether 
Energy and Mines can now spend their budget now that their 
estimates have been passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, they cannot. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So if we were to pass Education estimates 
this afternoon for some reason, would that permit the 
Department of Education to spend 100 per cent of their budget 
allocation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, interim supply is the procedure. I can 
explain to the hon. member, as I am advised that until such time 
as all the estimates are passed, the departments cannot spend the 
full amount of their budget, interim supply, except as granted 
by interim supply. If interim supply was to pass several 
departments for twelve-twelfths, then they could spend. You 
could, I gather, conceivably do that in advance of consideration 
or after. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now just so that we’re both agreed then, the 
timing of the passing of departmental estimates has nothing to 
do with those departments’ ability to spend their budget 
allocation. What we have to have in this legislature is a Bill for 
interim supply to give authority to those departments, even 
though their estimates may already have been completed by this 
legislature, for them to spend their money. 
 
That being the case, Mr. Minister of Finance, at the end of May 
it came to my attention, as a result of numerous school boards 
contacting me, that for some reason their budget allocations 
were being held up by the Department of Finance and they were 
in a position where they were having to borrow, in some cases 
millions of dollars worth of money in order to pay their 
teachers, to meet their monthly commitments. 
 
As a result of that problem, I wrote the Minister of Education, 
Mr. Hepworth, a letter on June 1 asking and  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1893 
 

expressing to him our grave concerns regarding the 
government’s failure to adequately meet the financial needs of 
local school board divisions through payments of grants. And in 
response to that letter, Mr. Minister, and in response to some 
comments that I had made in the press about the problem of 
funding for local school board divisions, your Minister of 
Education said that he would hope that the government can start 
playing a bit of catch-up if Education estimates aren’t approved 
by the legislature before the next interim supply Bill is needed. 
 
Now could you tell me, Mr. Minister of Finance, whether or not 
your Minister of Education knows what, in fact, the process of 
this House is, as a result of those statements in the press? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well certainly. But let’s put your argument 
in a nutshell. And the argument quite simply is that at the end 
of, or by the end of the first month after the budget, the simple 
thing to do to avoid the whole problem is for the government to 
bring in twelve-twelfths of all the expenditures for all of the 
departments under interim supply. That would take away, that 
would allow everybody to be paid right off the bat. There’d be 
no further need to come forward with interim supply, no need to 
go through the historical processes of the House. I don’t think 
that’s wise. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s never been done either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s right, it’s never been done. It’s not 
been done for a reason. The traditional practice has been to do 
one-twelfth, with some exceptions. But generally, if you go 
through the list, I would venture to guess that 80 per cent of all 
the interim supplies are one-twelfth. And it’s there for a reason. 
It’s because the historical practice of the legislature has been 
that the final amount is done when the estimates pass. 
 
So that process, I think, is well understood by everyone, and 
that’s the process that has traditionally been followed. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well my colleague says that you took a long 
time to say nothing, and I couldn’t agree with him more. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it is your government that has the sole 
responsibility and duty to decide when interim supply comes 
before this legislature — your government and your 
government alone. In fact, Mr. Minister, I would say it’s your 
responsibility as the Minister of Finance. And this year you 
chose not to do that. You chose not to do what your government 
has done in the past in terms of how it pays school boards in a 
timely fashion. 
 
And I want to tell you, I want to bring you up to date and 
document for you what you have done in the past. For instance, 
in 1988, April 27 of 1988, the date of the cheque stub for local 
school boards all across this province was one-twelfth, and they 
got it on April 27. On May 17 they received two-twelfths; on 
May 19 they received one-twelfth; on June 29 they received 
two-twelfths; and by the end of June they had received one-half 
of their budget allocation. 

And as you know, Mr. Minister, school boards’ year to date 
runs from January to the end of December. And what your 
government and what all governments have done in the past is 
that they have tried to ensure that by the end of June school 
boards have the money for the first six months of their year. 
And this year, Mr. Minister, your government chose not to do it. 
 
And what we had instead in the press, and what we had the 
Department of Education telling local school board employees 
and directors, was that it was the fault of the opposition that this 
money hadn’t been presented to them in a timely fashion. And 
in fact that was an unflat, blatant untruth on the part of the 
Minister of Education. 
 
(1515) 
 
And obviously, had your government been concerned about the 
fact that school boards across this province — and there are 
over 100 of them — have had to spend literally hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in interest payments, had you had any 
concern for that whatsoever you would have provided in the 
interim supply Bill on May 9 of this year what you have done in 
the past, and that is more than one-twelfth. And you chose not 
to do that. And as a result of that, Mr. Minister, the school 
board in Saskatoon, the city that I represent, the Saskatoon 
public school board has had to pay $1,600 per day in interest 
payments because of the delays by your government in getting 
those grants to those school boards in a timely way. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you’d get out your calculator, you will 
find out that $1,600 a day, times 30 days, is a great deal of 
money and, in fact, is a teacher’s salary. At a time when we 
have huge student teacher ratios, at a time when school boards 
across this province are laying off teachers as a result of your 
funding cut-backs, that’s an incredible amount of money. 
 
We have teachers in this province that have to count paper and 
can’t use staplers and can’t use the xerox machine because of 
underfunding by your government. And in fact, as a result of 
the delays in the interim supply Bill, and the fact that you didn’t 
. . . you decided not to bring in two-twelfths, or three-twelfths 
or four-twelfths in May, they have paid thousands and 
thousands of dollars in interest payments. 
 
Now I want to know what provisions your government’s going 
to make to ensure that those school boards don’t run over their 
budgets — and they have already, for interest payments. Are 
you going to refund them the interest payments that have been 
made as a result of your lack of getting those grants in 
payments to them in a timely fashion? Are you going to refund 
those interest payments to those school boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member was correct in only one 
point of her lengthy dissertation and that is that by the end of 
June that six-twelfths is paid to the school boards, and that’s 
precisely what this interim supply Bill will do. 
 
For you to argue that interim supply has historically been a 
one-sided approach by government, you do not understand the 
process. And in fact, traditionally there  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1894 
 

has been at least some discussion, or at least informal 
assessment as to what would be acceptable at a particular time, 
between the opposition of the day and the government of the 
day. And that’s the way this system has worked, and it has 
worked for some very long period of time, the only exception 
being on the one-twelfth. 
 
Whenever there is the scheduled interim supply, the opposition 
generally is told in advance. If there is serious opposition, the 
government can make its decision. But there has been the 
informal relationship back and forth on interim supply because 
both parties recognize that interim supply is an exceptional 
activity in dealing with the public expenditures. 
 
So having said that, you cannot avoid the responsibility, and I 
understand you were a very vital part of it, of hijacking this 
legislature for some 17 days. And let me tell the hon. member, 
then debating for another three weeks, then debating and 
filibustering for another three weeks, so that today we are in 
effect having been here for some 74 days, 74 days that we have 
been here. And most . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 74? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I add the 17 to the . . . 74 that we were 
here; the 57 that you were here. And that’s the difference. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that in the normal course, in 
the normal course, Mr. Chairman, all of the estimates, all of the 
Bills, all of the debate would have been over in the normal 
course, but it was your choice and your choice alone. And I 
understand the hon. member was very much a part of the 
decision to go on strike. 
 
So having said that, I suggest . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The hon. member from Regina Centre wants to take a little 
credit for it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he’s giving it all 
away now. I suggest to the hon. member that in the normal 
course of events we would have been all finished all of the 
agenda, including budget, estimates, legislation. 
 
So I suggest that everybody in the province, everybody in the 
province — and they will remember this after the session is 
over — they will remember two things: they will remember the 
SaskEnergy debate . . . They will remember three things. 
They’ll remember the potash, privatization, and they will 
remember that the NDP walked out on strike for 17 days to try 
and make this ungovernable. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously the Minister of Finance didn’t 
hear my question. And my question was, as an example, the 
Saskatoon public school board is paying $1,600 a day in interest 
payments as a result of your government’s decision not to pay 
grants to school boards in a timely fashion. 
 
Mr. Minister, that decision on the part of your government has 
cost school boards across this province hundreds of thousands 
of dollars in interest payments, payments that they had not 
budgeted for because they expected your government, who has 
the sole right and responsibility and duty to bring in interim 
supply Bills in a timely fashion — they had expected your 
government to get their grants or  

get their payments to them in a timely fashion. And you chose 
not to do that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it’s really quite a simple question and I 
don’t think that we should get all hung up in the political fights 
of past and the political fights of the day, because school boards 
are spending a great deal of money, and I just simply want to 
know, Mr. Minister: are you going to make arrangements to 
reimburse those school divisions — and there’s over a hundred 
of them in Saskatchewan — the amount of money that they 
have had to spend on interest payments as a result of your 
government not forwarding to them their school grants in a 
timely fashion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as I’ve indicated now on two 
occasions, that we are by this Bill, ending up in June, giving 
them six-twelfths. Having said that, and having taken your 
argument, then when you’re concerned about the day-to-day 
costs, why didn’t you pass this last night? Why didn’t you pass 
this last night? At one point, a day is important to you, and then 
the next time . . . you talked about all sorts of things last night. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that the public understands full 
well that you went on strike for 17 days; that they went on 
strike; you filibustered; you went on strike for 17 days. We’ve 
been in effect here 74, which would have finished, I think, 99 
per cent of the legislative session in Saskatchewan’s history, 
and you chose to delay that. You chose to not debate. You 
chose to walk out. You chose to go on strike. You chose to 
filibuster and not to get on with the business. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that when you say, let’s get 
away from the partisan, let’s get away from the political, that 
you’re in fact not getting away from it, and that this interim 
supply does in fact give the school boards the six-twelfths by 
the end of June as has been the historical practice. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously, Mr. Minister, you didn’t hear my 
question. I’ll just repeat it for you, and I would ask you to listen 
carefully. 
 
School boards, as a result of the late payments of grants to the 
various divisions, have had to incur thousands of dollars, 
hundreds of thousands of dollars in interest charges, charges 
that they had not budgeted for. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, if a school board has overshot its budget for interest 
by 30 or $40,000 as a result of this late payment, will your 
government reimburse them the 30 or $40,000 that they’ve 
overshot their budget by? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. You’re not listening to the answer. The 
answer is that by the end of June the legislature on interim 
supply has granted to the school board six-twelfths. Okay? Now 
accordingly to my watch, it is today June 14. Okay? For the 
member from Regina North West — 1989. Okay? 
 
It is not yet the end of June. It is not yet the end of June. And in 
the historical practice of this legislature, the school boards will 
receive the six-twelfths by the end of June, provided at some 
point we pass the interim supply Bill before the end of June. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1895 
 

I’m assuming . . . Perhaps, given the track record of the 
opposition to date, I’m being overly optimistic. But having said 
that, if we are to pass interim supply by the end of June, they 
will have received six-twelfths as they have historically done. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — But also . . . Mr. Minister, I think I’m going 
to try and do a paint-by-number description here, because 
obviously you’re not understanding. So maybe if you can get 
out your Think-and-Do book, we can get down to brass tacks. 
 
This year school boards received on April 24 one-twelfth of 
their funding; on May 23 they received another twelfth. That’s 
for the year 1989. Last year in 1988 on April 27 they received a 
twelfth, on May 17 they received two-twelfths, on May 19 they 
received one-twelfth. So by May 19, Mr. Minister, they had 
received four-twelfths, or one-quarter of their . . . or one-third 
of their budget. By June 29 they received the other 
two-twelfths, for one-half of their budget. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is that in this year they’ve only 
received two-twelfths of their budget. So from January until this 
time they have only had two months of their budget. So they 
have been paid for January and February, but they haven’t yet 
been paid for March, April, May, and June. So what school 
boards have had to do is borrow money each month, Mr. 
Minister, for March, April, May, and June to make their 
commitments. 
 
So what has happened, Mr. Minister, what has happened as a 
result of having to borrow the money, they have incurred 
interest expenses that they didn’t anticipate. And so they have 
had to borrow money, they’ve had interest expenses that they 
didn’t anticipate . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. We’ve got discussions going 
on between members. If members want to ask questions, as I 
said last night, they certainly have the opportunity to rise, be 
recognized in their place, and ask the questions of the Minister 
of Finance. So I would ask members to please refrain from 
having discussions across the floor and wait until their turn to 
ask the questions. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So as a result of this, they’ve incurred in the 
city of Saskatoon, for instance, the Saskatoon public school 
board has incurred $1,600 worth of interest every day as a result 
of the late payments, and it was something they didn’t 
anticipate. 
 
I received a letter that was directed to Mr. Hepworth from one 
school board . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I have brought this to members’ 
attention before. I let it slip once this afternoon, but I would 
caution members not to use other members’ names. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — To the Minister of Education this letter reads: 
 

Dear (Minister of Education): We are extremely concerned 
over the late arrival of the foundation grants to school 
divisions. We have already overspent our entire year’s 
budget for interest  

costs, and we had budgeted $10,000 more than last year. 
At the same time, we have cut off all purchases for the 
schools as our line of credit doesn’t even allow for the June 
payroll. 
 

(1530) 
 
That’s what’s happened in this province. And I simply want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister: what provisions has your government 
made to reimburse those school boards for interest payments 
that they didn’t anticipate? Those school boards have already 
set their mill rate. They can’t go back to the local taxpayers for 
more money. And I want to know, what are you going to do 
about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I think a reasonable resolution of the 
bell-ringing would indicate the right thing to do about it so that 
the opposition doesn’t go out on strike for 17 days. So that the 
opposition, that the opposition tie up the legislature for 74 days 
— 74 days — and when in normal course of events we would 
have been . . . passed the budget; we would have passed all the 
legislation; we would have finished all of the debates . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fantasy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . all of the other items. The hon. member 
says, fantasy. The hon. member says, fantasy, and that may be 
the world she lives in, but let me tell you that historically the 
session would be well finished by now. So I indicate to the hon. 
member, the second part, as most school boards may tell you, 
that at some point during the second half of the year, providing 
we finish our estimates, that they will then be paid the full 
second half. And most will receive additional interest as a result 
of those payments. 
 
So for you to put a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So they are going to receive additional 
interest as a result of your late payments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Depending what they do with it, depending 
what they do with it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well what will happen in the second half, 
providing we get through estimates, they will get paid the full 
second half — six-twelfths — which they then can bank, credit 
union, or whatever, and receive the additional interest which is 
theirs. 
 
So having said that, you asked me what the solution was. I think 
the solution is the reasonable resolution of the bell-ringing 
provisions. I think that the answer is that we get back and begin 
to expedite the business of the legislature. And that, thirdly, you 
not go out on strike. And so at the end of the June in most years, 
to my knowledge, the school boards will receive six-twelfths of 
certain funds, and that will happen as a result of this interim 
supply, providing it’s passed by June 30. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to clarify who 
is at fault here. Who is the guilty party when it comes to school 
boards having to pay hundreds of thousands of  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1896 
 

dollars in interest payments? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You are. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And it’s not us, as the members over there 
say. The people that are responsible are the members of the 
Progressive Conservative government — that’s who’s 
responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — That government has the sole responsibility 
and duty and right to bring in interim supply Bills any time they 
wish. And in fact they brought in the last interim supply Bill, I 
believe, on May 9, and at that time they could have brought in 
four-twelfths of the budget, and they chose not to do it. 
 
And then the Minister of Education in the press said that the 
NDP wouldn’t go for it, when at no time in the history of this 
legislative session has one member from that government 
approached these benches and asked us our opinion on interim 
supply Bill. So it’s flat untruth on the part of the Minister of 
Education. It’s a flat untruth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now you can answer, Mr. Minister, any way 
you wish, and you can blame us for this problem, but it’s not 
our problem. 
 
Had you chosen on May 9 to bring in four-twelfths of the 
budget for the Department of Education, the school boards 
across this province would not be in the mess that they’re in 
right now. They would not be in the mess that they’re in right 
now. But your government chose not to do that. You made that 
decision alone. It had nothing to do with us. 
 
Now what you’re trying to tell the school boards across this 
province is that the NDP’s decision to walk out of this 
legislature as a result of your government’s decision to privatize 
SaskPower has led to this economic crisis on the part of school 
boards. And that’s simply not true — simply not true. 
 
Your government can determine when, where, if, how interim 
supply Bill gets before the members of this Legislative 
Assembly. And your government chose not to bring in an 
interim supply Bill for the Department of Education that 
represented four-twelfths of the funding. 
 
Now I just want to review for the members opposite what you 
did last year, in 1988. On April 6, 1988, your government 
brought in one-twelfth for all departments. On May 16, 1988, 
your government brought in two-twelfths for all departments, 
with the exception of Health and Education and, I believe, 
Urban Affairs. And as a result of that, school boards by May 19 
last year, as a result of your decision, the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s decision, had received four-twelfths of their 
money. 
 
This year your government chose not to, on May 9, bring 
forward an interim supply Bill that would have paid to school 
boards the money that they required in order that  

they not incur these high interest rates. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Minister, you have misled the people of our 
province. You have misled school boards across this province, 
but they’re not buying it — they’re not buying it. And your 
comments will be sent to all of those school boards so they will 
know who the culprit is — they will know who the culprit is. 
And those comments clearly indicate to those school boards that 
they will not recover the interest payments that they’ve lost. 
They will not recover it from your government. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you full well know that in July there’s a bit 
of catch up, but after that it’s one-twelfth after this Legislative 
Assembly deals with budgets, and you know that. They don’t 
get six-twelfths in July and they can put it in the bank and 
collect interest payments. That’s purely a falsehood. That 
doesn’t happen. 
 
And so what’s happened as a result of your carelessness and as 
a result of your decision to play politics with the people of 
Saskatchewan? School boards in every community in our 
province have incurred thousands and thousands of dollars in 
interest expenses that they will not recover from your 
government. They will not recover that money whatsoever. 
They will have to make decisions, as a result of overshooting 
their budgets on interest payments, on whether they cut staff, 
whether they cut programs to kids, whether or not they cut 
janitorial services, cut repair services, or whatever. 
 
And your government has put them in that position. And your 
government, Mr. Minister, I suggest, will have to pay for that in 
the end because the people of this province are not stupid — 
they are not stupid — and they know full well that had you 
wanted to, you could have gotten that money to them in a 
timely fashion. On May 9 you could have introduced an interim 
supply Bill that paid additional money to the Department of 
Education to get that money to the school divisions. But you, 
and you alone, chose not to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think what the school boards will 
recognize, and the ones I’ve talked to fully recognize, that if the 
opposition had not have gone on strike and this House been 
dealt with in a normal way, that we would have been through 
budget, throne speech, legislation, and all the private members’ 
debates. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member that they fully recognize that 
the opposition has said that they would make this province 
ungovernable and that they hold you accountable to that. 
 
To suggest that you would have agreed with four-twelfths, they 
don’t believe you. They know full well that if there had have 
been anything out of the ordinary done in May, you would have 
picked up your little brief-case and you would have walked out 
that door; you would have walked down the hallway; you 
would have walked out of the front of the building, and you’d 
have been gone. And everybody in this province knows. 
Everybody in the province knows that, and they believe it. And 
they know it because they’ve seen it happen. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1897 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, what’s happening here is 
you’re trying to get away with two issues, both of which are 
your fault. And you’re trying to skate around and blame it on 
the opposition because of a 17-day effort where the opposition 
backed the position of the people of Saskatchewan to make sure 
that you guys wouldn’t dispose of SaskPower. That’s what 
really happened there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to get back to this issue and make sure that you 
come up with the truth in this, because we’re not going to let 
you get away with this. You can’t just skate around and keep 
skating around and think that you’re going to get away with it. 
In the first place, Mr. Minister, let’s get back to the May 11th 
date, 9th to the 11th. Did you or did you not at that date have 
the option of bringing in one-twelfth, or two-twelfths, or 
three-twelfths? I say you had the option. Did you or did you not 
have that option? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already indicated that on the first 
months after the budget we could have brought in for 
twelve-twelfths of every single budget and the total budget. 
That has not been the historical practice of this legislature, and 
it’s not one that I would recommend. Having said that, 
everybody in this province knows that in May, if the 
government had have brought in any exceptional changes, you 
would have walked out; you would have walked down the 
street. You would have walked down the street; you would have 
gone on strike, because everybody knows your statements that 
you were going to make this province ungovernable. Those 
were your statements. Everybody knows that. Every school 
board member knows that. Everybody involved with education 
knows that. And they know that you would have walked and 
gone on strike. That’s what they know. That’s what they know. 
 
So I’ve said, and I’ve said now three or four times this 
afternoon, that on the first month after a budget we could have 
brought interim supply to do twelve-twelfths, all the budget, all 
the expenditures, so that all the moneys are spent. But that’s not 
the way the practices work. The practice generally has been that 
each month until the budget is passed, the legislature votes 
interim supply, usually for one-twelfth. The exception has been 
two-twelfths. 
 
I have also said on numerous occasions this afternoon that by 
June 30 in every single year that I have records back to 1960, 
the school boards have had six-twelfths. In the spirit of 
co-operation, we have brought more than two-twelfths forward 
for education in this interim supply. 
 
And we’ll see whether you’re going to support that or not. Are 
you going to go out on strike again? Are you going to walk 
away? Are going to take off out through the doors? Are you 
going to run because this is now six-twelfths for the school 
boards? 
 
And you can’t hide from the fact that everybody knows you 
went on strike. Everybody knows that. You can’t run and hide 
from the fact that everybody knows you said you were going to 
make this province ungovernable. Everybody knows that. Those 
are not my words; those are your words. 

So having said that, they . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We didn’t say . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, no. Oh, no. Now the member from 
Saskatoon says: oh, we didn’t say that, we didn’t say that. We 
didn’t say that that we’re not going to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . oh now they’re trying to back away and say 
they didn’t say that they’re going to make this province 
ungovernable. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. There’s too much discussion 
going across the floor between members, so I again ask 
members to wait their turn, stand in their place and be 
recognized if they want to ask questions of the minister. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I asked the 
minister whether he had the option of giving one-twelfth or 
two-twelfths in the May 9 to 11 interim supply Bill, and in that 
long discourse he said, yes, he could have given up to 
twelve-twelfths. So clearly you had the choice. You had the 
choice of deciding whether it was one-twelfth or two-twelfths. 
The precedent over the past years has been to supply 
two-twelfths or three-twelfths in the interim supply Bill. That 
has been the precedent. So it was clearly your choice to short 
. . . either your choice or your incompetence, one or the other — 
your choice or your incompetence. So admit it. That’s all there 
was to it. 
 
But instead of admitting it, instead of admitting that it was your 
choice or your incompetence to give only one-twelfth in the last 
interim supply Bill, you started concocting a story. You 
concocted a story that somehow the opposition sets up the 
interim supply, or is to blame for the interim supply. In fact, 
you did worse than that. You are having employees of the 
Crown going around and perjuring themselves around this 
province. 
 
Here’s a quote from an issue of the Prince Albert Daily Herald 
just this week, and in this quote there’s a Gerry Sing-Chin, 
who’s acting director of the school grants for Saskatchewan 
Education, and he’s saying here: “Only two-twelfths . . .” 
pardon me, it says, before his comment, it says: 
 

Only two-twelfths of the grant money has been paid to 
date, compared to the five-twelfths usual for June. 
 

I agree. It is usual by the end of June to have five-twelfths. And 
then it says here: 
 

The late payments are due to a slow down of the 
proceedings of the legislature, said Gerry Sing-Chin, acting 
director of school grants for Saskatchewan Education. 
 

Now what you’ve got is you’ve got your people in your 
department passing on this untruth, Mr. Speaker, passing on the 
untruth that you didn’t have the choice. You clearly had the 
choice. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1898 
 

What you did after is you’re trying to regain a little bit of 
political momentum, and I understand that you would want to 
do that. But by doing that, you’re just making it worse for 
yourself because you’re trying to cover up incompetence with 
an untruth. 
 
And I want you to be able to come clean on this, and I want to 
give you the opportunity to do so. And I think if you did that, it 
would clear the matter up here and now, and we could get on 
with this. But if you just carry on and try to cover up one thing 
with another, you’ll be in a worse mess than you ever were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I suggest, if the hon. member takes 
my statement that you could pay twelve-twelfths in the first 
budget . . . or the first month after the budget as being indicative 
of what the practice could be, that is not what I said. I said that 
that is not the practice, and it is not a practice that I would 
condone or support, to pay twelve-twelfths. What has been the 
case is by the end of June, first of July, the boards get their 
six-twelfths. That’s what I’ve said. 
 
To say and try and deny that this legislature, with your strike, 
filibusters, and slow-down, has not disrupted proceedings . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Tory agenda. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . or the Tory agenda, obviously is not 
correct. 
 
So having said that, the public servant is correct. And you may 
not like to hear that, but mark my words, as I’ve said before, 
one of the things that the people will remember about this 
legislature when everything settles down . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — GigaText. They’ll remember GigaText. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They’ll remember GigaText when they’re 
getting their translations in French, and you’re going to run 
around like the Luddites . . . like the Luddites you are and say, 
oh, it can’t be done, it can’t be done, it can’t be done. 
 
The problem you have with GigaText, of course, is you had 
Nabu. Remember Nabu which cost over $5 million. Oh, the 
hon. member here from Regina is smiling; he remembers Nabu. 
He remembers Nabu — eastern Canadian company that you 
socked money in, that we lost $5 million on to help Ottawa 
develop its high-tech industry. You had that problem. 
 
So having said that, yes, your delays, your strike has in fact 
disrupted this, has caused the school boards not to be paid, has 
caused others not to be paid. And at the end of the day the 
people will remember it was the New Democratic Party that 
said, we’re going on strike; we’re going on strike, said the New 
Democratic Party. And the people remember that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously it’s no use 
in pursuing this any further. I’m rather disappointed, Mr. 
Minister, that you didn’t take the opportunity to just say, all 
right, that’s the way it was, and that we tried to  

recover some ground. You could have done the honourable 
thing, Mr. Minister. You could have said, yes, we made a 
mistake on May 9th or the 10th. You could have said that. 
 
Well maybe people got misled a little bit about this, but the 
truth of the matter is we could have done it. I’m disappointed in 
that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well heaven knows that it’s not my role in 
life to disappoint the hon. member, and I’m sad if he is 
disappointed. I know many other people out there are 
disappointed in the actions of the opposition. So keep in mind 
what I said as well, that in the normal course, 72 days, which is 
what we’re at now, 72 days that the government’s been here, 
the vast majority of sessions would have all been completed, all 
budgets passed, and all moneys able to be allocated to those that 
receive government expenditures. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister of 
Finance, when you were speaking I was the one that called out 
the word “fantasy”, because in this legislature I have heard 
Progressive Conservative members fabricate reality in many 
different ways, but you really take the prize. You wander so far 
from the truth that I don’t think you would recognize it if it 
jumped up and hit you in the face. You have said things in this 
legislature that are blatantly untrue. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order. I find that 
unparliamentary in the context it was used, and I would ask the 
member to apologize. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize for saying that. I will 
say that the member has wandered from the truth. I have heard 
him say things in this legislature about the issues under 
consideration that are wandering from the truth. 
 
The New Democratic Party has never said that we wanted to 
make this province ungovernable. We have never said that. And 
I have stood here when I was speaking to other issues, and I 
have mentioned the Canadian tradition of peace, order, and 
good government, Mr. Chairman, as being the tradition in 
Canada, a tradition which I very strongly, with my colleagues 
on this side of the House, honour and respect. 
 
And one of the traditions of good government, Mr. Chairman, is 
the tradition of having a Provincial Auditor as an officer of this 
Legislative Assembly, who looks at the accounts of the 
government and gives all of us, members in the opposition and 
members on the government side, particularly the 
back-benchers, gives us a record and an accounting of the 
expenditures made particularly by the Minister of Finance and 
his cabinet colleagues. 
 
And we have seen in this legislature the Provincial Auditor 
maligned by the government opposite, and we have seen a 
report from the Provincial Auditor that indicates that 50 per 
cent of the money spent by the government has not been looked 
at by our Provincial Auditor, our officer of this Legislative 
Assembly, the person hired by this Legislative Assembly to 
make sure that we do have good government. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1899 
 

And on top of that, Mr. Chairman, we’ve had just lately the 
GigaText scam, which indicates that close to $5 million of our 
taxpayers’ money was spent by the government opposite in a 
blank cheque to a snake oil salesman from Montreal who could 
come in and use our money, our hard-earned money, to go off 
to give $150,000 to a PC supporter, to take $15,000 of our 
money to go winging across to San Francisco for a weekend — 
completely unknown. 
 
And the fact that this government opposite would give a blank 
cheque to a person like that, to do what they want with our 
taxpayers’ money, and at the same time put some of the 
constituents in my constituency, and many of the people across 
this province who are on social assistance, under the most cruel 
surveillance by a branch of the Department of Social Services 
that’s staffed by ex-RCMP officers and cost the taxpayers 
money — people with a small bit of money under that 
tremendous surveillance, and a creep from Montreal getting a 
complete blank cheque from this government. 
 
And here I stand now, being asked by the Minister of Finance to 
support his interim supply Bill, to support more money going to 
who knows where and what scams we still have to uncover. 
And since there has been this scam with GigaText, I’m sure that 
there will be many more. 
 
So it is with reluctance that I vote to give this government a 
single penny more, because I don’t know what’s going to 
happen to it. I do hope that when we pass this interim supply 
Bill, that you will see that some of the essential services that the 
people of Saskatchewan need will get paid for. 
 
Your Minister of Human Resources and Social Services is 
saying that he can’t fund any of the programs in his department 
because we haven’t passed the budget, and yet it’s your 
government, and you, Mr. Minister of Finance, who have 
decided that the estimates will not come through. 
 
We’ve had over a month of debating a bell-ringing motion, 
which your government chose to put on the agenda as 
government business, day after day after day. You had a choice; 
you had control. You have far more control of what goes on in 
this legislature than the opposition has, and you chose not to 
bring in the estimates. You chose not to bring in the Bills that 
would help in some way deal with some of the crises in this 
province. You chose day after day to bring in the motion on 
bell-ringing. And in a sense, if you want to call it a strike, Mr. 
Minister, you were on strike as much as we were. 
 
You had the legitimate option of letting the bells ring on a piece 
of legislation that was appallingly bad for the province, and 
which received the total support of the people of Saskatchewan, 
massive support, for our 17 days of bell-ringing to let them 
know what you were up to. 
 
And I sure wish we could let them know more of what you’re 
up to. We could, if you would co-operate with the Provincial 
Auditor, and if you would co-operate in terms  

of just carrying through the normal procedure of good 
government. But you won’t do that. You live in some kind of a 
fantasy land that just simply will not recognize the traditions 
and the realities that the rest of the people live in. And the fact 
that you, as the Minister of Finance, were part of a cabinet that 
approved this GigaText scheme, which anyone who knows 
anything about high technology or computer technology would 
realize, is a long, long way from reality. 
 
And I said yesterday, and I’ve been saying to my colleagues, 
and I will say it again to you, Mr. Minister of Finance, that the 
GigaText scheme and the other schemes that you’ve been up to, 
particularly with high-tech, is like you’ve been looking at Star 
Wars through the bottom of a bottle of scotch, because there’s 
absolutely no reality to that. It’s more of the fantasy that you 
seem to be particularly susceptible to, you and your 
government. 
 
And the fact that we have this GigaText scheme, with a carte 
blanche cheque to go off and do whatever they want with the 
taxpayers’ money, is just proof again of your bad government, 
and proof again that you don’t have the interests of the people 
at heart. As I said earlier, if you did, you would have brought in 
your estimates, you would not have kept coming back with the 
bell-ringing motion. You put this legislature on strike as much 
as anyone did when you did that. 
 
And the other thing that you’ve done over and over again, you, 
Mr. Minister, and other people in your cabinet and the 
back-benchers, you have refused to debate the issues that we 
have brought to this House. You have refused to speak, and that 
is not good government, because whatever it is that you’re up 
to, you should be prepared to defend it here in this legislature. 
You should be prepared to answer the questions that we have 
asked you about the GigaText scheme and about what’s 
happening to our taxpayers’ money on that particular issue. You 
should do that in order to have good government. 
 
(1600) 
 
And don’t stand in your place and wag your finger at me and 
wag your finger at my colleagues here in opposition about 
being on strike and about wanting to make this province 
ungovernable. You are the ones that have chosen not to bring in 
the estimates and not to get on with the business of the 
legislature. It’s been your choice. 
 
And I don’t see how you can defend what you’ve done so far in 
any way. The school boards will understand very clearly why 
they have not gotten their money, and any other group that 
you’ve used as an excuse that you weren’t able to do anything 
because, oh dear, for 75 days you’ve had no control over this 
legislature — that is just fantasy! That is telling the people of 
Saskatchewan a complete untruth. That is misrepresenting the 
truth. 
 
And it is not fair on the people of Saskatchewan to give them 
that impression of government. You’ve had control. You have 
control. The trouble is, you don’t want to show the people of 
Saskatchewan what you can do, because you’re afraid; you’re 
afraid that if they know anything more about what you’re up to, 
that they will oppose you even further. And you’re afraid that 
we may walk out  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1900 
 

again. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me tell you that walking out of this legislature 
and letting the bells ring for 17 days was a very daring and a 
very courageous activity on our part. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — We took a risk when we did that, Mr. Minister. 
We took a risk when we did that, and we discovered to our 
great delight that the people of Saskatchewan were completely 
with us. And I stood, for one, in the Midtown Plaza and got 
signatures one after the other, and people in Yorkton, in the 
mall in Yorkton, were lined up to sign my petition when I went 
to Yorkton. And my colleagues have had the same experience. 
 
So while we took a courageous action, we found that the people 
are with us. That is not an action that we did lightly, and it is 
not an action that we could do again, because the people of 
Saskatchewan obviously want us to conduct our business in this 
legislature, and we are committed to doing that. We would ask 
that you would be committed to doing the same thing. 
 
But the fact that you have continued to put on your agenda an 
issue that we had to debate, and the fact that you would not 
debate it — you just simply left us speaking one after the other 
on the bell-ringing motion, and you chose not to bring in your 
estimates — you have chosen over the last month not to deal 
with your estimates, and that’s been your control and your 
choice — the fact that you’ve done that has meant that we are 
now at this point in time where we are having to debate another 
interim supply Bill and where people are going to be told a 
misrepresentation of the truth from your government that the 
reason they’re not getting their money is because we have done 
something to obstruct the government. 
 
We have very little power. You are the ones that are obstructing 
good government. And you are also the ones that are failing to 
take seriously your responsibility to monitor the taxpayers’ 
money with great caution and care. 
 
Mr. Minister, the amount of money that my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana said that the Saskatoon school 
board had to spend on interest, was the equivalent in one month 
of one teacher’s salary. It was the equivalent of two peoples’ 
salary living on minimum wage, and perhaps a bit more. That’s 
a lot of money to spend in interest rates that get nobody 
anything except more profit to the banks. 
 
There are people in this province who need the money . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member for 
Regina Centre if he wants to get into the debate to rise and be 
recognized, and certainly he can get into the debate. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairman, I assure you that the member 
from Regina Centre is eagerly awaiting a chance to get into this 
debate. I’m sure that he supports every word that I’ve been 
saying, and I’m sure that I will support every word that he’s 
been saying. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — As the critic for the Department of Finance, the 
member from Regina Centre has been looking at the budget 
very carefully, and I know he’s going to have a lot of important 
things to say. 
 
But I also want to take this opportunity in this legislature to 
register my horror at the way the government opposite is 
spending the taxpayers’ money on schemes like GigaText. I 
want to underline, again, your responsibility to spend the 
taxpayers’ money carefully; that the taxpayers’ money comes 
from people who live on very low incomes, something the 
Minister of Finance knows nothing about in his real life. 
 
And you can talk to him over and over again about the 
conditions that people have to live under in order to pay the 
taxes that he wants to collect, including the flat tax, and yet he 
goes off in a fantasy land and spends money on GigaText and 
gives money out to who knows what, and comes in with a 
budget with a tremendous deficit. And yet here he comes to us 
and asks us to support this interim supply Bill to go forward 
with more of his schemes. 
 
And I want to urge, particularly the back-benchers opposite, to 
take this issue very seriously. You may joke and laugh and 
shout at me about what’s happening, but the taxpayers’ money 
is a precious resource which you are entrusted to spend wisely. 
 
I ask you to spend it on programs for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I ask you to clean out your closet with all these 
skeletons that you’ve got there; clean up your act; spend the 
people’s money wisely. And if you do that I will have no 
trouble supporting an interim supply Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I know we will all wait with bated 
breath to find out if the member from Regina Centre in fact 
endorses what the member from Saskatoon Centre has said, as 
she so eloquently said, I know that the member from Regina 
Centre will support what I say. 
 
Let’s take a look at what she says. She says, first of all, that if 
she had her way she wouldn’t give this government one cent 
more money, and then she turns around and says she’s going to 
support the interim supply Bill. That was early in her remarks. 
 
So now there’s an inconsistency. She doesn’t know what she’s 
talking about. Then on a little later she says: oh, no money at 
all, and I’m going to be against the interim supply Bill because 
this government shouldn’t have a cent to spend. That’s what she 
says. 
 
Then she tries to deny to the people of this province that she 
went out on strike. The fact is, she did go out on strike. She 
went out on strike for 17 days, tries to deny that she did, tries to 
deny that she did. Do you want to know . . . And then she says, 
spend your money wisely because she’s all in favour of this. 
 
You know, there’s one member in this legislature, there’s one 
member in this legislature that has written to the  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1901 
 

government and said, I want a bed in the bathroom. I want a bed 
in the bathroom, says that member to this government, when 
she wants the women’s washroom. 
 
Now I happen to accept the argument that there should be a 
separate washroom for women. It’s now done. I draw the line 
about the request from the member from Saskatoon Centre for a 
bed in the bathroom. And that’s what the NDP member asked 
for, in writing, to this government — for a bed in the bathroom. 
She wanted a couch in the bathroom, all right? The hon. 
member asked this government for a couch in the bathroom. 
She wants a couch in the bathroom. The couch in her lounge 
isn’t safe enough — the couch in her lounge isn’t safe enough. 
She’s afraid to use the couch in the opposition members’ 
lounge. 
 
Now maybe there’s reason for that. I don’t know what it is — I 
don’t know what it is. But she wants . . . the hon. member, the 
NDP member, wants to have a sleep. A 17-day strike is not 
enough for the hon. member. She wants to sleep when she’s 
here. She wants to go to the bathroom and then lie down. 
 
And the hon. member has the gall to stand in this House and 
say, wise expenditure of money. You asked for the bed. You’re 
the one that wanted the bed. You wanted the government to 
spend several hundred dollars so you could have a bed in the 
bathroom. In writing, you asked for it. Yes you did. She admits 
it. 
 
And she has stood up here and talked for 15 minutes about wise 
expenditure of government money. Maybe you want to stand up 
in your place and justify why you think the government should 
pay for a bed for you in the bathroom. Here’s your chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d be pleased to 
respond to this. This is the first time the issue has come to the 
floor of the legislature, although I was going to raise it in 
estimates. I will point out that even as of now, there is no 
completely designated washroom for the women MLAs, and 
this legislature has never had one. 
 
I have written to the government, to the Speaker of the House, 
and to the House Leader, deputy House leader, and to the 
member responsible for the property management corporation 
about this issue, Mr. Minister. And I have asked that there be a 
washroom for the women MLAs. 
 
It is a fact in legislation that a women’s washroom, a washroom 
for a number of employees, shall have a couch in that 
washroom, and I wanted to be sure that you would go with the 
legislation and put that couch in a washroom for the women 
MLAs. 
 
If you want me to go into the details of why it was put in 
legislation that employers should put a couch in a women’s 
washroom . . . and most of the work places in Saskatchewan 
where there are a number of women employed have couches in 
their washroom. I know we had one in the Saskatoon Public 
Library. 

There are conditions that women have, such as pregnancy, 
when they may want to lie down. And I believe that there are 
many women who’ve taken advantage of that opportunity when 
they have had problems with pregnancy or with menstruation, 
Mr. Minister. And if you need to learn the facts of life here on 
the floor of the legislature, you’re really a pretty shameful 
person. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I’m quite prepared to stand here and say that the 
women need a washroom, and I have the support of many 
women’s groups in this province and the support of my 
colleagues in asking for that. And I hope that you will provide 
us with a decent one when you get around to it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the washroom has been supplied; the 
washroom’s been supplied for some time, and the hon. member 
should know that. If she doesn’t, that’s her problem. 
 
But you’re the one that’s put in the request, and you’re the one 
that stood here and complained about government expenditures. 
Now you’re the one asking for the couch and the bed. You’re 
the one. And I’m telling the hon. member, I’m telling you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . yes, she did write it. She’s admitted. 
She admitted it. She asked for it. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that your inconsistencies 
flowed several times during your remarks. You try and deny 
you’re on strike. On the one hand you say that you’re not going 
to support the interim supply Bill, not one more cent to the 
government, and then you say that it should have been passed 
yesterday. Then you say that no more money . . . then you’re 
going to say we pass the interim supply Bill. You were all over 
the map. You were all over the map in your remarks. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, I suggest to the hon. member 
. . . a little embarrassing, fellows, for you. Well, embarrassing 
for you, fellows, but I suggest to the hon. member, when you 
stand up, when you stand up and talk about expenditure, we 
know where your priorities lie. And they certainly fly in the 
face of what your remarks were. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, you can’t deny you were on 
strike. You can’t deny your request. You can’t deny that your 
objective was to make things ungovernable, and you can’t deny 
it. 
 
Oh, now all of a sudden she’s changed again. Now she’s 
changed again. 
 
(1615) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hardly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh she certainly has. On the one hand, she 
was up denying that she said it was going to be ungovernable, 
now she says she doesn’t deny it. So make  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1902 
 

up your mind. Make up your mind. Already been through that. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, the written request came from the hon. member. She will 
have to explain that. She will have to explain that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — She won’t have to explain it . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh yes, she will — oh yes, she will . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we’ll let the hon. member get 
in and defend her position again. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to make one comment and then 
the member from Saskatoon wants to take over. I just want to 
say that I think the minister has accomplished the impossible. 
You made the former Lloyd Hampton look sensitive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I don’t know what relevance that has. 
But I suggest to the hon. member that the accusations were 
made by the member from Saskatoon Centre, and I think 
they’ve been responded. I think she’s been responded to. We 
know where her priorities are. We know what her overall 
objective, what the highlight of her political career will be. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister has behaved 
with shocking disregard for the women of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I think there’s nothing else to say with respect 
to it. I want to ask the minister some specific questions in the 
social services area. And the first question I want to ask is with 
respect to the operations of the special investigations unit in this 
province. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could tell us in this fiscal year 
what the cost of operating the special investigations unit will be. 
And I wonder if you could send me in writing the number of 
staff in that unit and a list of those staff and of their positions. If 
you could tell us today the cost of operating that unit, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don’t have that detailed information 
from the various departments. That’s not traditionally the 
practice of interim supply, but that is certainly an appropriate 
question for the estimates of Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well I wonder if you could undertake to 
provide it to me in writing, please, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No I’m not sure I will, not because I don’t 
think it’s an appropriate question for the Department of Social 
Services, because I think it is an appropriate question for the 
estimates of the Department of Social Services. Having said 
that, if we’re now going to use interim supply to answer the 
detailed questions of all departments, I think that’s quite a 
deviation from practice, and I’m not sure it’s advisable. I have 
said, I think an  

appropriate question for the detailed review of the estimates of 
the Department of Social Services, and that would be the 
appropriate place for that question. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m asking you now to 
provide it to me in writing. That’s a perfectly reasonable . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Detailed questions should be 
asked of the minister of that department. Interim supply covers 
the whole government and all its expenditures, but not any 
detailed questions should be asked of separate departments 
under an interim supply Bill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, before the day 
passes, I want to get back to the subject which you spent so 
much energy in avoiding last night, and that is the Report of the 
Provincial Auditor. I suggested last night to you, Mr. Minister, 
that this government would be well served by lending some 
support to the Provincial Auditor instead of bending every 
effort to make his work impossible. I suggested last night to 
you, Mr. Minister, that the Provincial Auditor serves a useful 
purpose, not just for the taxpayer, but also for the government 
in office, as is the case with any organization, whether it be a 
business or a public organization, the auditors serve a useful 
purpose in keeping spending on track. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said last night, you defended, apparently, the 
principle of the use of private auditors. I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that the purpose of having a Provincial Auditor is that 
the Provincial Auditor is responsible to this Assembly and the 
taxpayers. 
 
The limitation in the value of having a private auditor was 
shown in this affair when the private auditors refused to make 
the information available. Surely that’s the whole purpose of 
having an auditor, is that ultimately taxpayers shall have the 
information and the taxpayers’ representatives shall have the 
information. 
 
Let me, Mr. Minister, use the example of a private business. In 
a private business the shareholders elect the auditors and the 
auditors are responsible to the shareholders. The problem with 
your system of private auditors is, it’s the directors who are 
appointing the shareholders and the directors who are firing the 
shareholders . . . sorry, it’s the directors who are appointing the 
auditors and the directors who are firing them. That wouldn’t 
work in a private business and that won’t work here. 
 
The value of the Provincial Auditor is that the Provincial 
Auditor is appointed by the shareholders, 64 in number, which 
have a seat in this Assembly. Your auditors are, in effect, 
appointed by the directors, the cabinet, and they’re not 
responsible to us and they’re not giving us any information. 
And they’re fired by you people. That’s the problem with the 
private auditors. 
 
If this Assembly nominated the private auditors, that would be a 
different system, but that’s not your system. Your system has 
the directors, in effect, appointing and firing the auditors, and 
that won’t work. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1903 
 

An Hon. Member: — Why not? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why? Well I would think that’s obvious 
even to the member from Rosthern, who shows such skill in the 
handling of farm machinery. I would think even you ought to 
recognize the old saying, he who pays the piper calls the tune. If 
the directors appoint . . . The reason why the directors of a 
private business don’t appoint the auditor is because they’re 
there, not to protect the directors, but to protect the 
shareholders. Your system has the auditors appointed by the 
cabinet, apparently to protect the cabinet, and not to protect the 
taxpayer. That’s the problem with the system . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Indeed I do. Indeed, I just finished saying that. 
Anyone, anyone . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Order. If the members 
from Rosthern and Wascana want to get into the debate, 
certainly they can rise in their place and be recognized to ask 
questions of the minister. At this time, the member for Regina 
Centre has the floor, and I would ask members to allow him to 
make his points and to ask his questions of the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that’s what’s wrong with 
your current system. Your current system has the auditors 
appointed by the cabinet, fired by the cabinet, the stoutest 
conscience . . . fired by the directors of the Crown corporations 
then, all of whom you appoint and all of whom you can release. 
 
There is, Mr. Minister . . . I will speak to the question of the 
auditor’s integrity in a moment. If the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will be patient, I’ll speak to that in a 
moment. 
 
But I just want to point out that that isn’t what’s done in private 
business and for the best of reasons. The stoutest conscience, 
Mr. Minister, the stoutest conscience will be bothered and 
perhaps bent by the absence of a pay cheque. The stoutest 
conscience will be affected by that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the whole purpose in having the Provincial 
Auditor oversee it is the Provincial Auditor is responsible for 
the members of this Assembly who in effect represent the 
shareholders. That’s what’s wrong with your system. 
 
Mr. Minister, well when PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) started — I say to the rather thick-skulled 
member — when PCS started it, the Provincial Auditor had a 
full range of supervisory authority. The difficulty with the 
system, as it has grown up, is that the Provincial Auditor cannot 
supervise that activity. 
 
There’s perhaps nothing inherently wrong with private auditors 
doing the books of Crown corporations so long as there’s 
adequate supervision by the Provincial Auditor who represents 
us, the taxpayer, in a sense. That’s what’s wrong with the 
system, not that the auditors are doing it, but that there’s no 
supervision. They’re answerable apparently only to the cabinet. 
 
Mr. Minister, it appears that if you haven’t any more sense than 
this, your Premier does. Your Premier, Mr. Minister, has now 
directed all of the auditors and all of the officials of the 
government to comply with the law and make all  

the information available to the Provincial Auditor. Will you 
now admit, Mr. Minister, that the system . . . will you now 
admit what the Premier’s admitted and that’s that the system 
you had in place was wrong, contrary to the law, but far more 
important than that, not an adequate protection for the taxpayer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I, with respect to the hon. member, 
don’t think the hon. member understands the process or has the 
foggiest idea about the process. There are private sector auditors 
that certainly are appointed by the boards of directors of the 
various Crown corporations. Did that happen with the potash 
corporation under the NDP? Yes it did. Did it happen with the 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) 
under the NDP? Yes it did. 
 
And the difference is that the hon. member doesn’t understand 
that the Provincial Auditor’s objection to the system is having 
to go through the private sector auditors to get the information 
he wants. Interesting that it works in every other province. 
 
For you to buy and say that there’s not a scrutiny and not an 
audit and not a public review of 50 per cent of the expenditures 
out there is totally wrong. You are in fact implying and stating 
— not implying, stating directly — that the private sector 
auditors are not doing proper audits, and I resent that and I say 
it’s wrong. It is a slam on the audit profession of this province 
and it is not accurate. 
 
Now the fact that the Provincial Auditor, instead of going 
directly and duplicating what the private sector auditors are 
doing and going to them for information, to state that we went 
to someone else for the information and not the ones that did 
the audit, and to say as a result of that practice, not getting the 
information, with the greatest respect, it is not the situation in 
any other province that uses private sector auditors. There’s not 
a duplication of the work. If the auditor has reason to believe 
that a private sector auditor is not doing a proper audit, he has 
every right and duty and obligation to make that public. Okay? 
 
And I have acknowledged last night that the system that works 
in every other province that uses private sector auditors is not 
working here. It’s not working. I said that last night. But to say, 
because we use private sector auditors, that an audit is not being 
done and the expenditures are not being reviewed, is not 
correct, is not accurate, and indicates — and I’m being very 
charitable — a total lack of understanding. 
 
I said last night that I believe private sector auditors bring 
something to the table for the province and their own 
profession. And I think it’s a good thing for the province to use 
our private sector accounting firms. 
 
I brought in the legislation that the Provincial Auditor has the 
ability and is the overall auditor. He has that by legislation. But 
to say that because we use a private sector audit, audits are not 
being done, is wrong. It’s just plain out and out wrong. 
 
(1630) 
 
I believe that within the present law, without a legislative  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1904 
 

change, that a workable system can be arrived at. I believe that. 
It is in every other province. 
 
I believe that the Provincial Auditor can carry out his legislative 
role, that the audits can be done by the private sector in certain 
instances, and I think that that’s healthy for Saskatchewan, I 
think it’s good for this legislature. I think it’s good for the 
corporations involved. 
 
Now I do believe, as I said last night, that the use of the Public 
Accounts Committee to try and resolve that — I hope they can; 
I don’t know whether they can or whether they can’t, but the 
system seems to work in every other province, and I’ve 
admitted that it doesn’t seem to be working here. But don’t 
leave the impression because we’re using private sector auditors 
that things are either being hidden under the table, I think you 
said last night — cover our tracks, I think, by using private 
sector auditors, I think is an absolute damning statement about 
the competence and the professional integrity of the chartered 
accountant profession of this province. 
 
And I’m taking, as you would expect, the liberty of giving your 
remarks to that profession, and you can deal with that 
profession. And I would expect that you would know that those 
remarks of yours would be forwarded to the profession — and 
properly they should be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Please do. Mr. Minister, I sincerely hope 
you forward a copy of my remarks to the chartered accountants 
institute. I sincerely hope you do, because I can’t believe that 
the executive of the institute would support the kind of system 
which you have established here. I just cannot believe they 
would support a system which has the auditor appointed by the 
management and not the ultimate taxpayer-shareholder, and 
that’s your system. And that’s the problem with the system. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, you mentioned public accounts. 
Well I just want to say that your members in public accounts 
have done their best to derail the activities of that committee 
because you don’t want to hear what the Provincial Auditor’s 
got to say. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to say, with respect to the Provincial 
Auditor, I hope . . . Heaven only knows how much influence the 
Premier has, but I hope the Premier has some influence in the 
government, and I hope we return to a system whereby the 
Provincial Auditor has overall responsibility for the audit. It 
may be done in the direct sense by the private sector auditors, 
but the ultimate authority ought to rest with the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Minister. And all I can say is that I hope we return 
to that system. 
 
I can’t imagine that the chartered accountancy institute would 
applaud a system whereby management appoints the auditors. 
That’s not the system anywhere, nor is it the system in any 
other province, just for openers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with the overall problems which 
have been raised by the Provincial Auditor’s report. This report, 
Mr. Minister, would embarrass any government but this. It 
points to a morass of mismanagement and incompetence. The 
question I actually asked you last night, Mr. Minister, was: what 
do  

you intend to do to clean up the mess? The Provincial Auditor’s 
report points to a government which has lost control over the 
administration of government. 
 
There cannot be, Mr. Minister, another government in Canada 
with the magnitude of the administrative problems which this 
government has. There simply cannot be another government in 
Canada which is in anywhere near the mess that yours is. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s two options open to you. One is to get up 
and deny it, and the other is to get up and tell this Assembly 
what you intend to do to clean up the mess. Those are your two 
options, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think most reasonable people would agree that the public of 
Saskatchewan would be far better served if you got up and 
outlined, at least in a tentative, hazy way, some plans to deal 
with the administrative mess into which this government has 
descended. I frankly do not think the public of Saskatchewan 
want to hear you deny the existence of any problems. Surely the 
Provincial Auditor’s report should convince even the obstinate 
members of the treasury benches opposite that you’ve got a 
serious problem. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to share with us whatever plans you 
may have to deal with what must be the worst administrative 
problems in Canada here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I appreciate the extreme language of the 
hon. member. He starts out by saying that we should have a 
system where the Provincial Auditor has the ultimate 
responsibility, and that’s precisely what the legislation presently 
in effect now . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right, only you didn’t follow it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, the difference is this. And what the 
hon. member doesn’t understand is that in the case of the 
private sector, supposing a holding company with several other 
companies under it, each could have a different auditor. It could 
be one auditor for the holding company, a separate one. Under 
the practice of the profession, the overall auditor relies on the 
actions of the other auditors. Okay? What we have here is that 
very system, except that the Provincial Auditor believes that he 
should go in and deal directly around the auditors that are 
appointed. No difference in any other province, with the 
greatest respect. 
 
The question, quite simply, can we have a workable system 
where the Provincial Auditor relies upon the appointed 
auditors? That’s the system that works in any other jurisdiction. 
And in every case, I believe, where there is an allegation that 
information was not forwarded, the information could be 
obtained from the auditor appointed by the particular 
corporation. 
 
So the problem was process. That’s the difficulty. I’m not in 
favour, or I would do it most reluctantly, to have a change in the 
legislation when the very legislation can work in other 
jurisdictions. I believe that it can ultimately work here. I hope it 
can work here, because I believe that  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1905 
 

there is a legitimate role for the private-sector auditors. I believe 
that they are in fact doing proper audits, and that should in no 
way impede the Provincial Auditor from dealing with his 
statutory duties. I believe that to be the case. That can be done 
with the co-operation between the auditors appointed and the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
For whatever reason, that hasn’t worked here, and I’ve admitted 
that now three times. It hasn’t worked. It works in other 
provinces. 
 
And it’s a matter of whether one goes to the private sector 
auditor and asks for the information, which I gather in all cases 
they were prepared to supply. Okay? Several cases the 
corporation has said, get the information from our auditors. 
Auditors are prepared to supply it. 
 
Well certainly that is a change, but it works everywhere else. I 
don’t know why it can’t work here. The Provincial Auditor has 
the overall authority. If he says an audit’s not being done . . . 
and he never said that. It’s an interpretation put on by others, 
including Mr. Petrie of the Leader-Post. But he didn’t say that. 
 
But he can, and I believe that the system can work. He can go to 
the auditors that are appointed, certainly by the respective 
Crown corporations, and get the information from them. And 
I’m not aware of a situation in that report where, when he went 
to the auditor, the private sector auditor, that the information 
was withheld. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me give you some 
assistance. You say that you’re not sure how it’s going to be 
made to work. I think I’ve got that figured out, and I think Mr. 
Lutz has got that figured out. It’s going to work when you 
appoint a provincial auditor with a great deal less integrity than 
Mr. Lutz has. 
 
And that brings me to another subject of deep concern to 
members of this side, and that’s the appointment of his 
successor. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to be bluntly honest with respect to the 
Ombudsman, and I make the point because there’s a past 
history of dealing with these legislative offices with something 
less than integrity. Mr. Minister, when the office of the 
Ombudsman came open, who did you appoint? A Tory toady — 
and I’ll use that language — a partner of Mr. Hill’s. Mr. 
Minister, we haven’t heard a word from him since that anyone 
cares to listen to. And that’s how you made the office of the 
Ombudsman work — you appointed a Conservative toady to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am therefore very concerned about Mr. Lutz’s 
successor. He points out that for some time there has been a 
practice of adopting the recommendation of the outgoing 
auditor with respect to the appointment of his successor. He 
points out that’s how he was appointed. Mr. Minister, I would 
like your assurance that that is how his successor will be 
appointed because frankly I don’t trust you at all to appoint his 
successor. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, you people are given a free rein, and if past 
practice is any guide in what’ll happen, your sole criteria in 
finding an auditor will be somebody who will salute when this 
government calls his name. That’s what  

you did with the office of the Ombudsman. There are any 
number of other examples of it, and I’m very, very concerned 
about the appointment of his successor. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you give us your assurance that 
past practice will be followed with respect to the appointment 
of his successor, because I am very concerned about it and so 
are members on this side of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I remember exactly the same criticism 
being given by the hon. member of me when I appointed Mr. 
Kruzeniski to head up the Human Rights Commission. And I 
remember you standing here and saying what a terrible, 
destructive, vindictive, awful, shocking, political appointment 
Mr. Kruzeniski was. That’s what the opposition said. And you 
were highly critical of Mr. Kruzeniski. You were highly critical 
of Mr. Kruzeniski. 
 
You sit up and you’ve attacked Lloyd Barber, saying he isn’t 
competent to run a university. You’ve said, your people have 
said in this House, that Lloyd Barber can’t even run a 
university. You’re starting to get the reputation right across the 
province now of attacking some pretty well respected people. 
And I suggest to the hon. member that you’re not doing 
yourselves any favours. 
 
You attack now all the chartered accountants, saying they’re 
toadies, that they’re doing a cover-up. That’s what you’ve said. 
 
I will raise a couple of issues with respect to the appointment of 
the Provincial Auditor, the successor. I happen to believe that 
the Provincial Auditor should be one that can work with the 
private sector auditors. I think that that’s fair, and they can do 
that in a thoroughly professional way with the Provincial 
Auditor carrying out his legislative mandate. And I believe that 
that is feasible, and I believe that the public will be well served. 
 
I believe that we should consider, as I believe in every other 
province, that the Provincial Auditor is appointed for a set term 
of five years — and I think the hon. member from Regina 
Victoria is aware of that — that the auditors are appointed for a 
statutory term of five years or 10 years. I believe that applies to 
the Auditor General of Canada. 
 
I think that that’s something we should look at, and I certainly 
have no difficulty, obviously, with the Public Accounts 
Committee considering that question. Many in the profession 
believe that Saskatchewan should go to a term appointment. 
That’s a matter of fair debate. That’s a matter of fair debate. I 
think that that’s something that should be looked at. 
 
(1645) 
 
But when you stand up and you blanket all the appointments as 
hacks and toadies, I think is your word . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Toady. 
 
Like I say, I can recall the strong criticism of the NDP 
opposition with Mr. Kruzeniski. Like I say, I hear the member 
from, I believe, Regina Rosemont, but . . . I think it was Regina 
Rosemont, saying that the president of the  
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1906 
 

university can’t even run the university. So the political 
personal attacks of some people in this province are, I think, 
starting to reflect back in the opposition, and you know the 
results of that as well as I do. 
 
But I think there are two fairer questions that have to be dealt 
with with the appointment of the successor to the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is he a Conservative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, no. 
 
I believe that the Provincial Auditor, without a legislative 
change as to the powers, because I don’t think it’s necessary, 
should recognize and be prepared to recognize that the private 
sector auditors bring a contribution to the province and to the 
corporation, and that the professional relationship which deals 
in the course of differing auditors in the same corporation 
should apply. 
 
And then, secondly, I think we should take a legitimate look . . . 
and I don’t as yet have an opinion whether we should go to a 
term. Many in the profession, the accounting profession, say 
that there should be a term. I think that’s a fair question to be 
debated and a fair question to be resolved. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, your remarks would alarm 
me if I thought anyone believed you. But given your history, 
Mr. Minister, of enormous deficits, a less than a candid 
approach to those deficits, particularly before elections, people 
have long since ceased to believe anything that you say. 
 
Just in case, however, someone might have been deceived, let 
me say that we never made critical comments about Mr. 
Kruzeniski. It is fair to say that there was some concern about 
his appointment because he had not heretofore taken a 
leadership position within the human rights. That was felt, but 
not said. Mr. Minister, we said very little about his 
appointment; as it turned out, he was a very good appointment. 
 
I have certainly expressed . . . with respect to Mr. Barber, I have 
never expressed any doubt about his ability to run a university. I 
have expressed a dismay that such a distinguished academic 
would lend his name to such a cheap political exercise, but I 
have never criticized his administrative ability. I’ve simply 
criticized his judgement in taking part in such an exercise. 
 
Mr. Minister, before time elapses, I want to deal with one other 
subject, and that is the imposition of the federal sales tax. Mr. 
Minister, this is a shemozzle. We have, Mr. Minister, four . . . 
we have . . . once the federal sales tax is introduced we will 
have goods being sold under four different situations: federal 
sales tax only, provincial tax only, federal and provincial sales 
tax and entirely exempt. 
 
I recently — in fact, in mid-May I saw a cartoon on the front 
page of The Financial Post which I though summed it up: a 
retailer in a store with four cash registers, one for each of the 
situations. 

Mr. Minister, I want to voice some complaint, first of all, about 
the fact that we now have two levels of . . . two different sales 
taxes both being imposed with very little co-ordination. Surely 
it would have been a more rational system to combine them into 
one. That is what your federal counterpart, Mr. Wilson, wanted 
to do. I understand you people wouldn’t. 
 
And if I may attribute motives to that, I think it may be in part 
due to the fact that there might have been less money in it if you 
had gone into a single system. At least, if you didn’t change the 
level of tax, it would have been less money. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like you to comment on the fact that we now 
have a vastly more complex situation with respect to sales tax 
than we used to have. I would like your admission that that is 
not a good situation. I’d like to hear what your plans are to get 
this country into a single sales tax, if a sales tax we must have. 
 
I will have one other question with respect to the wisdom of 
sales taxes generally, but that’s a separate question. For now, 
I’d like you to address yourself to the confusion which is going 
to be caused when businesses go to two. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just repeat — and I won’t take for ever on this 
because we are running out of time — I repeat what many have 
said, and that is that it’s going to be very difficult to keep track 
of these taxes without a computerized accounting system; it’s 
going to be very difficult to do on a manual system. And there 
are lots of businesses which are not yet on a computerized 
accounting system, and I think that’s largely the smaller ones. 
This complexity is going to hit the smaller businesses hardest. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to admit that; to give us your 
assurance that you’ll do what you can to get this country on to a 
single, unified sales tax system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the difficulty with the proposal . . . 
and many business organizations are urging the provinces to 
join with the national sales tax so that there is one tax. The 
problem is that they are fundamentally different taxes. We have 
a direct sales tax on certain items. The national sales tax, or the 
goods and services tax, is a much more broad tax dealing with 
services. 
 
So if we are to have one system, it would mean joining with the 
federal system. So if you’re urging us to join the federal system, 
with the greatest respect, that’s different than what some of 
your members were saying yesterday, which is that we should 
oppose that. 
 
So there are retailers in the province that have written to us 
saying, join the federal; make it one tax. That’s a consideration 
and a fair one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business for one . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, and the Retail Council of Canada 
have asked for it as well, and there are others. That is certainly 
one of the considerations. 
  



 
June 14, 1989 

1907 
 

But the problem is you can’t have it both ways. You can’t say 
oppose it and then say only one tax, because they are 
fundamentally different types of taxes. They do have some 
modest overlap, but overall the federal goods and services tax is 
a much more broad tax and more than just on commodities, as 
is our direct retail tax. So that’s one of the difficulties. It’s one 
of the difficulties. 
 
I don’t want to prolong this because if you’ve got specific 
questions — one that came up earlier I believe, I don’t know 
whether you wanted to pose it, came on the question of 
servicing. I believe the member from Regina Elphinstone said, 
servicing farm equipment, that the farmer would have to pay the 
tax. That is partially correct. 
 
The farmers are exempt from the tax, and if they paid that 
service tax at whatever rate, then they get that deducted from 
other taxes on a monthly basis on other payments under the 
national sales tax. So in effect, throughout the system, from the 
information we have to date, that the farmers are at zero tax. 
But I’m not trying to prolong it. If you’ve got specific 
questions, I’ve set out the difficulty of trying to go to one. They 
are fundamentally different taxes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think, Mr. Minister, with the greatest of 
respect, I think, Mr. Minister, that this government is 
exaggerating the differences between the taxes in the interest of 
maximizing the tax revenue. And I think what is more, you do 
not want to lose control over the amount of the tax that you 
levy. There may be some loss of control over what you tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, I thought it unnecessary to state again our 
position with respect to the federal sales tax. It was said 
yesterday during the rule 16 debate — sorry, during the debate 
which followed the rule 16 debate, and that is that we are 
opposed to the substitution of consumptive taxes for income 
taxes. We think they are injurious for a variety of reasons, one 
of which is that it imposes a fairly stiff tax on businesses which 
are acquiring additional capital equipment — and farmers are 
the outstanding example of that — who are going to be 
acquiring new equipment, some of which will be exempt, some 
of which will not. 
 
I note, as I’m frequently in the riding of the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I note the age of many of those 
half-tons. A lot of those things are really on what must be their 
last tires. I suspect if we get a decent crop, Mr. Minister, a 
goodly number of some of those vehicles will be replaced that 
have run down. My understanding is that there’s going to be a 
federal sales tax on those vehicles. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is also a fair comment, with respect to other 
businesses which are acquiring capital equipment, it adds a 
fairly stiff burden on businesses which need additional capital, 
because by and large the sales tax is levied on that capital 
equipment. 
 
Mr. Minister, our position with respect to the federal sales tax 
is, it should never have come into being, but, and this is the 
point I was making earlier, if we must have a federal sales tax, 
then we should have one sales tax in this country and not two. 
That’s the point I was making, Mr. Minister. 

So I don’t want to be misunderstood. Nothing I said should lend 
any support to the substitution of income . . . of consumptive 
taxes from income taxes. We think it’s retrogressive and not a 
progressive taxation system. We think, more specifically, it’s 
injurious to the economic health of the country. 
 
But if we must have two taxes, if we must have a federal sales 
tax, then we should have one sales tax in the country, not two. 
And that’s the point I was making. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well let me just respond again, because in 
terms of the point you made that capital equipment would 
become more costly, the advice I have is that those input costs 
are at zero, so that that’s not the case . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No. That’s precisely the way the system will work — that 
those come in at zero. 
 
Secondly, as I indicated in my response to the opposition the 
other day about the national sales tax, one of the difficulties 
from Saskatchewan’s position, there are some sectors in our 
provincial economy that benefit, because . . . some sectors 
benefit — manufacturing, processing, that now pay the 
manufacturing sales tax . . . That can include some restaurants. 
Okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well for some of their 
equipment, that’s right . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. Well 
I’m telling . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It is not revenue . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. That’s not my point. My point is that 
those that are now paying . . . And you can research this 
yourself. The present manufacturing sales tax — okay? — 
whoever they may be — and you can check it out — will 
probably pay less through a national sales tax because one of 
the objectives of the national sales tax reduce the federal 
manufacturing sales tax. It’s one of the stated objectives. That is 
the one point on which the three national parties agree . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Right, right. But you’re taking it 
zero at each stage. If it’s an input cost, you’ll ultimately pay 
zero, okay? 
 
I mean, I’m not trying to sit here and debate with you as to the 
imposition of the tax, I’m trying to indicate some of the 
difficulties in the assessing, and until we get the details, not 
only of the imposition of the tax and how it works, but 
secondly, because I believe it important, and I believe it 
responds to the point that the hon. member makes, is what are 
the expenditure offsets; are they adequate enough to offset for 
particularly low income people the imposition of the tax? 
 
That’s going to be a matter of some debate, and that’s going to 
be a matter of some analysis. We don’t have that yet. So there 
are offsets that can happen, and we just simply do not have 
those yet. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $476,798,400 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 1990. 

  



 
June 14, 1989 

1908 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum 
of $53,675,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $53,675,000 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1990. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move that the resolutions be now read the 
first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 48, an Act for Granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year Ending March 31, 1990, be now introduced and read 
the first. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly and under rule 
48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 5:04 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Residential Services 
   Act 
Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Line Fence Act 
Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 
Bill No. 14 — An Act respecting Consequential  
    Amendments to certain Acts resulting from 
    the enactment of The Municipal Board Act 
Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench  
 
 

 
     Act. 
 
Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend an Act to incorporate St.
     Margaret’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Biggar. 
Bill No. 48 — An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain 
     sums of Money for the Public Service for 
     the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 1990 

 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 5:08 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:09 p.m. 
 
 


