


















































March 14, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 14, 1989 
 

117 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. There’s 
been several rulings in the last couple of days that seem to be 
very inconsistent, and I want to refer you to page 56 of 
Hansard. Mr. Speaker, you and the Deputy Speaker have 
cautioned members on this side of the Assembly, and several 
times today when I mentioned the name of the Leader of the 
Government, the Premier of the province, I was sat down and 
other members similarly. 
 
If you notice on page 56 of Hansard, the name of the Leader of 
the Opposition was used by the member for Rosthern, on that 
page and several other times. I haven’t taken time to look them 
up, but no mention was made by the Deputy Speaker, I believe, 
who was in the chair at that time. 
 
I’m wondering whether or not you couldn’t, and your Deputy 
Speaker, be more consistent in your ruling. It seems to me that 
the members of the opposition are being treated in one manner 
and members of the government side, with their large majority, 
are being treated with more leniency. Now that’s unfortunate 
because obviously the Speaker of the Assembly is from the 
government side. And I think if you’re going to err it would be, 
I think, proper and probably in the best interest, if you were to 
err on the side of the opposition, who are the minority in the 
group. 
 
I want to say, as well, that before we broke at supper time, the 
Deputy Speaker had ruled a couple of words unparliamentary in 
referring to the government. One was "deceit" and one was 
"dishonest." I want to quote Beauchesne’s, page 110, where it 
lists out a number of words that, following 1958, were in fact 
ruled as being parliamentary. And the list includes deceive and 
dishonest. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. According to Beauchesne’s the 
hon. member cannot debate a previous ruling, only if he has a 
new point of order. It seems that this is the ruling of 
Beauchesne’s, and I must bring it to your attention. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want a point of clarification. What I am 
saying here is the Deputy Speaker would not allow him to say 
those words. The member from Saskatoon Eastview used the 
words deceit and dishonest in talking about the government. 
That was ruled unparliamentary and I’m telling you that, by the 
rules of the Assembly, it is not. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If the hon. members would be just 
patient, I will recognize them. 
 
I would like to draw the hon. members’ attention to rule 324(1) 
from Beauchesne’s which reads as follows, and I think in order 
for hon. members to understand it, I will take the liberty of 
reading the rule: 
 

It is impossible to lay down any specific rules in regard to 
injurious reflections uttered in debate  

against particular Members, or to declare beforehand what 
expressions are or are not contrary to order; much depends 
upon the tone and manner, and intention, of the person 
speaking; sometimes upon the person to whom the words 
are addressed, as, whether he is a public officer, or a 
private Member not in office, or whether the words are 
meant to be applied to his public conduct, or to his private 
character; and sometimes upon the degree of provocation, 
which the Member speaking had received from the person 
he alludes to; and all these considerations must be attended 
to at the moment . . . 
 

And I believe that is sufficient for that portion of the ruling. 
Going a little further: 
 

An expression which is deemed to be unparliamentary 
today does not necessarily have to be deemed 
unparliamentary next week. 
 

The long and short of the ruling is that a word which was 
deemed as unparliamentary perhaps yesterday or last week, 
because of these other factors which enter into it, it’s not 
necessarily unparliamentary today. That’s Beauchesne’s, rule 
324. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I had 
asked as well about the use of the individual member’s name. 
You didn’t rule on that. When you rise, I wish you would. But I 
want to question under rule 324, where it says: 

                        
Well there was no reference to particular members when the 
words were used. It was in reference . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I don’t believe we can get into a 
debate on the specific ruling here. You’ve raised a point of 
order on the word that was used earlier in the day — or 
yesterday, I’m not just exactly sure — but earlier in the day 
today or yesterday. And I have ruled that the word which was 
perhaps unparliamentary today and not necessarily yesterday, 
the same or vice versa. And I believe that covers the issue you 
have raised. 
 
As far as the earlier issue is concerned, it is a point of order; it 
is certainly well taken. Members should not use members’ 
names. However, the inference that the hon. member makes, 
that the government side is being treated with more leniency 
than the opposition side, is certainly not correct, not correct. 
 
Both sides are being treated with equally . . . The chairman, the 
Speaker, and Deputy Speaker in being human, perhaps at one 
time the name might slip by on one side and not on the other 
and vice versa. But there’s absolutely no intention, no intention 
whatever, of treating any side more equal than the other. 
 
I think that should clearly cover your point of order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I meant to comment on  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

118 
 

the point of order initially raised by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone before you made a ruling on that. And I don’t mean 
in any way to contradict any part of the ruling you made, but I 
was merely going to cite that the member for Wascana used my 
name in the legislature when he was speaking. And if you want 
to check the reference you can check it. He used it in reference 
to the mayor of Regina, Mr. Doug Archer, who was my 
executive assistant at one time. I do not wish to separate myself 
from the facts of the matter that he was my executive assistant; 
he was a good one. 
 
With regard to the second point that was raised by the member 
from Elphinstone, I wonder on reflection and at a later time, 
Mr. Speaker, if you could review the citation that you made 
from Beauchesne in direct connection with the comments made 
by the member from Regina Eastview as to whether he referred 
specifically to an individual or to a general grouping. I think 
that you will find that the member from Eastview referred to the 
government, not to any particular member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the original 
point of order both by the member from Saskatoon Westmount 
and the member from Regina Elphinstone, I would refer all 
members to page 24 of Hansard as well, where the member, 
being a member from the opposition, referred to the member 
from Maple Creek by name. I mean that goes on. 
 
I make only this suggestion, and I think to you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to the members of the House. I think we have got into a 
habit, and I say we, both sides of the House, of referring to 
members by their names, and I think that is something that has 
perhaps drifted on and should be corrected if you’re looking at 
the parliamentary system. 
 
The second thing that I do think that I would suggest helpful is 
that we get the whole area of parliamentary and 
unparliamentary language. Perhaps it would be appropriate for 
the Speaker and the office to set out for us some of the areas, or 
the language, that is clearly unparliamentary. And if we could 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you have it in 
Beauchesne’s and I would simply suggest it as a guide-line to 
all members; I don’t think that’s an inappropriate request. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I have listened to the hon. member’s 
point of order. And yes, you know, unfortunately we have kind 
of at times drifted into the use of names by hon. members. 
However, let me just say this, that this issue has been brought 
up many times. And I would just say this to the hon. members. 
They have been told over and over not to use the names of other 
members. And I would say this, that after having been told that 
many, many times, it is incumbent upon them not to use the 
names of hon. members. It’s just that simple, and the Speaker 
and the Deputy Speaker shouldn’t have to be listening to every 
single word that’s always said, just in case some hon. member 
is using another member’s name. 
 
That is a long standing ruling of this house and it’s a point well 
taken from both sides. But I also say this, hon. members from 
both sides, I think it’s also your  

responsibility not to use names of hon. members. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the member 
from Morse continues with his Speech from the Throne, I’d like 
to introduce some young ladies, and their leaders, in your 
Speaker’s gallery. Mr. Speaker, these are . . . I beg your pardon? 
Oh, I am sorry, I must ask for leave. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Martin: — We have in the Speaker’s gallery Girl Guides 
from the St. Joan of Arc Girl Guides in Regina. They reside in 
Normanview West, Mr. Speaker. And the age of these young 
ladies are ages nine to 12, and a fine looking bunch they are 
indeed, with all their badges from the various competitions and 
skills they get involved in in the Girl Guide program. They are 
with two of their teachers, Mr. Speaker, Shirley Dobie and 
Teresa Geni, I believe are the teachers. And we have the 
Commissioner, Dianne Penner, and Bonnie Rhyrochuk, who is 
a Guide leader. Welcome to the House. 
 
What you have just heard here for the last few minutes is a 
discussion concerning the rules, parliamentary rules. And as 
you heard that Mr. Speaker had the final word, as indeed he 
should have, but there was a fair exchange of ideas back and 
forth across the floor, as would happen in this kind of a 
discussion. But he has the final word and that’s what we were 
listening to. 
 
We are involved now, at this point in the legislature, in the 
Speech from the Throne, debating the Speech from the Throne, 
and each of the sides takes turns speaking about the subjects in 
the Speech from the Throne. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
would wish the members to welcome our Girl Guides and their 
leaders from the St. Joan of Arc Girl Guides. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I first of all want to 
begin by congratulating Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, 
for her first throne speech in this Assembly. And I have noted, 
Mr. Speaker, that during the past four or five months that she’s 
been with that responsibility, the role that she has played as a 
person who has come from Saskatchewan, she has a high 
degree of professionalism, and she has a high degree of 
acceptance in the province of Saskatchewan for who she is and 
in her own right for what she has done in the province. And I 
think that that’s a special recognition that we have paid a lady 
who has indeed deserved it. 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

119 
 

I want to also congratulate the new member seated right behind 
me from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on winning the election down 
there. I spent some time working down there, and I got to 
appreciate his constituents equally as much as mine. Part of his 
constituency touches mine and I got to meet a lot of people 
there that I had met earlier and that I was acquainted with. 
 
I know that it’s going to be a privilege working together with 
him. We’ve already sat on some committees together with him, 
and he’s got an interesting sense of humour and his candour is 
excellent. He’s got a willingness to participate, and I think that 
that’s a good thing to have, and I think we can appreciate that 
coming from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. The speech that he had 
was well delivered, and I think it was excellent, and he’s going 
to serve this Assembly well in the future. 
 
I want to also, Mr. Speaker, thank the people of the Morse 
constituency for their continued support. They have been very 
helpful to me in dealing with the various kinds of things that 
I’ve been involved with there. I have worked with the various 
government agencies, the municipalities, the hospital boards, 
and it’s been a privilege for me to do that. 
 
I also want to just point out a number of things that have 
happened there that I think are of significant value. I want to 
thank the Minister of Environment who’s responsible for Sask 
Water for coming out to a small town called Vanguard, 
Saskatchewan, to take a look at some of the irrigation projects 
that they had been using there over the last 50 years. 
 
Some new developments had taken place there and they had to 
have some reconstruction of some weirs, and in that they 
maintained a water supply for the village of Vanguard. And I 
received a very complimentary letter, as did the Minister of 
Environment, for the actions that were taken there. And I think 
that that spoke well of the decision that we had and that we’d 
made. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the fact that the four-lane highway 
now proceeds all the way through my constituency. It has been 
finalized and it moves on to the member of Maple Creek to 
move it further to the west. And I believe that over the next 
period of time that that will happen. 
 
That stretch of highway, Mr. Speaker, probably caused more 
accidents, took more lives than any stretch of highway on the 
Trans-Canada, and I’m certain that it’s going to improve that 
record there. I don’t know why that was happening but it 
definitely was a concern, and it was a concern to my 
constituents. 
 
The Department of Education is presently building a school in a 
small town called Success, and they are probably going to have 
it ready by the beginning of the next school term. And it will be 
a school for K to 9, and that is an excellent opportunity for that 
community. I know that they have worked long and hard to put 
that into place and I want to compliment the school board for 
their vision and for their well deserved efforts in planning and 
initiating these schools. 

In the past six or seven years we have had a real development in 
our nursing home structure in the province, and I want to 
acknowledge the fact that we’re going to this summer be 
building an integrated facility in the town of Cabri. That 
facility, Mr. Speaker, has been planned and discussed since 
1975. I really think that it’s important to emphasize that because 
it’s a focus that was put into place in the by-election at 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that we were going to dissolve all the 
hospitals, close them down and ignore rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well in the Speech from the Throne that the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg read about, the hospital in Lafleche I 
think is a good thing. The same thing is happening in the town 
of Cabri. This summer they’re planning on putting together that 
facility. That facility, Mr. Speaker, is really needed. It’s going 
to have a hospital and a level 4 care facility for the seniors. And 
that will, Mr. Speaker, provide 22 beds in all — 12 for level 4 
care and 10 for acute care. 
 
A former board member who is now on the health commission 
has worked a long time to put that facility together. Mr. Ernie 
Moen, I remember when I was on the R.M. council at Sask 
Landing, that he came over to our municipality to see whether 
there was any interest in our municipality providing some of the 
funding over there. When he had that put together, the package 
put together, he went to Kyle, he went to Stewart Valley, he 
went to Pennant and all the communities around to see whether 
there was an opportunity to put that together. 
 
He was working at it, and right about that time, Mr. Speaker, 
the Department of Health put a moratorium . . . or the 
Department of Social Services at that time put a moratorium on 
that portion of health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, almost froze in total the development in 
that community for a level 4 facility. And I think that that’s the 
kind of thing that is really appreciated in those small 
communities where they have an opportunity to maintain the 
community, the older people in the same community that they 
grew up in, that they lived their own whole lives in. They can 
retire knowing that there is a facility there that they can go to 
when their capacity, their physical capacity is somewhat 
impaired. And I think that that’s the kind of thing that I am 
proud of in this government and I know that others are too. 
 
The throne speech made mention of a number of things that 
dealt with . . . things like health care, adoptive services. It dealt 
with agriculture, and I’m going to talk a little bit about 
agriculture to begin with. 
 
The commitment that the Premier and the government have to 
agriculture in this province, I think it goes without saying. We 
have earned that respect from the things that we have done over 
the last few years. I want to just outline a few of them. 
 
If we take a look at some of the things that we have done and 
the impact on money spent, Mr. Speaker, we have probably 
spent more money in the last six years than any 15 years prior 
to that. I want to just mention that the 1982  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

120 
 

Agriculture budget was something like $72 million, and today 
it’s 140 to 250, in that range. And we have a lot of other 
programs, rural development and those, that have been 
increased in their funding too. 
 
There is one area that I believe needs to be looked at, and I want 
to do this, Mr. Speaker, because I think it’s necessary. This past 
year I spent a few days at a conference — it was called 
Agriculture in the Class Room — sponsored by the Department 
of Education. And it dealt with, Mr. Speaker, some really, really 
fundamental issues in teaching children and young people in 
schools about what agriculture can do and ought to do in the 
development of our economy. 
 
We have in the province of Saskatchewan initiated a program 
called the agriculture development fund. This provides $200 
million over five years and it is a research component dealing 
basically with a number of things. And I want to point them out 
today for you and for members of this Assembly, so that they 
can understand a little bit about what the opportunities in 
agriculture are. 
 
So many times we conclude that agriculture is putting the seed 
in the ground and putting the combine out and harvesting. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is not what agriculture is about today. 
Agriculture is about marketing; agriculture is about diversifying 
into commodities that weren’t grown five years ago, 10 years 
ago. It’s diversifying . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Name them. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Name them. Lentils, and you have a whole 
host of those kinds of things. That’s the kind of thing, Mr. 
Speaker. Fava beans, all of those. They’re crops that have not 
traditionally been grown in Saskatchewan. In dealing with the 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kochia weed, foxtails. 
 
Mr. Martens: — And as a matter of fact, kochia weed is a 
fundamental crop that is being used this year for feeding cattle 
in south-west Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And if you want to 
go to the silage pits in south-west Saskatchewan today, you’ll 
find that 50 per cent of that stuff is kochia weed; it has higher 
protein content than any of the others. 
 
Those are the things, Mr. Speaker, exactly, what we’re finding 
out in this kind of a discussion, and these kind of research 
projects that are being dealt with in a very concise, precise way 
by the agriculture development fund. We have to, Mr. Speaker, 
stay in tune in our research with the kinds of things that develop 
in soils. We have today probably the highest involvement of 
salts in soils and a decrease in the productivity of our soils. We 
have to research that, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important part of the 
development of the science of technology . . . in technology and 
development of our crops. 
 
We need to find out, for example, Mr. Speaker . . . I just was at 
a spring ratepayers’ meeting about two weeks ago, dealing with 
. . . The agrologist there presented a paper on the Russian wheat 
aphid, and there are some very interesting things about that little 
creature, Mr. Speaker.  

And I want to point that out because it’s significant. That little 
aphid is reproducing in North America without fertilization. It 
immediately, as it’s being born, already has young that it can 
give birth to within four to seven days. That is going to cause a 
serious problem, Mr. Speaker, in the volume of pesticides and 
the chemicals that are going to have to be used to kill that 
aphid. 
 
And if we in the agriculture sector aren’t aware of the problem, 
if we aren’t researching the kind of things that are going to be 
there to destroy that aphid, we are going to have a problem that 
is far surpassed by anything that grasshoppers have ever done in 
this province. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a reason why we need specialization 
in crops. We need specialization in soils. We need 
diversification in our attitude towards that so that our young 
people will go out and become research scientists in these 
fields. And I believe that is very important, and that’s why I 
wanted to bring it up here today. 
 
We need research, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the livestock 
industry. We have more and more people believing that 
livestock and confinement are . . . that is something wrong. We 
have to have an education process in place, Mr. Speaker, to deal 
with the kinds of things that agriculture food production are 
required to have to provide the food for people in Canada, for 
people in India, for Africa and all those places. That’s going to 
be done by the kinds of research we can do. 
 
To use an example, Mr. Speaker, the impact that research in 
various sectors has is calculated on the basis of a component of 
a percentage benefit it is to the industry. For example, livestock, 
research in livestock could have a 15 per cent increase in the 
impact that it has and the benefits it has to the society here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Canola, for example, had over 100 per cent improvement 
impact in the kinds of things it can do for the economy of the 
province of Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, let’s take that 
into the marketing component and deal with how we sell it to 
the United States. And that’s a very important feature in dealing 
with the kinds of things that we need to research in this 
province. 
 
And our agriculture development fund is providing those kinds 
of opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan to say yes, 
there’s an important component in research, but there also has 
to be an important component in dealing with how these people 
translate that into the on-farm practice. And that’s the kind of 
thing I believe that we need to have in dealing with a transfer of 
information that has a positive impact in the part of agriculture 
that we need. 
 
(1930) 
 
I’m just going to deal with a number of the kinds of projects 
that we have in place, and I want to do that for a specific reason. 
We are dealing with a lot of different items in this $200 million 
that we’re talking about; we’re dealing with a lot of different 
organizations. And I want to point them out because it’s all of 
agriculture participating together in the various areas that we’re 
dealing with. 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

121 
 

In crops, for example, the agriculture development fund in one 
of its areas has a project with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool that 
deals with the selection and valuation of improved high yielding 
spring wheat and soft wheat, and triple M qualities. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Wheat Pool is dealing with that, and they 
have some funding through ADF (agriculture development 
fund) and I think that that’s a really important feature. 
 
Another group that are working together with agriculture 
development fund are the University of Saskatchewan, which is 
fairly obvious, and they have a whole lot of projects in this 
agriculture development fund research component. They’re 
dealing with winter wheat production technology in south-west 
Saskatchewan; that’s an extremely important feature. 
 
If you follow the flow of the Russian wheat aphid in rye and in 
winter wheat, it’s going to be almost devastating. We’re going 
to need to have some real serious looks at some of those things 
that deal with insecticides in relation to those two crops. 
 
Now there’s other areas. There’s one, for example, Agriculture 
Canada are looking at semi-dwarf wheats which would produce 
higher yields, less straw. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
important feature in some of the northern areas where volume 
of straw is a problem. 
 
I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan Seed 
Growers Association are also involved in the agriculture 
development fund project. They deal with the vigour and 
performance of testing lots, on how they would respond in 
various kinds of small plot uses, and they’re working with 
different kinds of crops in those areas. The Saskatchewan 
Canola Growers Association are also involved in a project that 
deals with the canola potential in the province, and I think it’s 
an important feature. 
 
I was watching Country Canada the other day, and on that they 
were talking about those kinds of agencies and natural control 
factors that we can use in controlling the plants that we don’t 
want to have grow and controlling the pests that we use and are 
controlling with pesticides. We are asking the Saskatchewan 
Research Council to deal with that. 
 
Then there is also the component in that area dealing with the 
involvement of sweet clover as a nitrogen fixation plant. All of 
these, Mr. Speaker, are providing an in-depth rationale first on 
the research side and then, Mr. Speaker, on the development 
side, so that we can have a translation of the technology in 
developing these on the farm. And I think that that’s extremely 
important. 
 
We have — and I took a note of it — we have at least 46 
different agencies that are dealing with precisely these kinds of 
things. And I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are crop things, there are livestock items, but as we go through 
them, there are things which I think ought to be mentioned. 
 
First of all, I would like to mention the wild rice research in 
Saskatchewan that’s being conducted by the  

University of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Wild Rice 
Council — a direct asset to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan in dealing with the component of rice and the 
marketing and how they grow it and how they harvest it. 
 
We also have for the production and viability of market 
gardening in the province of Saskatchewan . . . We import a lot 
of our market gardening from California. A lot of it could come 
from the province of Saskatchewan, and I believe that we could 
do a lot of work in that area. 
 
There is a noxious weed that is dominant in the southern part of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a weed that is growing further and further 
along the South Saskatchewan River. It’s called leafy spurge. It 
is a noxious weed that is all over through the United States and 
into Canada. And the Premier has worked out an agreement 
with states in the United States, Alberta and Saskatchewan to 
deal with that. 
 
What I’m trying to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that the need for 
young people in agriculture is more evident today than it has 
ever been before. We need young people. We need bright young 
people in agriculture to provide that kind of depth in research, 
development, marketing, in all of those areas, in order to have a 
well placed economy in the agriculture sector. 
 
I’m going to just pass on to some of these other things here. 
There’s a couple of other things that I want to mention. One is 
that the Farming to Win is also sponsored by a number of these 
agriculture development funds and I think that that’s important. 
 
I also want to point out the Saskatchewan Indian agriculture 
program is also using the agriculture development fund to fund 
some projects in various parts of the province, and I think that 
that’s really important. 
 
We have other agencies, like the Economic Council of Canada; 
we have Saskatchewan 4-H Council is also doing some; we 
have a group of people that I think are important, is the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council who are working together in an 
agriculture development fund project; Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council, the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Paraplegic 
Association. 
 
We have in this province something like 2,000 farmers who are 
disabled, who have in some way had a farm accident and are no 
longer able to function in the same fashion that they did before. 
The agriculture development fund is looking at some of these 
projects in dealing with how they should handle some of the 
things that they have to do, and the accommodation that they 
have to make for some of their lack of . . . a capacity to do 
things. 
 
But what I want to say, as I spoke to a group of these farmers a 
while back, and I encouraged them to look for new and 
innovative ways of enhancing their opportunity to develop the 
kinds of things that they have done. Attachments on steering 
wheels for people that don’t have hands; attachments on lift 
carriages into tractors, and things like that. Those are the kinds 
of things that these people are inventing on their own, and I 
think that’s  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

122 
 

really an important part in dealing with the kinds of things we 
ought to in agriculture. The agriculture development fund is 
helping those people develop those kinds of skills in coping 
with their inability to do certain functions. 
 
I know that there was some reference made, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Speech from the Throne, to dealing with some of these things in 
the university, and I know that there’s also that going to be 
happening. 
 
The production loan program, we had in our public accounts 
this morning quite a bit of discussion on that. We have put out 
to the province of Saskatchewan about $1.2 billion, and it is 
slowly coming back. The first year only interest had to be paid, 
and then in the second year the unpaid for portion of that loan, 
which was over and above the extension, was placed at nine and 
three-quarters for 10 years, and the original was still at 6 per 
cent. That’s a part that this provincial government played in 
providing some up-front money in dealing with the problems 
that agriculture faced at the time. 
 
The irrigation assistance program set up in 1984 provided, Mr. 
Speaker, a large sum of money for grants to people of 
Saskatchewan for developing irrigation. This, in my opinion, is 
money well worth spending. 
 
The average grant was $8,000, which isn’t a whole lot of money 
when you consider the cost of the expenditures in irrigation. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, irrigated more than 23,000 acres. I 
believe that that is an important feature as we take a look at 
what has happened out of the last five years. We’ve have 
drought in the south-west three of the last five years, and in 
those cases that irrigation has paid off more dividends more 
than anything else. 
 
Irrigation funding program set up in ’86 with the federal 
government gave a development feature to the province of 
Saskatchewan over a long period of time, five years to be exact, 
for $100 million. The Saskatchewan Water Corporation and the 
federal government are working on that. 
 
I want to point out that last summer there was an extensive 
activity in well drilling and in dug-outs and things like that, 
supplying permanent water supplies for the people in 
Saskatchewan. And I’ve had people thank me over and over 
again for that kind of a program. 
 
The ’85 to ’88, over 3,000 test wells have been drilled. And in 
’88, 1.3 million was spent in that one area alone. In ’85 to ’88, 
in deep wells, 3,000 were drilled and 3.7 million in 1988 alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we decided as a government 
and as Sask Water to do was to fix the water supply in a 
permanent position for the people of Saskatchewan, and that, 
Mr. Speaker, was extended. 
 
The member from Elphinstone, who used to be from 
Shaunavon, is saying that we cancelled it. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
those people that make application till March 31 still have all 
summer to be able to develop those kinds of facilities. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is extending to the people of Saskatchewan an 
excellent opportunity in developing a permanent water supply. 
Over 5,000  

dug-outs and small storage reservoirs were built in 1988 for a 
development of $3.2 million at a cost that was partly shared by 
the federal government; almost 4,000 farm dug-out pumping 
projects, for a cost of a million dollars in 1988. 
 
On individual irrigation systems, Mr. Speaker, we have since 
’85 looked at 504 individual irrigation projects. And I think that 
that’s a very significant figure. There is probably 504 more 
producers in Saskatchewan who are able to carry their own feed 
supply from year to year without having to purchase it from 
other people. And I think that that’s an excellent way of placing 
the economic focus on the people in the various areas where 
they reside. 
 
I want to also say that in group irrigations there has been 124 of 
them and we spent 3.5 million in 1988. The group irrigation 
special projects, I want to point that out because I think it’s an 
excellent approach, have put into place about $30.4 million in 
Luck Lake and they’re looking at development in Riverhurst. 
And I’ve talked to producers there, and that’s right along the 
edge of my constituency, and they believe that it’s an important 
and very . . . a good feature that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they did with those irrigation projects . . . 
And I think here is what the member from Regina Wascana was 
talking about earlier; here is what should have been done in 
Outlook in days gone by. The farmers and Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation in Lucky Lake are working together with Ducks 
Unlimited and special soils management to control the 
salinization of soils. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farm input price survey established in 
September of ’85 has been conducting surveys on products, 
agriculture products, that the province’s farmers have been 
using. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a very important part of 
providing a sense of the prices that farmers are paying for the 
products that they use. 
 
(1945) 
 
I want to deal, Mr. Speaker, with an item that has occupied my 
attention over the past year, and that’s agriculture extension 
services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to review just briefly some of the things that we have 
done. In 1987, in December of ’87, Mr. Speaker, the agriculture 
caucus was asked to review the role of extension services in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the recommendation that we made 
to the Department of Agriculture was put into place in the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention in 1988 by the Premier. And his comments at that 
time were that the government would have an enhanced rural 
service network and that it would service at least at 52 
locations; there would be no job loss by employees; and that we 
would deal with a very strong consultative process with the 
employees, with the people of the SARM, and all of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well that’s what we began to do. In the beginning of ’88, and 
moving on to May and June of ’88, the minister’s advisory 
committee which I was the chairman of —  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

123 
 

which I still am the chairman of — we invited the people from 
SARM to come and visit with us to put in a strategy that would 
deal with how extension services would be delivered in the 
various areas of the province. 
 
We dealt with, first of all, Mr. Speaker, an initial phase and that 
would put together an opportunity for the minister and myself 
to speak to all of the employees throughout the province who 
were looking at joining forces to provide a better service to the 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan. Those four areas, Mr. Speaker, 
were together with community planning, lands, extension, crop 
insurance. 
 
Now we met with the members of the SARM executive on a 
regular basis. We met with people from the rural municipal 
councils. We dealt with them. We had meetings with the rural 
municipalities’ reeves and councillors for their six district 
meetings, and in those six district meetings we talked about the 
kinds of things that we would be interested in doing. 
 
In order to establish exactly what we needed, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Rural Development asked the six regional councils 
to place their representatives before him and we asked them to 
serve on the committee. They are representatives who we did 
not appoint. They were chosen by farmers in Saskatchewan to 
represent them in agriculture districts and regional councils. 
 
In the six regional councils, we had one member from North 
Battleford, we have a member from Carrot River, we have a 
member from Laporte, we have a member from Melville, we 
have a member from Gull Lake. We have also asked SARM to 
submit two names to us to provide their representation, and one 
of them is from Rouleau and the other one is from Biggar. 
 
We also asked them to put on a member, because we were 
dealing with the kinds of things that required some 
administration focus, we asked that there be a member placed 
on there from the rural municipal association, secretary 
treasurers. And we have a gentleman there who serves on that 
from Bengough. 
 
I think one of the things that is really important — there were 
three members at large that were appointed. One is Mrs. 
Margaret Cline, who is from Zelma, she is the head of the 
women’s institute; Murray Westby, who is the Saskatchewan 
president of the Saskatchewan-Manitoba Implement Dealers 
Association; and then we have the former president of 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Mr. Don Abel 
from Melville. I think that this committee has worked well over 
the past year in providing the minister with some real pointed 
and direct input. 
 
Our management team, made up of the deputy minister and 
people from the minister’s office, worked during the summer of 
’88 to talk with the employees of those four areas: the crop 
insurance, lands branch, community planning, and extension 
services. We asked the employees a number of questions: how 
they featured the service network should work; how the four 
government divisions should be co-ordinated; how the offices 
should look; how the offices should be equipped; how the staff  

should work together with district boards; how the staff help 
rural Saskatchewan develop and diversify. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, became the focus of our attention as we 
addressed the various areas of our organization. Through the 
summer, we got a lot of information from these employees to 
deal directly with the component of that rural service network. 
 
The structure that we used in determining how the rural service 
network will work is taking . . . And I’ve used this illustration 
before. We built on the foundation that was established by 
extension in previous years. The rural municipalities have an 
opportunity to set up a committee of agriculture councillors that 
deals with agriculture in the municipality. They then appoint an 
individual to serve on the agriculture district, and there are 43 
of them in the province, Mr. Speaker. Those 43 districts then 
appoint six regional councils, and those regional council 
members in turn are the ones that are going to be on the 
minister’s advisory committee — totally selected by people 
from the rural municipalities who have a vision, who have 
direction in the way that agriculture should go. 
 
The commitment was made, Mr. Speaker, to deal with this 
focus in a four-step method, to have the rural municipality, the 
ag district boards, the regional councils, deal directly with the 
minister’s advisory committee to provide input into programs 
for the minister. And that, Mr. Speaker, probably took four 
steps out of the program as it was in the past. In that way, Mr. 
Speaker, these ideas came from employees, they came from 
rural municipal people, they came from people who understood 
what the whole thing was about. 
 
We have opened three offices of this nature already, Mr. 
Speaker, and of the 52 those three have been open — Leader, 
Wolseley, and Watrous. And I believe that the people are going 
to be very well served out of those offices, and the 49 we’re 
going to be opening in this next year. 
 
Now in order to put this into perspective I just want you, and 
the members of this Assembly, to understand that these 52 
locations are locations where offices today are located. Now in 
those offices we have 98 different focuses that are in different 
locations in these various communities, in these 52. 
 
There are some communities that have one component of those 
four that I mentioned; there are some communities that have 
two; there are some that have three; and there are some that 
have four. There are 24 that only have one, and I’ll just use as 
an example the Minister of Environment’s constituency, the 
town of Kyle. There is no agriculture service opportunity for an 
agrologist to serve the people of that area from Eston through to 
Outlook. And I really believe, and it’s the belief of the 
department, that there needs to be an agriculture emphasis. 
 
If you take the area from south of Weyburn all the way to the 
Alberta border and 50 miles to 100 miles north, you have no 
agriculture services in that area at all. And I think that that’s the 
kind of thing that we need to take a serious look at as how to 
provide an agronomic service within that framework in those 
areas. 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

124 
 

Now I believe that this structure will provide that to the people 
of rural Saskatchewan. This will enhance the opportunity of 
delivery, and I want to talk about that a bit because I think it’s 
really important. We are placing into those service centres a 
computerization component which will be able to be accessed 
for crop insurance; it will be able to be . . . Individuals will be 
able to go in there and check out their own crop insurance 
policy. The service is connected with the university to the 
research council. It’s connected to the Canadian component of 
research in all of Canada to develop the kind of thing that can 
be accessed in those 52 locations by rural people just getting on 
line and knowing who to contact and who to get hold of. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, in this year, will likely provide a component 
that is very, very important in what we would call distance 
education. Distance education for rural Saskatchewan with a 
two-way audio and a one-way visual will provide into these 
service centres some dimension and some dynamic for giving 
them an opportunity to develop and to know what their markets 
are. I believe that that’s a step forward, and that it’s a part of an 
overall strategy to have rural Saskatchewan improve itself and 
want to be in a better position to compete with other people in 
other countries. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that there were a number of references 
made to the ag credit corporation setting up a new dynamic for 
initiatives in financing. And I’m going to be watching with 
some interest that development, because I believe in rural 
Saskatchewan that is a dynamic that is going to be really 
important over the next three years. 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, in reflecting a little bit about earlier 
comments about the fact that the 1970s were just the best years 
in agriculture in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, the grain 
sector did have some very, very good years in the ’70s. But if 
members and individuals who are acquainted with the livestock 
industry would have been involved in the industry in ’75, ’74, 
’76, ’77, in those years, I believe they would have a significant 
different opinion. 
 
There were many, many people in that period of time, Mr. 
Speaker, who went out of agriculture. In fact, from 1971 till 
1981 there were 1,000 farmers a year that left agriculture. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a reflection on what people would 
consider the good times in agriculture. And what we have today 
is probably a reaction and what you would call a ballooning 
effect on what happened in the last part of the ’70s and the 
beginning of the ’80s, and that was the high interest rate that 
was never really addressed by any government at that time. And 
I believe that that is very, very important in dealing with how 
we handle future financing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There was a time, Mr. Speaker, when feeding livestock in the 
province of Saskatchewan was considered a high-risk form of 
making a living. And I don’t think it’s really changed much 
over the years; however, there have been certain features that 
we as a province have put into focus.  

It’s a window that people have to deal with these concerns. 
 
We have just moved from an example of that in the beef 
stabilization program into signing an agreement with the federal 
government on tripartite stabilization which is going to help our 
cow-calf people, which is going to help our backgrounder 
industry in the province. And I was just talking to one of my 
constituents yesterday who is going to use tripartite stabilization 
as a backgrounder focus for putting into place some quality 
cattle into the feeder-finish opportunity. 
 
Another window that we’ve put in, Mr. Speaker, that is really, I 
think, going to just slowly grow and grow, and that’s the feeder 
association loan guarantee program. We have at this time over 
45 associations, both as limited companies, as co-ops, that are 
using that, and they will be able to take that program and 
develop it into an opportunity for them to get financing that is 
going to be almost at a minimal over prime. And that is an 
extremely important feature. 
 
(2000) 
 
I just want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that our family is in 
the process of setting one of these up. And we had . . . Without 
any initiative of ours, I had a call from a number of financing 
institutions asking whether they would be able to service our 
family with an opportunity to provide loans to us, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, is exactly what this does. It’s enough of a guarantee to 
provide an impact into the lender’s hands that he will then make 
sure that the financing is available for investment in what 
people would consider a high-risk area in agriculture. 
 
The area that I want to touch on just briefly here is we have had 
a considerable attack here in the last few days about the drought 
payments and reasonably saying that there was some concern 
about how the program was being delivered. However, standing 
and criticizing isn’t going to help the situation in any way, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think that what we need to do is consider some 
form of assistance in delivery in showing people how to deliver 
it better. 
 
In 1986 we had a special grains program that delivered 1.1 
billion into western Canada in a deficiency payment and that, 
Mr. Speaker, provided almost half a billion dollars into the 
province of Saskatchewan. And that, if you take it in 
perspective, is 50 per cent of the seeding costs involved in 
putting the seed into the ground in one spring in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year the federal drought assistance, together with 
Saskatchewan, provided a lot of opportunities, and I mentioned 
them earlier. 
 
I want to deal now a little bit with what I consider one of the 
best programs around, and that’s the natural gas distribution 
program that SaskPower and SaskEnergy are putting together. 
 
We have in this province, Mr. Speaker, now in rural 
Saskatchewan, an equal opportunity to reduce costs that are . . . 
or have our costs in our homes and in our shops, in  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

125 
 

our hog barns, our chicken barns, at a fair market value. That 
reduces the cost: it improves the net profit in these projects that 
we have. And I believe that we need to deal with this more and 
more as we go along. How do we lower the costs to our 
producers? And this definitely is a method to do that. 
 
I just want to use an example of one community, and it’s in that 
community that is served by the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and it’s the town of Bateman. I went 
there to cut the ribbon on the gas program that was being put in 
there a number of years ago, and a comment was made to me by 
a gentleman by the name of Jim Bateman, who the town was 
named after. He told me this, he said, the benefit to the 
community is extensive but nowhere is the impact felt more 
than in those agencies that we have to go from person to person 
to collect money for, like our rinks and our schools and our 
community involved . . . community centres. Those are the 
things that really feel the impact of that natural gas the most, 
and I’ll tell you why. It’s because we don’t have to go pay . . . 
collect all that money to pay for the fuel to be burned to heat 
those facilities during the winter. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, in some cases reduced the volume of 
contributions required by 50 per cent. And that is a really 
extremely important feature to many of these people in small 
rural Saskatchewan. And I think that is an example of what has 
happened to all those communities that when we delivered the 
gas into those communities, they had an opportunity to have a 
better community life-style. 
 
In the natural gas program, it has enhanced the opportunity for 
29,000 more people in rural Saskatchewan to have natural gas 
to heat their homes. And I think that that’s an important feature 
in dealing with how the people of Saskatchewan can relate in a 
competitive basis to people around the world. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about health care because we have, I 
think, been unjustly criticized about the way we’ve handled 
health care. The opposition have said we haven’t done anything, 
we’re going to probably be shutting down hospitals, and I think 
they’re totally wrong — I know they’re totally wrong. The task 
force on health care has gone through the province and are 
meeting for the last few weeks in Regina and Saskatoon and in 
that we’re probably going to come down . . . They’re probably 
going to come down with some very important 
recommendations that I think are going to be necessary. 
They’re going to provide a background for the kinds of things 
that we need to do in health care. 
 
I want to indicate that we have had a high increase in spending 
in hospitals in the province. We’ve had almost 1,500 new 
hospital beds in Saskatchewan and when you take into 
consideration that there are 7,000 hospital beds in 
Saskatchewan already, Mr. Speaker, and 5,000 of them are 
occupied, it’s a matter of where they’re located that we had to 
put these extra 1,500 new ones in. And these 1,500 new ones 
are located in places like Saskatoon and Regina where we have 
needed a whole lot more selective and elective kinds of 
operating procedures being followed. 
 

Now those areas have generated about 700 new nursing 
positions in the province. We have put in six new CAT scans in 
the base hospitals, expanded open heart surgery in Regina, day 
surgery in Saskatoon. The cancer priority . . . And I want to 
point this out, Mr. Speaker. There is nothing that makes a 
person recognize the benefits that have come to us over an 
extensive period of time on people who are willing and 
prepared to go into the research side on cancer. 
 
A year ago, or almost a year ago, my nephew was diagnosed as 
having leukemia and when that was told us, Mr. Speaker, it was 
like someone pulled the rug out from under us — and that in 
itself was an extremely negative thing in our home. The 
diagnosis was completed; the treatments are ongoing; and what 
I found is that the people who work in the cancer clinics in 
Saskatoon and Regina have a lot of empathy to these people 
who are in these positions. 
 
And I talked to my brother about this extensively because he 
was almost living there for the first month, or during the month 
of April last year, and what he said to me was that these people 
who work in these cancer clinics are extremely dedicated to the 
kinds of things that they have chosen for a profession. And 
what I want to say, too, is that the opportunity in Saskatchewan 
for people to go into there is excellent. This is one area across 
Canada and across the globe where people are needed and when 
we talk about educational opportunities, that is an extremely 
important area. 
 
I want to just mention that nursing home beds have been up . . . 
or we have over 2,000 more nursing home beds. I think that’s 
an extremely important feature. I’ve had an opportunity to have 
a few of them in my seat and the people in the various 
communities appreciate that. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about rehabilitation as it relates to 
various areas . . . the rehabilitation in a couple of areas that deal, 
first of all, with drug and alcohol abuse. I think that that’s an 
extremely important feature in dealing with the kinds of things 
that are happening in society today. I think it’s a step forward. 
We have a children’s rehabilitation centre in Saskatoon, the 
Wascana institute here, rehabilitation centre in Regina — 
excellent places for extensive rehabilitation opportunities for 
people who really need it. 
 
I want to just dwell a little bit about one important feature that I 
think is important. The Everyone Wins promotes eating right, 
keeping fit, reducing stress, quitting smoking, combatting drug 
and alcohol abuse, avoiding accidents. I think that one of the 
things that we need to have in rural Saskatchewan is a clear 
emphasis that this is an important feature. And I will note that 
there are many, many people in agriculture who have put 
themselves in awkward positions, and only to regret it later on 
when they have had to go to get rehabilitated in various areas 
like Wascana institute here, a rehabilitation centre. 
 
I want to say that many people have expressed a real optimism 
on the fact that the health care card has been established in 
Saskatchewan. I think that it’s really, really a benefit to people 
of Saskatchewan. In dealing with the card and what it can do, I 
think we’re only touching the  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

126 
 

beginning of an opportunity, and I am looking forward to the 
kinds of things that we can do in the future with that card to 
provide the benefit to people in health care and in other areas. 
 
Last summer we had introduced a private adoption Act or an 
adoption Act that deals, in some ways, with private adoption 
and various areas. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in that 
Act there are some very important features and I became 
involved with it because I was interested in it. 
 
There are certain things that are very pronounced there. One is 
that the interests of the children are looked after. There offers 
more protection, more choices in adoption planning for birth 
and adoptive parents. There’s opportunity for parents to select 
the parents that they want to have for their children. There’s 
more protection for the father in the instances of the child being 
allowed for adoption in other areas. 
 
The requirement for independent advice for parents signing 
adoption consent is also enhanced — and I think that that’s 
important — and requires independent advice for those people 
who have children who want to be adopted, who are over 12, 
and they have to have consent of the child. And I think that 
that’s important. 
 
The other area that I want to touch on briefly is the area of 
public participation. We have in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
probably, access to the Government of Saskatchewan and for 
the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan approximately a 
billion dollars in the kinds of bond issues that are really 
important. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it’s important from the aspect of the 
fact that what is happening in the bonds, is that money that 
would normally not be invested in Saskatchewan would flow to 
Ontario. We would have to, then, if we wanted to, make loans 
for that money to invest in Saskatchewan. We’d have to take 
that all back here and we would have to do it, and our people 
here would not receive the pointed benefits that accrue to that. 
And really what it would generally do then is overheat the 
economy in Ontario, which is overheated already, and we don’t 
need any more of that. And I think that those are the things that 
those bond issues do for us. 
 
(2015) 
 
I want to just touch a little bit on public participation as it 
relates to prior to this government being involved in governing. 
I want to touch on a little project that was developed in the back 
rooms by some of the people who sit opposite. There was a 
gentleman, who was a minister by the name of Cowley; there 
was a premier by the name of Blakeney; there was a minister by 
the name of Smishek; there was a minister by the name of 
Bowerman; there was a minister by the name of Cody; there 
was a minister by the name of Kramer; and then there was one 
member who formerly represented the constituency of 
Humboldt and now is in Regina North East. These people did a 
couple of things, they did a couple of things. They first of all 
were, Mr. Speaker, on the board of directors on the Crown 
investments corporation, and I think that that has to be put into 
people’s minds. These people were  

prepared to do a number of things, and I just want to outline a 
few of them. 
 
The board of directors and the people that I just mentioned were 
members of a board of directors of Crown investments 
corporation which in January of ’82 met to show . . . to begin to 
work on providing an investment opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — To discuss, Harold, that’s right. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Right, and it was an agenda item on the 
board, and the decision was reached, and the decision was this. 
The Saskatchewan share proposal is an attempt to accomplish 
two major objectives — two of them: to encourage 
Saskatchewan residents to invest in provincial industrial 
developments; to generate a new pool of capital to make 
strategic investments, thereby allowing Saskatchewan to take 
advantage of opportunities for large industrial projects in an era 
in which capital rationing for Crown investments has become a 
reality. Right! 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this has aroused some 
curiosity on the other side. Some of the guiding principles were 
to provide a mechanism for all residents of Saskatchewan to 
invest in the province. That was one of the guiding principles. 
To provide an alternative source for major new investments in 
resource enterprises and industrial projects. Okay. 
 
An Hon. Member: — New. New projects. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Right. To reinforce the identification of a 
partnership between the government and the people of the 
province in the developing of our economy. Those are very, 
very good guiding principles. Mr. Speaker, I think those are the 
kinds of things that I would vote for, too. 
 
Anyway, they continued on. What are the political 
consequences? This is the paper that was presented. What are 
the political consequences? The political consequences, Mr. 
Speaker, are, other Saskatchewan political parties will 
undoubtedly make similar proposals in the future. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very, very important feature. Other Saskatchewan 
political parties will undoubtedly make similar proposals in the 
future. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They knew they were going to lose. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There! There you have it. Another political 
consequence. If a substantial sum of investment capital could be 
raised through a share program, the government would be able 
to take advantage of large industrial projects, opportunities, 
without requiring a reduction in the investment by the utility or 
commercial Crown corporation. Now there you go. That’s the 
kind of thing that those people were talking about in the back 
room and never had the courage to initiate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today, what we see today far more than any other time in 
the period of time that I’ve been here, they have been saying to 
us that we are wrong in public participation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and they have continually said it. 
 
Now some of the projects that they would consider as  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

127 
 

new projects, aspen newsprint — interesting one; aspen market 
pulp; heavy oil upgrader — now there is a good one. They 
never, ever talked about joining forces with the Federated 
Co-op to put in a heavy oil upgrader. And then they wanted to 
maybe put in an ammonia plant, and then direct iron ore 
reduction out at Ipsco here probably. And then they have one 
potash mine that they’d be interested in investing in. What 
about the uranium mine and natural gas exploration? Very, very 
good opportunities for diversification in Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, the 
potential investments that could be transferred. Now I just 
talked about new ones in the component of this thing that we 
were discussing with public participation. There was a 
well-known iron smelting factory in the province of 
Saskatchewan — well known in Western Canada — it’s called 
Ipsco. Those people, Mr. Speaker, those people were prepared 
to sell Ipsco to the people of Saskatchewan in a bond or that 
kind of an issue, or maybe even shares. They weren’t quite sure 
on how they were going to do it, but they were going to 
participate with the public of Saskatchewan, which is today, 
Mr. Speaker, exactly what we’re doing. 
 
Now I just want to point out another one, Prairie Malt, and if 
it’s the same Prairie Malt that I know about, it’s in Biggar, and 
that Prairie Malt is probably going to be criticized all over the 
place for public participation and involvement by the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now lets take a look at another one. We’ve had a lot of 
criticisms about SED . . . S-E-D components. And you know, 
they had an interesting comment beside SED Systems: the 
precarious financial position of the company would have to be 
disclosed. Now that’s an interesting observation by Crown 
investments corporation. The precarious financial position of 
the company would have to be disclosed. Now that is an 
interesting one. 
 
In 1982 these people opposite were talking about how they 
could involve the public and how they would have to disclose 
some of the focus that they were placing on these Crown 
corporations that they were trying to run. And were they so 
pious in their discussing all of the components of this share 
capital program? Another one. I want to go through the list here 
because it gets better. 
 
Cablecom, current losses and value of predecessor would 
become public. Now there is a real one. Now that public 
information — and we were in public accounts today and the 
NDP piously were dealing with the kinds of things that say, oh, 
you can’t do this and you can’t do that and you can’t do the 
other thing. Now they weren’t willing to disclose those features. 
They figured it was a threat. And maybe that threat kept them 
from disclosing those opportunities for the people of 
Saskatchewan to invest Saskatchewan dollars, home-grown 
dollars in good companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another one, the Cornwall Centre, the Cornwall Centre. And 
this is what they said about that: the early years of this project 
will have very low returns — well it’s no wonder, they gave 
such a good deal to the people of Toronto. But it will have a 
source, but it will be a source of regular  

income. Now there’s a real good investment, and I think it 
probably would have been. 
 
Now here we go to what the member from Shellbrook-Torch 
River was talking about earlier about Weyerhaeuser and 
PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company). Now there is a good 
one. Now here, I want you to hear this because it’s an important 
component of what we found out later on. This is what their 
forecast was for PAPCO. Listen: a good possibility with a 
dividend flow, but in an industry expecting difficulties for the 
next few years. I wonder whether we should sell it. Now that’s 
Weyerhaeuser. PAPCO moved from where they were in 1982, 
it hit a tremendous slump in the pulp business, and it drove this 
government to pay $90,000 a day in paying the interest costs in 
the delivery of a pulp mill to the province of Saskatchewan. 
And what have we got today? We sell it to Weyerhaeuser. And 
these people stand up and yip and yap about what we should 
have done and should have done it different. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, this is fundamental to this government that public 
participation is the road to go. 
 
I noted with some interest, Mr. Speaker, that a news release just 
recently indicated that the people in Chaplin and Fox Valley — 
and this is a special interest to the member from Thunder Creek 
— that the employees of the sodium sulphate plant in Chaplin 
and in Fox Valley got a 700 to $1,000 profit-sharing benefit, 
and that management earned between 1,000 and $2,000 as a 
profit-sharing component of the deal that was worked out for 
those people. 
 
Now did they ever get that when they worked for the 
government? I would doubt it. I would doubt it very much. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why we on this side of the House say, 
when they’re in power they do things strictly on their own. 
They don’t ask anyone. They don’t allow people in this 
province to participate. They think they can run it better. 
 
And we on this side, Mr. Speaker, believe that people in rural 
Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan can run it better than 
government can. And I honestly believe that, and I want it to go 
on record that we support the areas of public participation that 
we have done. 
 
I want to point out a couple of things, Mr. Speaker, that they 
even had the mechanism set up on how to do this. They had a 
mechanism set up on how to do it. They talked about the 
financial implications. They did all of those kinds of things. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why on this side of the House we 
sometimes call those people over there hypocritical. And I 
believe that the evidence is being brought forward more and 
more all the time. And I wonder how they can stand here and in 
their piety tell us we’re doing wrong when we are almost 
implementing what they said we should do in the first place. I 
think that that, Mr. Speaker, is totally, totally misrepresenting 
an opportunity for truth. 
 
I want to deal with two other areas before I close. One has to do 
with the home program. The Minister of Urban Affairs, who is 
responsible for Sask Housing, has probably created more jobs 
through the home program than any minister has ever done in 
any kind of a program in the  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

128 
 

history of Saskatchewan — winter works, or whatever. And I 
want to point out something. 
 
Now in the home program there were almost 300,000 
applications for matching grants, and I wonder if any of those 
people on the other side decided to take advantage of this 
opportunity. I’ll bet you that they are some of those people, too. 
There were almost 60,000 who had a 6 per cent loan program 
provided to them in a mortgage reducing interest rate. Now 
what did that do for jobs? Mr. Speaker, 20,000 jobs have been 
established over the period of time from 1986, ’87, ’88 and I 
think that that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And that’s why we have the highest 
unemployment — higher than the national average. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes is 
talking about high unemployment. Mr. Speaker, if we hadn’t 
have done it, just think of what the unemployment would have 
been if that would have happened. And I think that that’s the 
kind of thing that we need to do and we need to continue to do. 
That, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, and probably in his too, 
because he has a rural constituency, he probably had just about 
the same amount of opportunity for development. 
 
In my constituency that value . . . that value in my constituency 
was over $2 million that was paid to people to improve their 
housing. And I believe that was really, really important — yes, 
yes, Mr. Speaker, $2 million in my seat and almost $2 million 
in the loan program. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
truly a good make-work kind of program where people of 
Saskatchewan benefit, and people of Saskatchewan have gone 
to work, and I think it’s an excellent opportunity. 
 
I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, on an issue that was raised 
through the last few days on electoral boundary changes. And I 
know it was in the throne speech, and I wanted to address it. 
 

(2030) 
 
People have said: why should one area of the province have a 
representation that deals with 12,000 constituents, another with 
9,000, and another with 7,000, and another one with 8,000. And 
I believe that there are a number of things that we have to do 
and we have to think about when we represent people. There are 
things that we have to consider when we have rural 
constituencies. 
 
And I just want to point out a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. 
One is, I have run in the Morse constituency for four times, and, 
Mr. Speaker, for me it has been an exciting experience. My 
political involvement began in 1973 . . . in 1972 in the R.M. of 
Sask Landing, that’s when my political involvements began. I 
have lived in that constituency all my life. I was born in that 
constituency. I know the people. I understand the people, and I 
want to continue serving the people there. 
 
But I just want to tell you something about . . . and you know, 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone, who used to be the 
member from Shaunavon, indicated this earlier in his speech 
today, and I want to compliment him for his broadmindedness 
in this issue. He said it’s different  

serving an urban seat than it is a rural seat. And it’s different 
because he just has to drive four or five blocks to provide the 
same service that I drive two and a half hours to get to my 
constituency, first of all, and then it takes me another two hours 
to drive either way — I live right about in the middle — to 
drive either way to serve the people of my constituency. 
 
I just want to point out one other thing . . . I want to point out 
something else. Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I have 12 
municipalities — 12 municipalities — I have seven hospital 
boards, I have one park, two resort villages, and six regional 
parks. I have 18 towns and villages, Mr. Speaker. And it seems 
to be bothering them over on the other side. And I want to just 
point this out: those are the people that I serve, and those are the 
people that I have to become involved with; those are the 
people that I want to become involved with, and I have. And 
that’s, Mr. Speaker, what it takes to be a good MLA, because 
the focus is different today than it was 10 years ago; the focus is 
different today than it was five years ago. The focus, Mr. 
Speaker, has to do with a number of things, and I want to point 
them out. 
 
They come to the MLA office . . . And I have three offices in 
my constituency. I have one in Swift Current, one in Cabri, and 
one in Morse. I have three offices, and in those three offices I’ll 
tell you what I do. I become a counsellor, I become an adviser, I 
become an ombudsman, an administrator, a business man, and 
whole lot of other things to these people who come to see me. 
And I do it consistently through the year, all the time. 
 
Now if I have to drive . . . For example, the member from 
Elphinstone, he can go to the place that he represents in the city 
of Regina; he can drive there and in an afternoon; he can meet 
four or five people, even coming from the legislature. He can go 
there and sit with those people, having coffee with them. I can’t 
do that, Mr. Speaker. I have to drive 150 miles to get there, and 
then I have to drive another 75 miles just to get to the 
constituency’s boundaries. And I have to do that, and I’m 
pleased to do that. But you have to recognize one thing that’s 
very important, Mr. Speaker, and that it takes me five and a half 
hours to drive from here to Swift Current and back. It takes 
another three hours just to go have coffee with the people in 
some corners of my constituency. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I 
agree with the report of the task force on the boundaries of 
constituencies and how they place mine. 
 
Now they have criticized or compared Morse constituency with 
urban constituencies, and I say, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to have 
been mentioned, but I just want to point out one thing to the 
people of Saskatchewan, that it takes a lot of time to serve a 
large constituency. 
 
One other item, Mr. Speaker. The members from Athabasca and 
Cumberland probably have some same and similar 
circumstances to the kinds of conditions that I have, and that, 
Mr. Speaker, is why they have less voters in their seats, is 
because they have the long distances. That, Mr. Speaker, is the 
kind of thing that I’m referring to, and why I believe that the 
Electoral Boundaries Commission did the right thing in 
recommending the kinds of things they did in the rural 
constituencies. 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

129 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will be informing the House that I will be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne and I will be proud to 
do that. I want to compliment the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on his delivery, the member from 
Yorkton on how he conducted himself in seconding the address 
from the Speech from the Throne, and I will be supporting the 
motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay, thank you. Mr. Speaker, with due respect 
to the language of the House and also the languages of the 
province of Saskatchewan, I will say a few words in Cree, and I 
will also translate the introductory remarks following. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree. See end of 
Hansard.) [See page 140.]) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will present the document that I just 
spoke in Cree. With due respect to the historical writing system 
in Cree, the syllabic system was created in the 1840s, and it was 
used by the Wesleyan Methodist missionaries, along with help 
from the Cree speakers from northern Manitoba. And as we 
went further West, there was the development of the syllabics 
and it was utilized by the Anglican church. And the document 
that I present is therefore the syllabic system as is used by the 
Anglicans throughout western Canada. I will then give that to 
the page to deliver it to Hansard, you know, as an official 
record. 
 
In regards to the throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look at it 
in three aspects. One is in regards to the question of who is 
included in the throne speech. But more importantly, who does 
it exclude? What happens to be the sin of omission by the PC 
government for 1989? What’s their position on the neglect of 
people in this province? 
 
A quick look will show you that there is no mention at all about 
our transportation system which they had privatized previously. 
We now have one of the worst roads in any province in Canada. 
And there is no mention of improvements on our roads, and 
especially on our dangerous northern roads. 
 
I also look at the area where there is no mention of jobs. Many 
working people in Saskatchewan and small businesses were 
looking forward to a year where there would be an emphasis on 
jobs and job creation. Again, no actual mention. 
 
There is also only a cursory mention of Indian and Metis 
people, and I’ll read that into the record later on. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government states very clearly 
that it wants to be positive. And I would like to put it on the 
record that they are indeed very, very positive. They are very, 
very positive in regards to the big corporations, whether the big 
corporations are from the United States or Japan or South 
Africa. They’re extremely positive when it comes down to 
them. 
 
They are also very positive to Crown corporations; not the 
Crown corporations from Saskatchewan, but the Crown 
corporations from China. 

The latter part is, what about the neglect and the negativism of 
this throne speech. I would say that it has a straightforward 
attack on the Crown corporations that Saskatchewan people 
built as a protection for themselves. Because basically they had 
looked at the history which I will mention later on. 
 
There is also really, as we look, a continuation of the strategy 
wherein they did away with the department of co-ops, and there 
is no strong mention of co-operatives except as a cursory 
mention. 
 
The other thing is in regards to Saskatchewan children when we 
recognize that one out of every four is in a poverty situation. 
One out of every four of our children in Saskatchewan is 
hungry. No mention of our children. 
 
When we look at the overall aspect of who builds 
Saskatchewan, therefore there is no real strong, solid support 
for the workers, the business people, and the farmers of this 
province. 
 
The first major area I would like to discuss is that whole area of 
economic development and jobs. And as I look into the throne 
speech on the job record of this province, I look at it as one of 
the most dismal in Saskatchewan’s history. I look at the 50 to 
80 per cent unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan. I 
look at the fact that 43,000 people are out of work, and we 
know that’s a formal record; there is probably more like 80,000 
people out of work in this province. 
 
As I look at the fact of our youth and I look at the fact that 
1,600 people have just recently left our province in only one 
month, could you imagine our people, our youth are leaving this 
province because they know that there is no future except 
empty promises? 
 
The only place where I saw jobs as advertised this year, and 
very recently in regards to this Tory government, is to the Tory 
MLAs — the defeated Tory MLAs, those people that wreaked 
havoc on northern Saskatchewan before, people like Sid 
Dutchak, who did absolutely nothing in regards to northern 
development. He got a job. 
 
When we looked at the other people who ran, for example, in 
northern Saskatchewan, we saw Jack Cennon, recently defeated 
MP who ran in P.A.-Churchill in northern areas and was 
completely wiped out in the North — by over 10,000 votes he 
was beaten. He gets a job. When we look at John Gormley, 
when we look at Gordon Dirks, Paul Schoenhals, making over 
$100,000 a year when people are trying hard to get jobs. There 
is absolutely no caring and concern by this PC government in 
regards to working people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When we look at the area of mismanagement, 
there is absolutely no province in the history of Canada that has 
come from a balanced budget in 1982 to a $4 billion 
mismanaged economy. It’s a deficit that’s beyond any reason at 
all. It costs us $3  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

130 
 

million a day. There is no wonder that there are long waiting 
lists at our hospitals, because the staffing is not there. There is 
no wonder that our education . . . our youth cannot go to 
university because there is no money for our universities so that 
they can go to school, so that they could have a future for 
themselves. The mismanagement of this province is . . . the PC 
government is beyond precedent in Saskatchewan history. 
 
On the other hand, they will turn around and have birthday 
parties — $9 million — $9 million for birthdays. When I look 
back, even the defeated MLAs and MPs of this province, people 
also look forward to the future. This PC government only looks 
forward in regards to their own particular re-elections. 
 
And I have to look at the Premier’s own riding wherein he has a 
$1 billion boondoggle, the shafferty project. And when we look 
at that, people are crying out for health services; seniors are 
asking for continuing care in this province. 
 
There’s a whole host of developments that are required by a lot 
of small-business people in this province. And yet we have to 
continue paying for the re-election of the Premier in his own 
riding. 
 
We talk a lot about the experiences of acid rain, of ozone layer. 
But he will have this coal-fired plant in his home riding. It will 
not only burn holes in our pockets but it will burn holes in our 
atmosphere at the same time. 
 
When I look at the overall general aspect, the economic disaster 
of this PC government, I look at the 1,500 bankruptcies of small 
business and farmers in this province; I look at the fact that 
there was over 1,200 foreclosures this past year for farmers in 
this province, and when I look at the fact that in all of this the 
same income tax and business tax increases have hurt a lot of 
the businesses. 
 
I see the higher costs in utilities that are raised because of the 
serious mismanagement of our resources and our finances. This 
has got to be the most incompetent and corrupt government in 
the whole history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — This PC government talks about the future. It 
talks about global views of economics. But the only solution it 
offers is the 200-year- old dream of Adam Smith, where 
supposedly the invisible land of private ownership would trickle 
down wealth to everybody. But that hasn’t happened in 200 
years. We well recognize that in Canada, at the height of 
development in the ’20s, that the big corporations went at great 
lengths to control everybody’s lives, and we ended up in the 
’30s Depression — when it was uncontrolled and unplanned. 
We also see that even in 1988 with the crash. The fact is that 
this is an old-fashioned theory wherein putting dollars on 
resources solely and only in the hands of big business will there 
be success for the people. And when you look at history, that’s 
not the way it is. 
 
We look at Saskatchewan history: we look at the  

legislature today, we look at our highways, we look at our 
buildings, we look at our schools, our hospitals, we look at our 
farms. Right from the early days people have to work together; 
people had to work together in order to build the farms; people 
had to work together in order to make a base of living. 
 
Indigenous people prior to that worked together in collectives, 
working together side by side to make sure that proper living 
was made. And this type of idea of working together is no 
longer the basis of Saskatchewan history. All it is private gain 
and private greed. And I think it is very important to recognize 
that the working together of economic development, wherein 
you have private enterprise, where you have co-ops, where you 
have the Crown corporations working side by side and 
co-operating together in a joint venture in this province in a 
mixed economy approach — that has been the success that 
we’ve had in this province. That is what brought us into a 
situation where we had balanced budgets and a lot more jobs 
than in today’s PC era. 
 
When we look at the aspect of the mixed economy, this idea 
was transferred also in the area of health care. We saw 
Saskatchewan people having to challenge the privatized 
medicine of the past. We saw the old ideas had to be challenged 
where people would have to be working together for the public 
good. We saw that they had to co-operate, that indeed, leaving 
it solely in the competitive sphere was not good enough; that 
they needed a system where there was competition and 
co-operation at the same time. There had to be balances in the 
system. 
 
And when we saw the medicare being attacked by the Tories in 
this province, we saw that they were only interested in 
themselves. They only wanted the rich to be able to afford 
medical help. This was the same thing a hundred years ago in 
regards to education when we had only private education and 
privatized education. Only the rich were able to get an 
education; only the rich were able to get medical help. And this 
is the type of society that you are promoting again through this 
throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One of the biggest things that I saw is the 
tremendous hypocrisy in this throne speech. I see the fact of the 
big corporations wanting to take complete control, not only in 
Saskatchewan but throughout the world. I see the fact of South 
African corporations trying to dig up our diamonds in northern 
Saskatchewan. I see the U.S. corporations moving in through 
the free trade agreement, and also Japanese. 
 
But the most hypocritical thing that I see here is the fact that at 
the same time they are doing it, this PC government attacks the 
Saskatchewan corporations that the people of Saskatchewan 
built. The hypocrisy here is that they will support the Chinese 
public corporations and they will not support the corporations 
that the people of Saskatchewan built. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — That is the tremendous hypocrisy of this  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

131 
 

government. 
 
When I look at the record of the mixed economy approach, 
when I look at the record of Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation, when I look at the diversified 
investment system that was utilized in regards to base metal 
production and uranium production in the North, I saw 
Saskatchewan mining corporation take a global and world 
leadership in business management. 
 
Now when we look at the Tories, all they want to do is provide 
the $60 million that was made clear-cut profit by SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) and transfer 
it to private people. Just transfer it over to, possibly, the free 
trade giants from the United States or to the Japanese large 
scale capital. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tory friends. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The Tory friends, as the member from 
Saskatoon also states. 
 
So what we are looking at is the dismantling of corporations 
that have been effective, that have worked for us in the 
province, corporations such as SGI. When I used to live in 
Ontario for a while, when I was teaching there on a five-year 
period, I remember when I came back to Saskatchewan and I 
said, my goodness! am I lucky to be back home. Look at the 
insurance rates. I had to pay close to 800 bucks in Ontario. 
 
And when I look at youth, what it tells me is only that the rich 
youth will be able to buy privatized-type insurance — 
tremendously high rates. Either that, or you will get second 
class insurance where the costs aren’t as big, but you will not be 
covered fully. And that’s the type of system that you’re trying 
to implement in our province which has shown a leadership not 
only in Canada, but in the world. It was world class that you’re 
trying to take apart. 
 
When I look at the fact of . . . I gave an example of SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), the fact the 
potash corporation was in the hands of only private, large-scale 
owners. We need to balance them off and compete alongside 
them. We provided them the opportunity to operate in the mines 
in this province, but we set up our own Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan because we wanted a fair return. We wanted to 
have not only a window, we wanted to have the fair return that 
gives us the advantages at the world scale that we were already 
competing in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When we looked at the Crowns, the balances 
were in favour. The reasons why they were brought in was in 
regards to the fact of greater concern, not only of the economic 
consequences of corporations. One of the basics and an 
historical fact of Crowns is because it would have to take into 
consideration the social development, that the profits that come 
from the corporations would have to be rechannelled into health 
and education and so on. 
 
And that was the reason why the Crowns were  

established so that they wouldn’t only go to Japan, they 
wouldn’t only go to the United States, in San Francisco, and in 
many other places in the world — the profit would disappear 
from Saskatchewan. In this way, when the Saskatchewan 
Crowns, when we built them, in the same way that people 
challenge the big corporations in regards to the retail centre 
through their co-ops, people have to challenge them in the 
co-operative fashion, in much the same way that we did 
co-operative investment into our Crown corporations. Because 
there was no way that the concern, the social concerns, the 
environmental concerns, the job concerns were adequately met 
by the privateers. 
 
I think it was very important that when the Crowns came in, it 
balanced it off. It forced a lot of the private entrepreneurs then 
to start dealing effectively, not only economic concerns but 
social concerns and also the concerns of the environment. A 
moral, well-rounded economic development strategy was 
developed through that approach. And it is through that 
approach that we have developed Saskatchewan. 
 
And I will remind that we have not tried to completely displace 
the private ownership. We work side by side with private 
ownership in joint ventures as in SMDC. We work side by side 
with the co-ops, and we work to develop our own Crown 
corporations. 
 
So when I look at the historical record, one recognizes that we 
had indeed achieved global status. When we looked at the 
international investment community, they looked at 
Saskatchewan to invest. When we looked in the area of mining, 
that’s the historic record. When we looked at the whole record 
of forestry, that was the case also. When we looked at the 
aspect, we had to be able to deal and balance it off from sector 
to sector. 
 
When we weren’t getting the returns, we were able to establish 
our own competitive network in our own very Saskatchewan 
way, because it was Saskatchewan people who built it. It was 
Saskatchewan people who did all of these things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The basic point behind all of that is that as an 
NDP government in the past, and when we look forward to the 
future, let it be said that we trust our Saskatchewan people, that 
we trust them that we can work and stand up beside any global 
corporation in the whole world, and that we can be the best in 
the world also. 
 
(2100) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One other . . . On a personal level in regards to 
this whole privatization, I had a chance to be able to see it 
firsthand when I visited Chile last fall. I looked at Chile, and I 
arrived there and saw 15 years of privatization and 15 years of 
deregulation and 15 years of free-trade-type systems. 
 
And what did I see when I got to Chile? Well the first thing  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

132 
 

I was confronted with was that the large-scale corporations had 
an army to protect them. The army was there to meet the people 
on the streets; that the privatized realms of big business and the 
rich in Chile were safely protected by the army, by the military 
dictatorship. 
 
When I went to the rich areas I definitely saw positive 
development. I definitely saw positive statements by the 
Chilean government in regards to the big corporations and also 
to the rich in Chile. I also saw that they were fenced off from 
the people. They had high fences with people walking around 
and guns protecting them. This was the only place where I saw 
development; there were brand-new plush housing. That was 
where the development . . . 
 
I went downtown; it was a wreck. I went downtown to the poor 
areas; it was a disaster. When I saw the straightforward 
privatization policies, and I saw everywhere I went, children 
begging on the street. When I see signs and records today that 
one out of every four children is now going hungry in 
Saskatchewan, and that Saskatchewan is the second of the last 
in Canada in regards to poverty and in regards to child hunger, 
and when I saw the Chilean children, I knew what privatization 
and what deregulation had accomplished over there. 
 
I see many times a lot of the government trying to get the 
middle class to support them. But I saw the middle class over 
there in the initial stages, what I read and then talked to them. 
They said, we sort of supported; we didn’t know. But they said, 
we don’t support the Pinochet government any more. We don’t 
support their privatization strategy because it has hurt us. 
 
I talked to many teachers over there, as an educator from there. 
They were being paid $100 a month, $200 a month. They had to 
find second jobs in order to subsist. And when we look at the 
record, and I looked at the cost and prices — they were pretty 
much the same as in Canada — I said, how could they survive? 
 
In regards to some of the meals, I notice that one of the persons 
said that just one afternoon meal by the big shots in one of their 
homes is how much an ordinary worker gets paid for the whole 
month in Chile. And that was the impact of 15 years of 
privatization and 15 years of deregulation in the Chilean 
economy. 
 
When I looked around and I visited the indigenous people in 
Chile, I also recognized that not only did the land of the 
indigenous people, which was under collective ownership 
before, not only was that not ignored, it was privatized. It was 
cut up so that it would be given back to the rich landowners 
over there. It’s a lot like a lot of the land went back to the rich 
banks, not very dissimilar to the fact that we see a lot of our 
farmers’ land disappearing to the rich bankers in Saskatchewan. 
 
So when I see the policies of privatization by this government, 
one has to look at facts throughout the world. One has to 
recognize exactly where a privatized strategy has been utilized 
with no concern for a mixed economy approach. The mixed 
economy approach is the basis of what is happening in the 
global world. 

As I also look at the issue of the North in regards to the throne 
speech, I would have to introduce my remarks by saying that in 
1982 this PC government produced a document, a Department 
of Highways document that went to tourists from the United 
States, tourists from across the world, and a lot of people who 
visited Saskatchewan, and everybody who gets a map. 
 
And in that official document in regards to northern 
Saskatchewan, it said: northern Saskatchewan is populated with 
beautiful lakes and rivers, but no people. I remember looking at 
that, absolutely astounded. And it’s only after being in session 
for the first time in 1986 did I realize that the PC government 
meant what it had said back in ’82, because the policies were 
one that showed a complete neglect in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This past year I have to congratulate the minister in charge of 
the North for visiting northern Saskatchewan. But she has 
indeed been uplifted by the North, because I saw a document 
recently that stated that the North is alive. And it was indeed a 
revelation for the minister to find that people are indeed alive in 
northern Saskatchewan. It took them seven years to figure out 
that people from the North were alive. We have been alive all 
this time. It’s now the first time that this PC government 
recognizes that we’re alive in the North. 
 
When I looked at the throne speech, I saw a presentation there 
in regards to Cumberland House. And it said that this agreement 
in Cumberland House was a model of co-operation. And I 
looked at it and I thought, a model of co-operation — my 
goodness! And I started looking at the record. The first thing I 
noticed was since 1982 the people of Cumberland House have 
been making a strong stand for the settlement of their claim. 
 
In 1983 they had put on a legal case to take this government to 
court in order to fulfil the compensation of the vast areas of 
destruction on Cumberland area on trapping lands, fishing 
lands, not to mention the problems of transportation, etc. We 
used to kill about 1,000 muskrats a year for a lot of the trappers 
there. Now you can hardly get 50 if you’re lucky. 
 
There was tremendous damage to the people of Cumberland 
House. It took them six years in this model of co-operation to 
finally get a settlement from this government. It also cost them 
$1.5 million in legal fees. It means that the people of 
Saskatchewan, whether we look at it, are going to have to start 
spending $1.5 million in legal fees in order to get this 
outstanding case and model of co-operation, because it was $1.5 
million. 
 
Somebody mentioned the name of Bill Carriere from across 
over there. Bill Carriere happens to be my uncle. I just had a 
conversation with Bill Carriere on Sunday night and he wanted 
me to leave you a message. And the message was this. He says, 
we thought we were very pleased with the agreement that 
something was finally being done. But he said, on the one hand 
I’m a fisherman; I do a lot of fishing in my area. All of sudden 
I’m cut back with species limit because some rich doctor tries to 
come and do some fishing in my area where I built camps for 
many years. So he says, I’m being squeezed out of a  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

133 
 

livelihood there. 
 
On the one hand the Premier, he said, promised us that the 
trappers and the fishermen would have a specific clause in that 
agreement to provide them with bucks. And he said, no there 
wasn’t; there’s only a generalized agreement. That indeed he 
said that the Premier appears to be backing up on his word in 
that regard. 
 
Since I know that the process of negotiation is taking place, a 
lot of other people say that the aboriginal rights clause in there 
has to be taken out because it is a straightforward compensation 
agreement. 
 
The other aspect that I saw in this model of co-operation is that 
Cumberland people took a strong stand. I was proud of my own 
community taking such a strong stand. 
 
We had asked the Minister of Environment to get off his high 
horse and away from the ivory tower approach he was doing, to 
go and work with the people of Cumberland. And I remember it 
was only after that that there was some action that took place. 
But the changes that took place only appeared after the people 
took a strong stand. They decided they would bring some media 
attention, and they built a weir. 
 
Now this model of co-operation seems to suggest that people in 
northern Saskatchewan, if they want to get action, have to build 
weirs or threaten blockades before they will get any work done. 
And that’s the type of thing that had to be done in Cumberland 
House. And here you give it as a shining example of 
co-operation. 
 
I think that as we look back on the Cumberland House case, on 
the other side of Cumberland you built a brand-new highway 
for Simpson Timber, according to your plans last year. You did 
an environmental work that you did in one week and you gave 
the okay to Simpson Timber to build this road. A lot of people 
raised the concern about most populations on the other side. 
You went ahead and built it. 
 
And what the people said is that they did not listen — the PC 
government did not listen. What we wanted was a road from 
Cumberland to the mine, so they could get jobs at the mine only 
25 miles away. Instead they built something for Simpson 
Timber. Now we find out that Simpson Timber is going to be 
closed down. Some planning! 
 
When we look at the whole area of the Cumberland agreement, 
and as I watched through all the communities, I must say that 
the people, the trappers, the people who do fishing, all the 
traditional resource users are saying, while the big businesses 
get deregulated, we get more regulations. We get more species 
limits. We get more control so that we can’t move. We aren’t 
able to do our living. Subsidies on transportation were taken 
away from us. In the area of pickerel, where a little bit of 
money could be made, where the big corporations make big 
money, you give them big dollars. When we try hard to make a 
living on pickerel, you take the transportation subsidy away 
from us. And they also relay a message; they said, how come 
you still subsidize bulls and you can’t subsidize the trappers and 
the fishermen in northern  

Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — As I looked at the throne speech, there was 
only a mention of Indian and Metis people in a way that was 
more or less . . . no, I think it was in the last paragraph . . . it 
said that they would be visited by the Duke and the Duchess, 
and it said that they would visit our children, and it said they 
would visit our native people in the North. And I thought to 
myself, well, a lot of the treaty Indians in this province have 
made strong cases before that they want to be recognized as 
Indians, that the PC government should not be afraid to say that 
treaty Indians are Indians, not native people. 
 
The fact that Metis people are also recognized in the Canadian 
Constitution, in section 35, they want to be recognized as Metis, 
and the only mention is the visit in this whole throne speech. 
And it’s a real shameful aspect of our Saskatchewan history 
when that’s the only mention that Indian and Metis people can 
have in this province. 
 
I look at last year, Indian economic development was cut back 
by $2 million, from 3 million to $1 million. And when I looked 
at they spent money on advertising — when I presented the case 
of Al Capone and Sitting Bull last year — there was about 
$400,000 spent on that. And I presented that thing last year, and 
I said, why not put that money into economic development 
where it could be fairly utilized under the control of Indian and 
Metis people. But no, what this government did was to take 
away that important source of livelihood for many families and 
children in this province. 
 
When I look at the question of land entitlement, this PC 
government is back in the dark ages. Over 100 years ago the 
treaties — Treaty 6 in 1876, Treaty 4 in 1874 — established the 
basis of land claims, as I said, through the settling of treaties, at 
that point. 
 
The PC government of the day had these policies, and I will put 
them on the historic record. For the big corporations, the CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway), the PC government of the day gave 
25 million acres of land, 25 million acres of land went to the big 
corporation. Hudson Bay Company received 7 million acres of 
land in that PC government over 100 years ago. How much did 
the treaty making process establish in terms of land? It was 1.5 
million acres, just over 1 million acres for Indian people and 25 
million acres for the CPR. 
 
When we look at it 100 years later, we see the same type of 
outdated policy by this PC government. Now we see both the 
federal and the provincial level trying to utilize the same type of 
argumentation. Weyerhaeuser gets 12 million acres. 
 
The fight for land entitlement by Indian people according to the 
’76 formula that the NDP agreed to, and also in regards to the 
federal government of the day, would have provided another 1.4 
million acres to treaty Indians in this province. But this 
government simply will not settle those claims. 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

134 
 

They say they should use the standard of date of first survey. 
That means they will go back to the original dates when they 
were surveyed. That means they’ll go back 100 years. When we 
do grants, when we do systems of fairness today, we take the 
population of Saskatoon in 1989 when we want to provide a 
grant for the city of Saskatoon. We take the 1989 population of 
Saskatchewan when we want to deal with people of 
Saskatchewan. This PC government will not do that. They will 
take the population 100 years ago. What would it be like if 
people in Saskatchewan said, we will look only at the 
population of 1905 to come out with a grant system, to come 
out with some source of fairness. People would be absolutely 
outraged. But this is exactly what you are doing in regards to 
Indian land entitlement in this province. While tremendous 
amounts of land goes to the big corporations in form of the CPR 
a hundred years ago, 25 million acres, Weyerhaeuser today at 
12 million acres — and all Indian people are asking for is just 
over 1 million acres. It’s a travesty of justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Overall I would say, as I listened to this throne 
speech, the conclusions that I can come from it is that the 
government is very positive for the big corporations, whether 
they are from South Africa or whether they’re from Japan or 
whether they’re from the United States. 
 
And also they will be helping their defeated MLA friends and 
MPs and provide jobs for them when many children of this 
province and many workers are out of jobs in this province. 
 
We see therefore from this throne speech there is absolutely no 
way I can support this throne speech. I can’t support it because 
it has no respect for Saskatchewan history. I cannot support this 
throne speech because there is absolutely no respect for what 
the people built up in this province. I cannot support this throne 
speech because there is absolutely no respect for the original 
Indian people in this province. 
 
There is absolutely no respect in this throne speech for people 
in the North, except on a confrontational nature. That indeed as 
we look forward in the future, we will have to say, why doesn’t 
the government smarten up and start listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Why doesn’t the government start paying 
respects to the people? Why don’t they start respecting the 
institutions that the people of Saskatchewan have built on a 
co-operative basis, on a private basis, and on a Crown corporate 
basis? 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to state 
strongly that I’m highly disappointed with the throne speech of 
1989. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can only 
say that the last speaker probably made more sense, and spoke 
with more feeling and conviction and with more sincerity than 
any of the previous speakers I’ve heard from the opposition 
benches. At least there is a  

person who understands the problems of his people and speaks 
them from his heart, and does not do it from the standpoint of 
partisan politics. His standpoint has been one that he’s probably 
kept throughout the years and he has not wavered. He has not 
wavered in his beliefs, nor do I believe him to be hypocritical. 
Unfortunately that can’t be said of other members of the 
opposition. We saw that earlier today — question period, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, question period. 
 
We have issues today that are serious. We have a number of 
people who have brought up the situation of Indian people, the 
problems in the North, the problems in the rest of 
Saskatchewan. We have questions brought up about 
unemployment. We have questions brought up about 
agriculture, farmers, the drought. And the burning questions 
today in question period, Mr. Speaker, took us to a new low in 
this Assembly — a new low. Hypocritical questions from 
members of the opposition, saying that there were a number of 
people who were appointed to positions and condemning them 
because they had Conservative backgrounds, while at the same 
time, when they were in power, hundreds upon hundreds of 
people were appointed — were appointed. 
 
And they weren’t all . . . they weren’t all simply people who 
had served in public office. Oh no, they weren’t, they weren’t. 
The NDP have made a practice of looking at individuals who 
work for the government, and they’ve implied that it’s improper 
for these people to work for the government because they may 
be Conservative supporters. 
 
Well I’d like to review some of the past hiring practices in this 
province. And I’d like you to be patient, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because the practices and the lists I have are fairly long. 
 
We’ll start out with, oh, let’s see . . . the name of James Eaton, 
the director of the EMO (Emergency Measures Organization). 
He gave a contribution; as you know, lists of people who give 
contributions to political parties in excess of $100 are available, 
they’re public information. This gentleman gave $100 to the 
NDP. Presto, he is now a director of the EMO. 
 
The public record shows that one Doug Archer gave a 
significant financial contribution to the NDP and was appointed 
as an EA (executive assistant) to the member for Saskatoon 
Westmount at that time; later, given a position that paid $4,000 
a month. In 1981, Mr. Speaker, $4,000 a month was a lot of 
money. 
 
Ah, Dr. Boulton, president of the Saskatoon NDP constituency 
association; he gave a contribution; he was given a big job as a 
director under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Regina North West may find this one 
interesting. One June Butz was given a job, public service 6, 
Mr. Speaker, not through the Public Service Commission but 
through an order in council. 
 
Let’s take a look at the Highway Traffic Board, Mr. Speaker. 
Ron Bohner gave money to the NDP, was given a job with that 
board. Amazing. Amazing. Dennis Renaud gave money to the 
NDP, given a job with the  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

135 
 

Department of Highways; Valerie Gorchuk gave money to the 
NDP, given a job on the Highway Traffic Board. And on we go. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not bring up the names of these people 
in this Assembly lightly. We have a rare privilege in this 
Assembly, as you know. We can speak what we feel and what 
we believe to be the truth, and I am speaking what is the truth. 
 
I bring up the names of these people not to demean those 
people, not to put them down. They were probably very capable 
people, Mr. Speaker, probably good people; probably have 
wonderful relatives in this province. They voted NDP. It’s a 
free country. They’re allowed to do that. Why I bring the names 
and the list into this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is to show the 
members of the opposition that they are not without blemish 
when it comes to positions that are appointed, jobs that are 
available to people in the province for persons who may have a 
political opinion different to theirs. They did it when they were 
in office, and they condemn the present government for doing it 
now. 
 
Well there’re some interesting people. Past president of the 
NDP constituency association, one Pat Lorje, I believe, gave 
money to the NDP. Who was that? Oh, what was the name . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh see, they know the name, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I mean Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. They 
know it, and they know it well. And that person was given 
$3,000 a month. Three thousand in 1981 was a lot of money, 
Mr. Speaker — $3,000 a month. 
 
A consultant, Mr. Speaker, to the Department of Health, a 
consultant who gave money to the NDP was paid almost 8,000 
a month in 1981 — 8,000. That was a really, really good 
position at $8,000 a month. Now that was a heck of a position, 
Mr. Speaker, for one Mr. Colin Smith. Jack McPhee gave 
money to the NDP, and in return the NDP gave him a job in 
Energy and Mines worth $5,500 each month, Mr. Speaker — 
$5,500 a month, each and every month. 
 
(2130) 
 
Oh, here’s an interesting one, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, one 
Bev Dejong. Does that name ring a bell? Did I say that one 
right? I see members of the opposition don’t want to hear this, 
Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. Oh, she got 3,500 a month. You 
know, you folks across the way made a sad mistake when you 
ran for public office again and got elected. You had to take a cut 
in wages. Some of you should have stayed where you were at. 
 
Kevin Hayes made a large donation to the NDP in ’81, and he 
received a large job as executive director of municipal 
management, all by order in council. You see the pattern, Mr. 
Deputy Deputy Speaker. Give money to the NDP and they’ll 
give you a job. They condemn this government for employing 
experienced people, but at least this government does employ 
experienced people — people who can do a good job for the 
province. The NDP auctions off jobs. The more you give, the 
bigger job you’re going to get. 
 

Let’s go back to the list for a while, Mr. Speaker. One Dale 
Weisbrot gave money to the NDP, and in turn he was placed 
with the Department of Agriculture. Michael Kraft, who didn’t 
give money to the NDP, but who had one Bill Knight write a 
letter for him to the government. And Mr. Knight in his letter, 
and I quote, "Kraft is a good New Democrat." Now he was 
given a job because he was a New Democrat; it was in the 
letter. And congratulations to him for having a friend like Mr. 
Bill Knight who could bargain for him — get his friends jobs. 
That’s great. 
 
Brian Kramer sold memberships for Gordon MacMurchy, 
former minister of agriculture. And behold, Mr. Kramer was 
given a job in the Department of Agriculture. Now isn’t that a 
surprise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, the list goes on and on and on and on and on. It’s amazing, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. 
 
There was a lot of different people who picked up good jobs. 
Myrn Twigg was one of the big spenders, Mr. Speaker. Yes sir, 
she was given a position as the director of women in Labour at 
the price to the taxpayer of 4,500 each and every month. Give 
money; get a job. To the highest bidder go the spoils. That’s 
amazing. That’s just amazing. 
 
And the NDP opposition stand in their places today and 
sanctimoniously criticize this government, stand there and in all 
arrogance say, bad, bad, bad. You shouldn’t do that; it’s not 
proper. 
 
Well I could get into the lists of former NDP MPs and MLAs 
who were hired as well because . . . the opposition chuckled 
when I said, you know, we look for people of experience. 
Obviously they looked for people of experience too, because if 
they weren’t experienced people, why did they hire them? Why 
did they? And I would think that the name of Don Cody would 
be an experienced person. He was defeated in 1971, pardon me, 
Watrous; defeated in ’75, Qu’Appelle. But he was given a job 
in SGI, a senior position until June of 1978 when he was 
re-elected as an MLA in Kinistino. And he probably did a 
reasonable job as an MLA, Mr. Speaker. He resigned from SGI, 
you know, in 1978. That was good of him. There are other 
members of the opposition who retain full-time teaching 
positions and things like that while they are sitting members. 
It’s interesting. 
 
Cooper — one Marjorie Cooper — one-time CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) MLA. Let’s go back 
awhile here. Regina West in the mid-60s, she was elected in 
1952, Regina city constituency; ’56 and 1960, elected 1964, 
Regina West. W. Cameron Cooper is her son — October 1975, 
special assistant to the Minister of Transportation; EA 
(executive assistant) to the Minister of Education, August 1971, 
$840 a month — $840 a month, 1971 — could we have 
someone compute that into 1989 dollars. That must have been a 
fair good salary back then, and he was an EA to the Minister of 
Education, and later received government contracts. 
 
George Burton, transportation agency, director of public 
communications, brother to John Burton, former NDP MP, 
$2,882. Zennie Burton, appointed to the Highway Traffic 
Board, paid $10,710 as an honorarium in ’81-82.  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

136 
 

Obviously, Zennie is the wife of John Burton, the former NDP 
MP. But there’s no political patronage, or is there, Mr. Deputy, 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Eric Cline appointed Crown solicitor, Law Reform 
Commission, Attorney General’s Department, June ’81. He was 
a defeated NDP candidate in the 1978 provincial election. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, I say these are good Saskatchewan people, 
and I bring their names up not to demean them but to show the 
public of Saskatchewan that members of the opposition are not 
without sin. 
 
Hagel, Glenn; Hagel, Glenn. I apologize, Mr. Deputy, Deputy 
Speaker, the name that I referred to is now the sitting member 
for Moose Jaw. It’s interesting; I apologize for that. NDP 
candidate Moose Jaw, April ’82 election, received an 
honorarium of $5,700 from the Department of Education, 
1981-82. I wonder what he was doing before that? 
 
Terry Hanson, former NDP MLA elected 1971 
Qu’Appelle-Wolseley, defeated 1975 Indian Head-Wolseley, 
given an honorarium for special services from the Department 
of Agriculture — $1,910, ’81-82, as a member of the farm 
ownership board. 
 
Frank A. Hart sought the NDP nomination in Swift Current in 
1978. He didn’t even win the nomination, he just sought it; 
order in council appointment as associate director of one of the 
departments for $3,895, 13th of December, 1979, OC 2135/79. 
It’s amazing isn’t it. Amazing. It’s a lot of money every month. 
 
And I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I think what I will 
do, I think what I will do is I’ll just save a little bit of this for 
later on in my presentation because I plan to have a fairly 
lengthy presentation. 
 
Now that we’ve touched on the differences of opinions that we 
had in this House earlier today, to which many members have 
alluded to in their reply to the throne speech, on the basis of 
whom should be hired by whom, perhaps we should get back to 
the throne speech, in proper, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan and it’s record in Saskatchewan. 
 
I have, Mr. Speaker, a number of firsts in this province that I’d 
like to tell you about and I’d like to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan about. I’m very proud of the job that our 
government has done; I’m very proud of the people of 
Saskatchewan; I’m very proud of the businesses in 
Saskatchewan; I’m very proud of the investors; I’m very proud 
of the working people in Saskatchewan, and there are a number 
of firsts that they have accomplished. 
 
At the top of my list is that in Saskatchewan we have the first 
leader of a political party to foreclose on farmers — a first, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a first. The Leader of the Opposition is the 
first leader of a political party to be part and parcel of a firm 
that is foreclosing on farmers — the first political leader of a 
political party. I’m really, really impressed with that. And that 
person aspires to be not only, not only the Premier but, God 
help us, the leader of the NDP federally, and possibly the prime 
minister. And that person turns the, oh, the power, if you would, 
the power of the law against farmers who have had some  

difficult times. 
 
And then we see another first. We see the member for Regina 
Elphinstone stand up and defend that Leader of the Opposition 
in this Assembly, and then tells everyone what a good man he is 
and he really didn’t do it. It wasn’t really him that done it. And 
that same member from Regina Elphinstone, only a short week 
or so ago, was one of the members who was trying to stab the 
leader in the back — et tu Brute! Amazing the way that politics 
works and what it does to people and their minds. I think we 
must have struck a nerve, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well let’s see about some other firsts that we have here that are 
a little more positive. We have the largest primary steel 
producer in western Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have the 
largest fine paper mill in western Canada, rock pickers, rod 
weeders, chisel ploughs were invented here. We have the first 
protein oil starch pilot plant in Canada, the POS (protein, oil 
and starch) plant. We have the first fibre optics system in North 
America. We have the largest deposits and the largest uranium 
mine and highest grade uranium in the world. We’re the biggest 
exporter of potash and uranium in the world. 
 
Well I think the members opposite are saying from their seats, 
it’s not because of us guys, not because of this government. 
And I want it to go on record that members of the opposition 
were in favour of being the largest uranium mine and having the 
highest grade uranium in the world and being in favour of being 
the biggest exporter of uranium in the world, because their party 
can’t decide what side of the fence they’re on in the uranium 
issue. And I really appreciate the fact that members opposite 
have clarified that for the people of Saskatchewan. I’m really, 
really pleased to see that. 
 
We have the purest reserves of potash in the world and the 
largest reserves in the free world. Of course that may not be an 
issue that excites members of the opposition. We have the most 
heavy oil reserves in Canada, and we’re the site of the only 
heavy oil upgrader in Canada. Aha! They didn’t say, not 
because of us, that time. It is because of us that we have the first 
heavy oil upgrader in Canada, and it’s because of our 
willingness to work with private sector people like the co-ops in 
putting up the largest heavy oil upgrader that anyone has seen 
here. And there is a second one to come on stream — a second 
one, a second one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maybe. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — The opposition says, maybe. And they said 
previous to the building of the plant in Regina with the co-ops, 
the new co-op upgrader, they said, you’ll never do it. As a 
matter of fact, they were hoping we wouldn’t do it. They don’t 
like to see people have jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They like to 
see people on unemployment so they can say, we’ll save you, 
we’ll save you. That’s us, we’ll save you. And that’s what they 
say to people. They want them to be poor, they want them to be 
without jobs, they want them to be downtrodden. They don’t 
want them to think for themselves. They don’t want upgraders 
and potash mines and uranium mines and upgraders. I tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s disgusting. 
 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

137 
 

Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have the site of the 
largest agriculture livestock show in North America, the 
Western Canadian Agribition. It’s one of the biggest in the 
world. We’ve also got the site of the biggest dry land farming 
equipment show, the Western Canadian Farm Progress Show, 
in the world. 
 
Now I don’t know if members opposite have ever bothered to 
wander over there and take a look at what’s here, but for 
members of Regina, members of the opposition for the city of 
Regina, those types of things provide a number of jobs here, a 
good number of jobs here. And when was the last time you 
stood up and said, that’s good we’re doing that; that’s good 
we’re promoting that? I haven’t heard that from the opposition. 
All we ever hear is doom and gloom. 
 
This is quite possible. A member just said that when someone 
from the opposition was an alderperson, they never went there 
either. Maybe they’ve been there since. I presume the members 
opposite have been there and have taken a look at the show. 
 
But the important thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the important 
thing is the jobs for the people in the city; and secondly, is to 
show what we can do to the world. It’s to show what people in 
Saskatchewan can accomplish. 
 
That particular show is a show-place; it’s an exposition of what 
Saskatchewan can produce so that our people can continue to 
build and continue to expand and continue to have jobs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, more and more jobs. 
 
And how do you get jobs, Mr. Speaker? Well by building and 
expanding and research and development, and once you’ve built 
this product, Mr. Speaker, you have to sell it, and you have to 
trade with people. And these people come in from all over the 
world. 
 
(2145) 
 
We had 21 countries represented at Agribition last year. All 
over the world came to Saskatchewan to see what 
Saskatchewan had to sell, to see what trading opportunities they 
could work out with us. Members opposite say, oh, that’s bad; 
free trade’s bad. The Premier going to the Pacific Rim is bad. 
We shouldn’t do that; that’s terrible. My God! They might find 
out about us and they might want to trade with us and, good 
heavens! they may want to invest here and we wouldn’t want 
that. And that’s what members of the opposition say. 
 
They don’t understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that’s what 
makes the world go round. That’s what provides the jobs. 
That’s the economic engine that fuels the social programs that 
everyone in Saskatchewan has come to expect. That is what has 
to be done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Money does not grow on trees. You cannot simply expect the 
government to dig deeper into their pockets or in the people’s 
pockets more and more and more, or go into deeper and deeper 
deficits, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What you need is an engine of 
economic growth, jobs, trade, so that these industries can 
provide the tax dollars and the royalty dollars to provide the 
services that we need, that our seniors need — nursing homes, 
nursing homes, 

hospitals. 
 
When the NDP were in power, they put a moratorium on 
nursing homes. And I’m sure they’re getting tired of hearing me 
say this, and I’m glad they’re tired of hearing me say this, 
because they put a moratorium on in what they call the good 
times. When they claimed there was money around, when they 
claimed they had a balanced budget, they put a moratorium on 
nursing homes. Can you imagine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? In 
good times they cut back the funding for the defenceless, the 
most defenceless people in our society, our seniors who could 
not look after themselves. And they stood up and said, aren’t we 
wonderful? We’re the saviours of medicare. We’re the saviours 
of the people of Saskatchewan. We stand for the poor and the 
downtrodden. 
 
Well yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they certainly do stand for them. 
They stood around and they watched them try to find a nursing 
home and they didn’t have any to go to. It was sad. It was sad. 
 
My grandmother, who passed away November of ’88, came 
into a serious problem. My grandfather could no longer look 
after himself. She, being a frail lady, could not look after him 
either. The family tried, worked very hard. Finally a nursing 
home bed was found 85 miles away — 85 miles away. And 
every day for five years that grandmother of mine thought about 
my grandfather being 85 miles away. She’d lived with the man 
for 65 years. Can you imagine that? What a shame. What a 
shame! What a travesty. What a travesty! 
 
Those people were the pioneers of this country that made it 
possible for members of the opposition to enjoy the type of 
life-style that they have, for members of the government to 
enjoy the life-style that they have, for members of 
Saskatchewan’s population to enjoy the life-style they have. 
And that little old lady had to have someone drive her 85 miles 
to visit the man she’d lived with for 65 years if she wanted to 
see him. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there was building in the province during the 
NDP regime. Yes sir, I’ve got three liquor board stores in my 
constituency, brand spanking new liquor board stores, 350 
grand apiece, but no nursing homes. That was okay. The old 
people could go down and buy a crock and drown their sorrows. 
I guess that was the NDP’s philosophy. Because that’s what 
they did. That’s what they did. And it’s there; it’s a matter of 
record — liquor board store. Right there — big sign, big letters. 
The fanciest building in town until 1982, when we came along, 
until we came along, the PC government. 
 
Well, for the first time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a nursing 
home in my home town. It’s attached to the hospital and called 
an integrated facility, a 12-bed unit attached to a 10-bed 
hospital. It’s not fancy, it’s not big, but it serves the needs of the 
public, and I’m proud to say that the people working in that 
facility are proud of the job they do. My grandmother spent her 
last two months of her life in that facility, and I’m proud to say 
that it was our government that put it there, so that that lady 
who had helped build this province could enjoy her remaining 
days in at least, at least the best that we could provide. 
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

138 
 

We didn’t build a liquor board store for her to go and buy a 
crock in — we built a nursing home. And in Wadena — 
Wadena, the town of Wadena — it’s been in the news a lot. We 
were there the other day, as a matter of fact Monday, yesterday, 
and there were 350 farmers who came out to a meeting. And 
they came out to a meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not to preach 
doom and gloom, not to condemn the government, not to 
demand another hand-out. No they didn’t; they came, Mr. 
Speaker, to discuss improving their own lot in life with their 
own initiative. They came to discuss the possibilities of 
building an inland terminal, just like the inland terminal at 
Weyburn, so that we could have more jobs in our constituency, 
so that the grain that we grow can be cleaned there, so that we 
could have other industries start up, like feed mills, feed mills. 
 
Members of the opposite benches, the NDP chuckle about that. 
They chuckle about that. They sit there and they smile and 
they’ve asked, you know, there’s things that need to be done for 
farmers. Well yes, we’ve tried. We’ve done quite a lot, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I’ll go into those things in a little while. 
 
But I just wanted to bring to their attention that in the town of 
Wadena there were 354 forward-thinking farm people, good 
hard-working people in Saskatchewan who weren’t sitting there 
going, what can the government do for me? They were saying, 
how can I better my own lot? How can I improve my own lot in 
life? 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is certainly a first in the thoughts of 
the members opposite because they’d never think of something 
like that. They believe big brother government should look after 
you for ever and ever and ever, from cradle to grave, from 
womb to tomb. And I could go on, but I won’t. 
 
They believe that the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatchewan need somebody looking over their shoulder to 
look after them. It’s okay though for old people to not have a 
nursing home, but everybody else has got to be regulated, and 
we got to look after how they think and what they do, never 
mind where they live, or what have you. 
 
And the member for Regina Elphinstone, and I’ve got to go 
back to this because it slipped my mind momentarily when I 
was talking about it earlier, talked today about his constituency 
in his riding, just as I am talking about mine. And he talked 
about the suffering that’s in his constituency, and he talked 
about how tough things were in his constituency and how sad 
things were in his constituency, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
constituency was represented by the former premier of the 
province, Allan Blakeney, for I don’t know how many years. 
Do you mean to tell me he did nothing to improve the lot of the 
people in his own constituency? It’s ludicrous, but the member 
opposite said that today. 
 
Think about it. Think about what he said. He said, the people 
are suffering in my constituency, and he went on to list the 
woes and the ills and all the rest of it. And I’m quite certain, 
Mr. Speaker, that, given the talents of the former premier of this 
province, Allan Blakeney, I’m sure if he had wanted to, he 
would have done something in  

that constituency to improve the lot of the life of the people 
there. But obviously he didn’t — he didn’t — which lends a lot 
of credence to my argument about the NDP wanting people to 
live in misery and to be poor. When you represent the poor, or 
claim to represent the poor and the downtrodden, and they are 
apparently your voting base, why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
makes a lot of sense to keep the people poor and downtrodden, 
because if they rise up in the world and learn and improve their 
lot in life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why then, you won’t be 
representing them any more, and they won’t vote for you. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can only say that it was a shock to 
me to learn today that the former premier of this province, who 
represented the Elphinstone constituency for I don’t know how 
many years, did nothing for the people in that constituency. 
And I suppose that’s only fitting since he was the premier of the 
province when they were building liquor board stores instead of 
nursing homes. He didn’t do anything for my people either — 
not a thing. 
 
We got a fancy liquor board store in Wadena and a fancy liquor 
board store in Foam Lake and a fancy liquor board store in 
Kelvington, and that’s nice. I suppose they pay taxes and they 
improve the scenery a bit, but outside of that, it’s kind of a 
travesty. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you think we could sell? 
 
Mr. Petersen: — And I just heard a member say, do you think 
we could sell? That’s an interesting thought. That’s an 
interesting thought. There’s one thing I know for sure, there’s 
one thing I know for sure. We’ll be building nursing homes and 
hospital beds. 
 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, speaking of nursing home, 
there is another nursing home being built in the town of 
Wadena, in the town of Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — A brand-new level 4 to replace the old level 3 
attached to the hospital. And there are nursing homes being 
built in a number of other locations in the province too. And 
I’m only speaking of my constituency, because that’s what I 
know. 
 
Thousands of people in the province of Saskatchewan can go to 
sleep tonight knowing that, should one of their loved ones have 
need of a nursing home, there will be a better opportunity for 
that person than there was under the NDP. But they’re the 
people who claim they’re the defenders of the poor, the 
downtrodden, and so on and so forth. Well I think not, Mr. 
Speaker. We have another first in hypocrisy here. 
 
Let’s talk about agriculture for a while, Mr. Speaker. My 
learned friend from the constituency of Morse spoke about a 
number of things that have been done in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And they were done to enhance the role of 
agriculture. And when he was speaking, members of the 
opposition were catcalling and chuckling and laughing, saying, 
sit down, sit down, sit down. Well, it’s not important to them 
you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I can understand why they’d 
say that.  
  



 
March 14, 1989 

 

139 
 

They don’t care. They don’t care and they don’t understand. 
They don’t understand that agriculture’s one of the engines of 
economic growth in this province. 
 
Sure, we’ve had a couple of tough years. But look at the course 
of history, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Look at the numbers of jobs 
that are created in agriculture. Look at what happens to jobs in 
Saskatchewan when agriculture is in dire straits, in tough times. 
Yes, we have unemployment in the province. Take a look at the 
elevators that have had to close because there is no grain, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in many parts of the province. There’s no 
trucking, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Maintenance crews that work for 
those grain companies have been laid off. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s no wonder there is unemployment. 
Agriculture is a major employer. Members of the opposition 
don’t seem to understand that. They think of a job as some 
place where you go and you punch in and walk away or what 
have you and get a government cheque, work for the 
government. Many of them have done nothing else all their life. 
 
But I’m here to tell them about the real world. The member for 
Morse was here to tell them about the real world, where people 
don’t just, you know, go from college into a government job. 
They have to go out into the world on their own, and it’s their 
choice. There are many people who work for the Government 
of Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada and municipal 
governments, who are fine, hard-working people and earn every 
cent that they are paid, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The people that work for this province in those government 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, are fortunate to enjoy many benefits that 
they have negotiated for over the years, and that’s fine. I 
commend them for that. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need the 
members of the opposition laughing and chuckling when the 
member from Morse is talking about people in other sectors in 
the province of Saskatchewan who don’t have those benefits 
and those safety nets. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s talk about agriculture. When you 
look at the world and how it’s changing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
you will see that in the province of Saskatchewan we have 
typically been one of the largest producers of export wheat in 
the world. That production, Mr. Speaker, is something that has 
given our people a number of jobs and have given our farmers a 
reasonable way of life and a good standard of living. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just as my friend from Morse pointed out, the 
world is changing. We are no longer hewers of wood and 
drawers of water. It’s not good enough simply to grow wheat 
and export it. We have to have diversification. We have to have 
value added, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have to go out and take a 
look at where we can achieve the greatest amount of 
profitability for our efforts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have to 
look at new markets . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Being 10 o’clock the 
legislature stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 




