


















































March 21, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 21, 1989 
 

 
295 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to the Assembly today, a group of six patients from 
the Cancer Patient Lodge here in Regina. These people are 
taking treatment, I believe, at the cancer clinic here in Regina. I 
know all members would want to wish them a speedy recovery 
and an enjoyable stay here in the Assembly for question period. 
We look forward to seeing you after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, some guests, 20 students from Fulda. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Eileen Germaine, 
chaperons, Laura Eckl, Donald Schlitz, Ralph and Karen 
Fleishhacker, Harold Wempe, and Gwen Kalthoff. Mr. Speaker, 
I look forward meeting with them at 2:30 at the steps. I hope 
they have an enjoyable stay. I also look forward to the visit on 
April 15 to the little town of Fulda for the official opening of 
the new school. I very much . . . I’m sure they appreciate that 
day. I would like to ask you to help me welcome these visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reservoir at Rafferty Dam 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today, Mr. Speaker, is . . . I guess, first of all, I’ll direct 
it to the Deputy Premier, the minister in charge of the Souris 
Basin Development Authority. Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Deputy 
Premier, I have in my possession here a letter written to one Dr. 
J.D. Mollard, dated January 27, 1987, and it’s from the 
engineering firm of Cochrane Lavalin, the engineering firm that 
carried out studies on behalf of the Souris Basin Development 
Authority in regards to the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
In that letter, Mr. Deputy Premier, it states: 
 

Based on data available starting in 1912, it will take about 
40 years for the reservoir (that is the Rafferty reservoir) to 
reach its full supply level. 
 

My question today, Mr. Deputy Premier, is this: given that your 
engineering firm says it’s going to take 40 years to reach the 
full operational supply level of the dam, what kind of a deal did 
you and the Minister of the Environment cook up to suppress 
the status so it doesn’t appear in the environmental impact 
statement that was presented to the people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, number one, I don’t  

take what he says at face value. Number two, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hope you do. Number two, Mr. 
Speaker, I can remember a couple of years when I was a young 
lad living in that valley, that one year — one year, Mr. Speaker, 
would have filled that dam. Based on the experience of the last 
five or six years, Mr. Speaker, and the run-off that we’ve had in 
the last five or six years, my guess is it would take about 6,000 
years to fill the dam. So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t take at all what he 
says at face value. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, my new question to the same 
minister. The minister may not believe me, but he’ll believe this 
when I put it on the Table — it’s from his own engineering 
firm. The new question regards another letter. This time it’s one 
dated February 26, 1987. It’s to Mr. George Hood, director of 
planning and operations, Souris Basin Development Authority, 
and it’s from the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
I want to read the first sentence of this letter, and listen very 
carefully, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 

Dear Mr. Hood: As you requested February 23, we have 
examined the potential to reduce the full supply level of 
Rafferty reservoir in consideration of the proposal to 
eventually pump ground water into Rafferty reservoir. 
 

Mr. Deputy Premier, my question is this. Despite the fact that 
you have repeatedly, in this House and in Crown Corporations 
Committee, denied that this was your proposal, and despite the 
fact that you have said to the people of Saskatchewan that there 
was no plans to pump ground water that would affect farmers 
throughout the area into Rafferty dam, I ask you again: what 
kind of deal did you cook up with that minister, the Minister of 
the Environment, to suppress this data from the Rafferty 
environmental impact statement? 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, don’t you think that it’s time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure it’s only 
coincidence that the Leader of the Opposition finds it 
convenient to be out of the House when that member has a 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Hon. members are 
reminded, as I have before, that we do not refer to members 
who are absent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I apologize. Of all people, Mr. 
Speaker, I should know better. I just want to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that I don’t know of many projects any place in the 
world that are used for the purposes of cooling an essential 
service like the generation of electricity, a utility, where there 
isn’t some consideration given to a fall-back position in the 
event of a sustained drought. 
 
Now they laugh, they laugh, Mr. Speaker. I did not build 
Boundary dam — I did not build Boundary dam. This very  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

296 
 

day, Mr. Speaker, we are pumping from four wells into 
Boundary dam to cool Boundary generating station so that we 
have electricity in the province. In the event that Rafferty, 
because of a sustained drought, did not reach its peak level, so 
that we ran into cooling problems, we better be prepared to cool 
that generating capacity or we won’t . . . well the lights will go 
out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, wonders will never cease. For two years 
members on this side of the House have been questioning that 
minister about the environmental impact statement and the fact, 
the way in which this government has cooked the books on that 
environmental impact statement. My question to you, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, is this: based on the fact that you have just 
admitted to the people of Saskatchewan that you are going to 
pump the aquifer into Rafferty dam, will you please enlighten 
this House as to how many farmers will be affected by that 
pumping, and how many wells in that area will go dry as a 
result of this plan which you suppressed from the environmental 
statement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going from memory 
now, but I think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well that’s scary as heck. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I agree. It ought not to be relied 
on with any degree of precision. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think we have drilled two wells, two 
farmer’s wells deeper into the aquifer in the Estevan area. 
There, by the way, are two aquifers down there. One is the 
table-top aquifer and the other one is the Estevan aquifer. And 
we have drilled two wells deeper to accommodate farmers who 
may have been negatively impacted by pumping from the 
aquifers into Boundary dam so that we could cool the Boundary 
generating station so that we could keep the lights on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is we had to derate this last year, derate 
the capacity of Boundary because there wasn’t enough water, 
because of a sustained drought, Mr. Speaker, to cool it to the 
extent that it could operate at capacity. 
 
Now these people, these people would deny us a body of water 
five times larger than Boundary to give us the kind of cushion 
we need to assure that that capacity will work in the long haul, 
Mr. Speaker. And any impact, to answer his question directly, 
any impact that may come as the result of pumping water from 
the aquifer into Boundary dam is because it’s necessary — as a 
matter of fact, because of a sustained drought, will be mitigated 
by SaskPower, and has been done to date. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary. Final supplementary, Mr. 
Speaker. Excuse me, a new question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Minister of the Environment. Mr. Minister, you knew the plans 
of the Souris Basin Development Authority, that it would take 
40 years for Rafferty to fill, that they planned  

to pump ground water. These documents that I have produced 
today were done before the environmental impact statement on 
Rafferty were produced. You knew it; you suppressed it. 
 
Don’t you think it’s time you did the honourable thing, instead 
of standing in this House trying to defend your unconscionable 
actions, that you did the honourable thing — referred it to the 
International Joint Commission and then packed in your 
portfolio and resigned as the minister who is irresponsible for 
the environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what 
documentation the hon. member has today. He brings all sorts 
of documents to the House, and many of them without much 
credibility. 
 
In the very detailed studies that have been done on the Rafferty 
and the capability of filling that dam, Sask Water Corporation 
advised me that it will fill, and it will fill on average once every 
10th year, not once in 40 years. So the hon. member’s 
documentation is not correct. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I did nothing to write the environmental 
impact assessment or was I the one to review it. My department 
do the complete review, and at the time that they reviewed it 
and the federal government reviewed it, both governments felt 
that the environmental impact assessment was adequate, that it 
covered all the detail. It went out then for public input. The 
public went through that whole document as well, and at no 
time was this issue raised. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very satisfied that my department and I 
have looked after the situation in the best interests of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans of Future Corporation 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the Premier, and I ask you, Mr. Premier: are you 
aware — at least you should be aware — of the fact that the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities recently at 
their convention passed a resolution overwhelmingly requesting 
that you cancel the extravagant $9 million package or 
celebration and to better spend that money in rural 
development? 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: will you in fact take this advice, or will 
you go on in your blind arrogance and political expediency to 
plough ahead with this wasteful, ill-conceived celebration that 
the people of Saskatchewan have rejected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to admit 
that for those who don’t understand what the Future 
Corporation is all about, it may well . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. SARM wants it 
cancelled. 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

297 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s not hard to understand how people 
could come up with the idea, not knowing what it is, that it may 
well have been ill-conceived, Mr. Speaker. That could be the 
perception. 
 
But I want to say this: the president of the Future Corporation 
spoke to a group of people in Bruno the other day; I think you 
were there — wasn’t it Bruno? — and the member from 
Humboldt was there. And the people at this Future gathering, 
Mr. Speaker, supported with a great deal of enthusiasm the 
kinds of things that the former mayor of Saskatoon was talking 
about relative to the Future Corporation. 
 
Now I might add, Mr. Speaker, that when the MLA for that area 
was given an opportunity to speak on this very thing, he got up 
and he endorsed it with a great deal of enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker, 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I wish the member for Quill Lakes would 
invite the member for Humboldt to brief his caucus on all of the 
positive merits of this particular undertaking, Mr. Speaker, 
because the more people know about it, the more they endorse 
it, the more pride they take in Saskatchewan, the better they 
understand how we fit in the world economy, the better they 
understand Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement to the Deputy Premier, who is 
answering for the Premier. I want to say, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
what your answer indicated is that SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) delegates don’t know what 
they’re talking about. That’s what you’re saying. 
 
I want to ask you, how can you possibly be so much out of 
touch with the economic crisis in this province? I ask you, how 
can you ask Saskatchewan families to celebrate when farmers 
are losing their farms, their farms are being auctioned off, small 
businesses are closing, and young people are leaving this 
province in droves? I ask you, where are your priorities? Don’t 
you have any feeling for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what I did not say, I did 
not say that SARM didn’t know what they were talking about. 
As minister responsible for the Future Corporation, Mr. 
Speaker, I take some — and I expect some — legitimate 
criticism for not having properly communicated what the Future 
Corporation is all about. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
for Humboldt understands now what it’s all about, and I’m sure 
. . . I’m not sure that there’s enough time in eternity, Mr. 
Speaker, to get the member for Quill Lakes up the learning 
curve on this particular issue. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s precisely because we have had difficult 
times in the agricultural community, it’s precisely because we 
are a trading province. It is precisely because  

our students should know how we fit in a world economy. It is 
precisely because technology is going to be what drives our 
economy in the long haul into the future — domestically, 
nationally, and internationally, Mr. Speaker. It’s precisely 
because of those things that the Future Corporation will exist. 
Now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further supplement to the Deputy Premier 
answering for the Premier. This sounds like a farewell party for 
the Tory party come election time. Nobody knows about it 
except themselves. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, in light of the fact that 
the Minister of Rural Affairs indicated to the SARM delegates 
that there would be no further increase in revenue sharing; in 
light of the statement by the SARM delegates asking you to 
seek a better priority on behalf of the taxpayers, I ask you: will 
you change the priorities of this extravagant party for the Tory 
party and in fact spend the money on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan rather than for the benefit of the PC Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s long view to 
the future has never gone beyond the next election, Mr. 
Speaker, never gone beyond the next election. And you can rest 
assured, Mr. Speaker, that this money will be well spent on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. It will be spent, Mr. 
Speaker, teaching our kids about how Saskatchewan fits into 
the world economy; teaching our students about how we get 
into that world economy; how we are in fact a very important 
trading province in this country; how our technologies will take 
us well into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. This will be money 
very well spent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if what that member says is true, if this is a party to 
celebrate our demise, why wouldn’t he endorse it 
enthusiastically? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, why in fact don’t you come clean with the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
Order, order. I’m going to give the hon. member from Quill 
Lake an opportunity to restate his question because I had no 
opportunity to hear it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Premier, I repeat my question: why 
don’t you come clean with the people of Saskatchewan? Why 
don’t you in fact indicate what you’ve set up?— a slush fund. 
Isn’t it just a slush fund for the cabinet minister come the next 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I 
missed being recognized, so I’ll answer again. I said no. 
 

Payment to Remai Investments 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

298 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier 
and it concerns order for return which was tabled last week in 
the House, order for return no. 193. And we see in here, Mr. 
Premier, that your government paid to one Remai Investments 
Ltd. some $22,572 to do an assessment for a hotel convention 
centre in Regina. 
 
Could the Premier confirm this is the same Remai Investments 
which actually built a hotel convention centre, a great portion of 
it that is now being rented by your government through the 
property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the 
question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, new question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. Now, Mr. Premier, we know that in the order for 
return no. 193, $22,572 was paid to Remai Investments Ltd., 
and they were to study the feasibility of a hotel convention 
centre. They build the hotel convention centre, and 
subsequently you lease it for millions of dollars. Did you really 
expect the assessment to be rejected, or the assessment to reject 
the idea of a hotel convention complex? How many sharp deals 
like this are you cutting for the people of Saskatchewan, or are 
these deals only available to people like John Remai and Remai 
Investments in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that a Regina 
member didn’t ask the question about the new hotel. I’ve taken 
notice, and I think there are 300 orders for return. I don’t have 
all of them with me; I will be glad to respond when I get the 
information. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
The Premier has taken notice, and I remind the hon. member 
that if he’s asking related questions they should not be couched 
as a supplementary question but simply a request for further 
information. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that, but 
you read my mind inaccurately. My question is to the Minister 
for Trade and Economic Development, and I would ask the 
minister . . . it’s the Department of Economic Development and 
Trade who gave the contract to Remai Investments, and we’re 
seeing a lot of relationships between Conservatives and 
economic deals in the province of Saskatchewan. My question 
to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade is whether 
or not he would undertake to table leases that the government 
has signed with John Remai or Remai Investments Ltd. in 
Regina, so that the people in Saskatchewan can see just exactly 
how you’re spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars on empty 
office space in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has been 
in the House now what, I think, two years. I think you 
appreciate the last two years, when you go into this, that each 
department contracts with SPMC  

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) for their 
space. So in answer to the hon. member’s question, the 
Department of Trade and Investment has entered into no 
contract with Remai. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consultant Study for SaskTel 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina North 
West . . . Regina North. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Apology accepted, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for SaskTel, if he would pay any 
attention to what’s going on in the House. 
 
Mr. Minister, return no. 148 tabled in this House March 10 
regarding consultant studies done for SaskTel in fiscal 1985-86, 
shows $77,000 paid to Pemberton, Houston, Willoughby for 
what is listed as a special study. What’s so special about this 
study? Is that in fact the study on the privatization of SaskTel 
done in that year, and if it’s not, will you table the study so that 
we know just what that special study is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I direct the public’s attention 
to the hon. member that . . . about the particular hon. member 
who said that the TeleBonds were a bust and a dud, Mr. 
Speaker. The fact is that the TeleBonds, Mr. Speaker, sold over 
100 millions of dollars to the people of this province. Secondly, 
Mr. Speaker, the TeleBonds sold to nearly 35,000 
Saskatchewan people and yet . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. My question, in case 
you hadn’t heard, had absolutely nothing to do with your 
TeleBonds fiasco. 
 
Mr. Minister, it has everything to do with your credibility, sir. 
In the 1986 election campaign, we released a copy of that study 
that said the government planned to privatize SaskTel. At the 
time, to quote you in the Leader-Post of October 17, 1986, you 
said: 
 

 Lane added he was never aware of a report prepared by 
Pemberton, Houston, Willoughby detailing issues relating to 
the divestiture by the province of Saskatchewan of all or part 
of its equity interest in SaskTel. 
 

If we’re to believe that you knew nothing of this report, then 
who in SaskTel has the authority to spend $77,000 on a special 
study keeping you, the minister, in the dark all the time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I recall the last 
provincial election, there was a rather extensive debate led by 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I’m once 
more hearing unparliamentary language from the seats. I once 
more ask hon. members to refrain from that. 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

299 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we went through a rather 
lengthy debate on the alleged privatization of SaskTel, and it 
was denied at that time, Mr. Speaker. It’s denied again. And the 
hon. member does not like to hear that. He was dead wrong on 
the TeleBonds, so far wrong, Mr. Speaker. He’s been wrong on 
the privatization. That was the study that was debated, that was 
chosen selectively by the opposition, that various people had 
copies of at that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to commemorate an 
important occasion for our province and our country. You will 
know that today has been declared the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is fitting in Saskatchewan that this event be 
marked by the Legislative Assembly because we are a province 
of many peoples and many races. This province was built by 
immigrants from every continent and most countries of the 
world, and to this day we welcome new citizens from 
everywhere to help us build our province here in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a province need to grasp the opportunity 
afforded us by our multicultural identity — opportunities for 
personal growth, economic and social development, and 
frankly, the richest culture possible among nations. 
 
From our first days as a territory, Mr. Speaker, multiculturalism 
has been and is an inseparable part of the individual citizenship 
of Saskatchewan people. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the people in the 
Department of Culture tell me that Saskatchewan continues to 
be the most ethnically diverse political jurisdiction any place on 
the globe. 
 
With diversity there is a potential for conflict, and we in 
Saskatchewan are not immune from this threat to our social 
fabric. The crucial weapon, however, that we wield against the 
tyranny of racial discrimination is education. And it is for this 
reason that we are proud of the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College and its efforts to bring greater harmony between our 
aboriginal peoples and the diversity of Saskatchewan. It is this 
weapon of education that is wielded in The (new) Languages 
Act and the new languages institute, Mr. Speaker, which will 
teach our children not only the languages of other nations but an 
appreciation for the cultural values of those who share this soil. 
 
It is this weapon of education, Mr. Speaker, that the 
multicultural task force appointed by the government in July of 
last year will wield when it makes its report this spring. 
 
Through education we will all gain an appreciation for the 
cultures of our neighbours and indeed an appreciation of our 
own cultures that will translate into  

greater harmony and indeed understanding in Saskatchewan. 
We are pleased with the implementation of the entrepreneurial 
immigration programs in Canada and Saskatchewan that are 
serving to bring people of many races to our province to join 
with us in providing opportunities for the children and all the 
children of Saskatchewan. 
 
One example of this, Mr. Speaker, of the closeness of the world 
community, is the growing relationship between this province 
and the Pacific Rim, a relationship that encompasses many 
races and many cultures, a relationship that all of us hope 
expand to our mutual benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I join with all members of the Assembly and with 
all the people of Saskatchewan in our shared commitment to 
eliminate racial discrimination for ever from the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
make some brief comment on the comments that the Premier 
has made with respect to the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
I want to begin by saying that I agree, and we on this side of the 
House agree that it’s important to note such a day. But I want to 
stress, Mr. Speaker, that that alone is not enough. A day 
certainly is a way to highlight certain things and certain issues 
and certain needs, but if all that we in our society do is sit and 
we recognize those issues on a specific day and do not provide 
some follow-up in dealing with those problems, then I think we 
will not have failed only those people at whom racial 
discrimination is directed, but I think we will have failed 
ourselves as a society. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that I certainly would have to agree 
with the Premier that in this province and in this country, but 
more in this province than anywhere else in Canada, because of 
the composition of the people who live here — people who 
have come here from every land in the world, people who can 
hear almost any language spoken on a given day on a street 
corner in some town in Saskatchewan — because of that kind of 
a composition there’s probably a greater understanding of each 
other than in many other parts of the world. And that is 
certainly a credit to this province, a credit to our heritage, and a 
credit to our history. 
 
But while I say that, Mr. Speaker, I want to also emphasize that 
although all of that is here, we too are not without some guilt 
because in this province, as there is in this country, there too is 
racial discrimination. It’s happening and I think that it is 
incumbent upon all of us here in this legislature to recognize 
that and to make a commitment, not only in the day of 
recognition, but to make a commitment for every day of our 
lives to deal with that situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say that and I say that we also have an 
obligation to recognize the difficulties around the  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

300 
 

world with racial discrimination in South Africa, and apartheid 
comes to mind. And I hope that the government opposite will 
join us and that we, certainly together, can do all that we can to 
do the necessary things to try to bring an end in those kinds of 
situations throughout the world as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Soil, Water, and Wetlands Task Force 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to announce the 
establishment of a five-person soil, water, and wetlands task 
force. We are working to protect and maintain soil, water, and 
wetland resources for the present time and for the benefit of 
future generations. The work of the task force will help us reach 
that objective. The task force will provide opportunities for 
public involvement by holding a series of public meetings 
throughout the province. It will then report its findings and 
make any recommendations to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
The members of the task force will include Ed Kennett of 
Wawota, a farmer and past president of the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation — Mr. Kennett will serve as chairman of 
the task force — Dr. Elaine Wheaton of Saskatoon, a research 
scientist in climatology with the Saskatchewan Research 
Council; Jack Piercy of Rosetown, a farmer and a member of 
the Sask Water’s board of directors; Roberta Blackwell of 
Assiniboia, a farmer and public health nurse; and Joe 
Zagrodney of Fosston, a farmer and a director of the 
Saskatchewan Conservation and Development Association. 
 
Drought conditions of the past several years have resulted in 
many groups and individuals having renewed interest in the 
topics of wetlands, marginal farm land, and erosion control. To 
help promote discussion on these issues, Sask Water will be 
distributing a report titled, A Discussion Paper — Soil, Water, 
Wetlands, prepared by Don Young of Environmental 
Management Associates of Regina. Dates and meeting locations 
for the soil, water, and wetland task force will be announced 
soon. 
 
The announcement of this task force is further evidence of how 
our government is working to protect water resources, wetlands, 
Saskatchewan soil, and the environment. I encourage the people 
of Saskatchewan to make their views on this topic known to the 
members of the task force, and I look forward to their report 
and recommendations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a 
response to the minister’s statement here today. I am looking at 
the statement before me, and I must say, and I say this having 
watched the operations of this government and this minister in 
the past, that I am not very encouraged. I am not very 
encouraged simply by the announcement by the minister of yet 
another task force. And the reason I’m not encouraged, Mr. 
Speaker, is because the record of this minister and this 
government with regard to these kinds of issues is not a very 
good one. 

Here we have in Saskatchewan a massive project which is 
going to cost Saskatchewan taxpayers something in the area of 
a billion dollars at Rafferty-Alameda. The minister stands in the 
House and talks about a wetlands task force, but in this project, 
Mr. Speaker, the wetlands, both upstream and downstream, are 
being drained along with the project. Now that, Mr. Speaker, 
speaks a lot louder and says a lot more about the seriousness of 
this government than the minister’s announcement today of yet 
another task force. 
 
The credibility of this government on these kinds of issues 
concerning the important aspects of the environment, Mr. 
Speaker, is really questionable. 
 
I’ll show you another example. It’s A Discussion Paper — 
Soil, Water, Wetlands. This paper, Mr. Speaker, was written 
and prepared by the Souris Basin Development Authority. It 
was done so, Mr. Speaker, without the knowledge of the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation, without any knowledge by 
the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, because the Souris Basin 
Development Authority did not want the water corporation to 
know, nor want the federal government to know, what was 
happening over there in that development by the Souris Basin 
Development Authority. 
 
And all that has been documented in letters which have been 
tabled, which have been discovered at the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, which shows that all along this government has 
been hiding what it’s been doing and secretly trying to put in 
this project in spite of environmental concerns . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I wasn’t setting the member down; I was just 
kind of wondering if he wasn’t straying from the topic. If he 
wants a few more seconds, well he certainly has the right to do 
it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I was not straying from the 
topic because the record of the government, I think, is important 
to note when one looks at any announcement which the 
government makes, which is what the minister has been doing 
here today. 
 
And this record, Mr. Speaker, has been a saga of secrecy, 
keeping information from the public, keeping information from 
other authorities in order to cover up things that the government 
has been doing dealing with the environment, but knew that 
there would be some public protest if the public were made 
aware of it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this yet another announcement of a task force 
called the wetlands task force is going to be met with a great 
deal of cynicism. It’s going to be met with a great deal of 
cynicism because the record of the government is such that 
there is no reason that the public can believe that they will do 
what they say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

301 
 

Change in Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
move, seconded by the Minister of Highways, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, this Assembly 
shall on Thursday, March 23, 1989, meet at 10 o’clock 
a.m. until 1 o’clock p.m., and that when this Assembly 
adjourns on Thursday, March 23, 1989, it do stand 
adjourned until Tuesday, March 28, 1989. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1445) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Decrease in Population of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were made aware of 
some statistics, some facts that, to state it mildly, are alarming 
and for some reason yet to be explained, some facts that got 
very little public attention in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And even to those of us who serve in Her Royal Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, these statistics, 
these facts were shocking. 
 
Who would believe that in the month of February, last month, a 
month of 28 days, from the province of Saskatchewan 6,261 
people left this province — 6,261 more than those who came 
in! The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that in the month of 
February, a number of people equivalent to the entire 
population of Melfort up and left the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, those of us in the opposition 
consider this matter to be serious enough to bring forth in this 
first opportunity under rule 16 of this sitting of the Legislative 
Assembly, a motion which I will move at the end of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker. And I will be moving a motion to the 
effect: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the continued alarming 
out-migration of Saskatchewan people, including many 
young Saskatchewan people, to other provinces — more 
than 6,000 in the past month alone, and (I will also move 
that this Legislative Assembly) urges the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take immediate steps to provide job 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we review the statistics, the facts that are 
produced by the Government of Saskatchewan in their own 
documents, in their own publications for the month of February 
— last month, Mr. Speaker — we find, produced from the 
Bureau of Statistics, the figure referring to in-migration — 
those who moved into Saskatchewan  

— 910 people which we welcomed into our province. But sad 
to say, Mr. Speaker, in that same month of February, according 
to the Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics as published in the 
Saskatchewan hospital services plan covered population, in the 
month of February, last month, Mr. Speaker, 7,171 people 
moved out of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is an alarming figure; it is a shocking figure; 
it is nothing other than a condemnation — a condemnation pure 
and simple — bold-faced condemnation of the track record of 
the Government of Saskatchewan today. If there’s any positive 
news at all that we could draw from those figures, Mr. Speaker, 
if there’s any positive news at all, I say simply that thank God 
there were only 28 days in February or the figures would have 
been even worse. 
 
So what has been, what has been the record of the Government 
of Saskatchewan when it comes to jobs? and what an abysmal 
record it’s been. And let me take a look at some of the numbers, 
some of the figures, some of the facts, Mr. Speaker, that cannot 
be denied, and let me focus on February — last month — the 
most recent numbers available to the people of Saskatchewan. 
What do we find? As of February, last month, February was the 
fourth month in a row, the fourth month in a row, in which the 
unemployment rate in the province of Saskatchewan was higher 
than that for all of the nation. 
 
And what’s the significance of that, Mr. Speaker? The 
significance is this: is that for the past four months, for the first 
time, for the first time since statistics have been kept back to 
1966, the rate of unemployment in our province, in our 
Saskatchewan, has been more negative than that for the people 
of this nation — 9.1 per cent unemployment in the province of 
Saskatchewan today; literally one out of every 11 people in 
Saskatchewan looking for work. And that’s not the total picture. 
That’s not the total picture. 
 
The labour force in Saskatchewan today, 10,000 less than a year 
ago. The number of people with jobs in Saskatchewan today, 
12,000 less than a year ago; 43,000 people — 43,000 people in 
Saskatchewan today unemployed and looking for work. And the 
fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that the real picture is even 
worse, because that’s 43,000 who are unemployed and 
registered as looking for work. That doesn’t include the 
thousands who have given up. 
 
One out of every 11 people in the province of Saskatchewan 
looking for work. What a tragedy! What a tragedy for this 
province of ours in which we have known, in which we have 
had a history of full employment and putting our people to 
work. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it would be even worse if it wasn’t for 
this mass exodus, if people were not fleeing our province. 
People of Saskatchewan are voting with their feet, quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker; they’re voting with their feet. 
 
In 1988, last year, 13,300 more people left this province than 
came in. We had a loss, an out-migration of 13,300 more than 
the people who came into our province -—  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

302 
 

13,300 shattered dreams in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And 1989 gets worse. In January, 1,550 people more left than 
came in. And as I said, in February, 6,261 more left than came 
in. Thirteen thousand three hundred in 1988 alone, and in the 
first two months of 1989, Mr. Speaker, 7,800 people more have 
left this province than came in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means in the past 14 months, 21,000 shattered 
dreams for Saskatchewan people, people who have upped and 
left — 21,000. Sometimes it’s hard to comprehend. What does 
that mean. That’s equivalent, Mr. Speaker, to every man, 
woman, and child in Lloydminster and Melfort and Melville 
and Indian Head, in 14 months, having shattered dreams and 
picking up their hopes and their futures and going out of 
Saskatchewan to try and realize their hopes. What a tragedy. 
What a tragedy in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the only reason, the only reason 
that we’ve only got one out of 11 looking for work in the 
province of Saskatchewan is because people have left. Because 
you see, Mr. Speaker, if those 21,000 people had stayed home, 
had stayed here where they call home and stayed unemployed, 
our unemployment numbers in Saskatchewan would not be 
43,000 but 64,000 people — 14 per cent unemployment, and 
one out of seven people in Saskatchewan looking for work, if 
21,000 had not left in the last 14 months. What a condemnation 
of the record, the failed employment record of the government 
opposite. 
 
And I listened very carefully, Mr. Speaker, I listened very 
carefully what the government had to say in the Speech from 
the Throne, and I know that that debate is over and the motion 
has been passed, but what did the Speech from the Throne that 
we have just heard, the government’s grand plan for the people 
of Saskatchewan, have to say about jobs? Nothing. 
 
And I listened very carefully as every member opposite got up 
and spoke. And what did they talk about? Did they talk about 
vision? Did they talk about employment? Did they talk about 
hope for people of Saskatchewan? No, they didn’t. What they 
talked about was the track record of the New Democratic Party 
government in the 1970s; one or two even wandered back into 
the ’40s, and nary a word, nary a word about jobs, employment 
and future and hope for the people of Saskatchewan — stone 
cold silent on the topic of jobs. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that 
is a betrayal of the hopes and the dreams of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not only devastating to individuals and 
families in this province, it’s devastating to family business. 
You know, family-business people around this province say, 
more than anything else, what they need is people working; 
people with disposable income in their pockets so that they can 
afford to shop on Main Street, Saskatchewan and 
small-business, family-business people can afford to make a 
living. This is not only a betrayal of individuals and families in 
Saskatchewan, it’s a betrayal of small business and family 
business in Saskatchewan. 

I’ve said in this House before, and I say it again now, Mr. 
Speaker, it seems to me that when we come to this Assembly 
and we ask ourselves what our priorities are and our objectives 
are, employment is number one. Clearly employment, a full 
employment economy, is the number one responsibility of those 
of us who come into this Assembly. Fact of the matter is, so 
many of those other social problems that we find ourselves 
looking at programs and legislation to deal with, simply go 
away when people are working. 
 
Employment, Mr. Speaker, and the record of employment has 
to be the number one reflection of political will. You know, 
Tommy Douglas once said, when referring to the level of 
employment that occurred during the war, that maybe it’s time 
we declared war on unemployment, and maybe it’s time we 
declared war on unemployment in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What are the facts? Political will says, 43,000 unemployed in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It would be 64,000 if 21,000 
hadn’t fled in the past 14 months. And political will and the 
Government of Saskatchewan says, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
jobs for defeated, jobs for defeated PC members. Political will. 
You can’t get rid of them, the people of Saskatchewan say. 
They’re worse than wild oats, wild oats gone wild. 
 
Let me just give you a very short list, Mr. Speaker, and these 
are defeated PC members; these reflect the political will of the 
government opposite. Let me just give you some examples from 
across the province of Saskatchewan because they’re all over 
the province, Mr. Speaker. All over the province there are 
defeated PC members who are working and making a good 
living. 
 
Up in Saskatchewan we get Paul Schoenhals, former PC MLA, 
defeated. Where’s Paul now? Paul’s got himself a job as 
chairman of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Down 
goes a Tory and up pops a job, Mr. Speaker. They got a job in 
Regina for Gordon Dirks. Gordon Dirks, Regina PC MLA 
defeated. He was rejuvenated as an educational consultant — 
down goes a Tory, up pops a job. Political will. 
 
Sid Dutchak, PC MLA from Prince Albert, he was defeated. He 
was revived, Mr. Speaker, as the president of Sask Housing — 
down goes a Tory, up pops a job. Keith Parker, from Moose 
Jaw, defeated PC MLA. Where’s Keith these days? Keith’s at 
the Liquor Board these days, Mr. Speaker — down goes a Tory 
and up pops another job. Ralph Katzman from Rosthern, PC 
MLA, defeated. You find Ralph these days at the Department of 
Highways — down goes a Tory and up pops a job. John 
Gormley from the Battlefords, member of parliament, PC, 
defeated. Where’s John these days? He’s in the department of 
piratization, and down goes another Tory and up pops another 
job. And Louis Domotor, Louis Domotor from Humboldt, PC 
MLA, defeated, and where’s Louis? He’s in the property 
management corporation these days — down goes a Tory and 
up pops another job. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that when we look at the 
track record of the Government of Saskatchewan today, we 
have to say, and we have to wonder, whether  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

303 
 

this massive exodus and unemployment are consequences of 
mismanagement. Can anybody be that incompetent, or are they 
consequences of piratization? Or are they a deliberate 
government plan in support of the message that the Premier 
took to the Conservatives of Moose Jaw a week ago when he 
said that in order to be more attractive to Asian investors what 
we need in Saskatchewan is cheap land and cheap labour? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, for all of these reasons I would move for the 
consideration of this Assembly, seconded by my colleague from 
Saskatoon Eastview, this motion: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the continued alarming 
out-migration of Saskatchewan people, including many 
young Saskatchewan people, to other provinces — more 
than 6,000 in the past month alone, and urges the 
Government of Saskatchewan to take immediate steps to 
provide job opportunities for all Saskatchewan people. 
 

(1500) 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to second this motion made by my colleague from 
Moose Jaw North, and I commend him for, at his earliest 
convenience, bringing forth this motion to the House to this 
very, very serious situation of out-migration of people from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is imperative, Mr. Speaker, that this government take 
immediate steps and positive and concrete action to address an 
issue that has never been more critical in the province in the last 
45 years. As my colleague has outlined, the number of people 
who out-migrated last year, the trend in January and February 
for this year is absolutely staggering and scary. It’s increasing 
so rapidly that it’s hard to imagine that that’s the case. 
 
But the concern I want to specifically address myself to today 
are the number of young people leaving. Of that 6,200 in 
February, literally one-quarter, or 1,500 of those people were 
young people. Now we all know, Mr. Speaker, young people 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan. Every family knows 
someone who’s leaving. There’s no question about that. 
 
As youth critic for the opposition, I have on a month-to-month 
basis called on this government to bring forth some concrete 
action to deal with this situation. Not a month has gone by that 
I’ve not done that, because the statistics of young people 
leaving have continued to increase and increase month by 
month, and I don’t know what it will be next month. There’s 
certainly no summer works program and no reason for 
optimism that the situation is going to change. 
 
If this Premier who likes to talk about families and youth, if this 
government is serious about rural Saskatchewan, about 
communities and about the people of the province, why don’t 
they do something to prove it? There’s no question that there’s 
a lot of rhetoric, but very hollow promises. And we just simply 
hear the Premier say the same thing day after day in this House: 
by golly, what are we going to do for you in the future; just hold 
on and you wait and see. The point is, he said that in 1982 — 
we’ll  

bring the kids home — and he’s been doing nothing but driving 
them away by his failed economic policies, Mr. Speaker. The 
people of this province, the youth of this province, are still 
waiting for the Premier’s policies that are going to bring the 
children home. And I have to say that there really is no choice; 
he’s not leaving the young people any choice. 
 
The Premier’s failed leadership, his failed economic policies, 
his failed blind, ideological, privatization mould has resulted in 
the loss of 20,000 young people — net loss of 20,000 young 
people in the last seven years. So that’s not bringing the kids 
home; they’re leaving in record numbers. 
 
In February of 1989, Mr. Speaker, the unemployment rate for 
young people is 17.5 per cent, almost twice as high as the 
provincial average, which is also high for unemployment 
provincially. 
 
This PC government is in charge; it is in power. The Premier of 
Saskatchewan is at the helm. What is he going to do about 
young people leaving the province? Is he not concerned about 
that? These are his stats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This PC government has left young people with few options but 
to leave. This government has cut back on university and 
technical education programs. They’ve created a crisis in our 
universities by underfunding. They have not provided job 
opportunities through summer employment programs. They cut 
back over $4 million last year in summer job creation. They’ve 
got no winter works program. They’ve got no long-term 
strategy for employing young people. Again, there’s no . . . and 
more seriously, as my colleague from Moose Jaw North has 
said, there’s no plan for the future. 
 
The throne speech was full of rhetoric. And I wish the Minister 
of Education would listen; it’s his department that’s in a 
shambles. The throne speech had a lot of rhetoric but no 
substance, and that simply isn’t good enough. We’ve got the 
greatest depopulation since the Dirty Thirties in this province. 
The blind privatization has resulted in losing jobs, exporting our 
future, exporting our young people. The financial waste and the 
mismanagement by this Devine government is unprecedented, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Patronage? Well there’s no jobs, as my colleague from Moose 
Jaw North said, no jobs for ordinary Saskatchewan people, but 
lots of jobs for PC hacks and parasites who are getting high 
salaries and big benefits at public expense. No relief to small 
businesses. Money for Pocklington, money for Weyerhaeuser, 
money for Remai, $1 billion to ensure that the Premier gets 
re-elected in Estevan. But where are this government’s 
priorities? Where are the priorities for families, for young 
people? Where are the Premier’s priorities? Who is leading this 
ship? Who’s the conductor of this train that’s going the wrong 
way? 
 
In my view, the Premier of the province is responsible for the 
fiscal and the economic mess this province is in. Just like his 
buddy in Alberta, he’ll be turfed out at the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

304 
 

Mr. Pringle: — In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I beg this 
government to come to its senses, to seriously come to grips 
with the fact that young people, young families, are leaving the 
province; to acknowledge the problem that is faced by the 
small-business people, the backbone of the economy; to change 
its view about blatant privatization and destroying one of the 
major engines of our economic growth and our mixed economy. 
 
I plead with this government to come to its senses, to recognize 
the problem of out-migration as being very real. As my 
colleague from Moose Jaw North said, the unemployment rate 
would be much higher, tremendously a great deal higher, if the 
people who were leaving were counted in the stats — and 
they’re not, of course. So this government has got to create 
employment. They need a long-term plan. They need some 
immediate plans. They need to beef up a summer employment 
program for students. They need to priorize education. They 
need to have faith in the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
People of Saskatchewan want security and they want 
opportunities. They want to stay here. And people in 
Saskatchewan want to work. They want hope and they want a 
future in this province. They don’t want to leave their families 
and go elsewhere, but this government is forcing them to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask the government, I would ask the Premier of this 
province, to quit talking about his support for young people and 
support for families, but to invest, to start doing something to 
invest in our young people, to invest in our farm families, to be 
serious about an economic strategy about an informed and a 
relevant farm and agricultural policy, and turn this serious 
out-migration trend around. 
 
It’s time for this Devine government to put people first, Mr. 
Speaker, not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the hon. member 
knows what I am referring to, the use of a member’s name. And 
I know we’ve talked about allowing some of this, but basically 
where we’re allowing it is in quotations, headlines, that sort of 
thing. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
close by saying that it is time for this PC Tory government in 
Saskatchewan to get its act together to develop a long- and a 
short-term economic strategy that encompasses the mixed 
economy, not the blind, ideological, privatization, megaproject 
mentality that is driving people away from this province. 
 
And in closing, again I take great pleasure in, I take great 
pleasure in seconding the motion put forward by my colleague 
from Moose Jaw North. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to make a few comments regarding the motion presented by 
the member from Moose Jaw South and the out-migration of 
youth from the province of  

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we’ve just been discussing for the past 
number of days the throne speech, and the throne speech has 
brought out many initiatives that will deal with some of the 
problems that are being faced in the unemployment sector. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that over the years 
there’s always been a movement of young people in our 
country, a movement from one area to another. Even within the 
province of Saskatchewan we get the movement of our 
teenagers from the rural area into the cities because of the 
economic growth within the cities. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I find it a little unfair that the member 
would attack the economic development initiatives of this 
government, and I find those attacks unjustified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also aware of the fact that the agricultural 
community in Saskatchewan has faced multiple challenges in 
the past few years. Just two or three years ago we faced the 
challenge of grasshopper infestation and the problems 
associated with the grasshoppers. We’ve been facing the 
challenge of global subsidy wars, and the fact that our 
agricultural producers have been taking lesser prices for their 
product because of the initiatives other governments have 
placed to protect their producers. 
 
We’ve also seen the problem that monumental drought has 
created. And all the members opposite are as well, Mr. Speaker, 
are aware of the initiatives, not only by this government but as 
well by the federal government, in helping our agricultural 
sector. 
 
And while helping our agricultural community deal with these 
setbacks, our government has been busy initiating economic 
development programs to help diversify the economy and 
lessen the problems facing agriculture on the rest of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, had this government not been so active in creating 
these initiatives, the impact on our province would have been 
even more horrific; in fact, our entire province would have been 
decimated by the drought we’ve been just experiencing. And 
it’s certainly gratifying to see the greater amount of snow and 
the higher prices in the agricultural field, as I’m sure the 
farming community themselves are looking forward to even a 
better year than they’ve had, experienced the last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite know as well as any 
Saskatchewan resident that the problems related to the drought 
are what is causing the migration of residents outward, not any 
policy of this present government. In fact, the Premier just 
reminded us a few days ago in question period of the fact that 
we have 10,000 fewer jobs in the agricultural field. And one of 
the largest institutions in this province of jobs, the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, has even had to face some serious 
questions themselves as they’ve cut back on their employment, 
because there just is not the product in the rural economy in 
order for the wheat pool themselves to maintain their job level. 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

305 
 

In reality, Mr. Speaker, it is the policies of this government in 
economic development and diversification that has kept this 
province from feeling the even more potentially disastrous 
effect of the drought, had our economy not been expanded by 
an economic base created by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the loss of jobs in the agricultural sector points out 
more than ever the need to diversify the economy of this 
province. And I believe members opposite know full well that 
the more economic development stimulated in this province, the 
less dependent our province will be on the agricultural 
economy. That in itself will help keep a viable future for the 
young people of our province. 
 
Talking about youth unemployment, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting to note statistics that I noted recently. In the years 
’72 to ’82, youth unemployment in this province was 1.9 times 
the national average; ’82 to ’89, it was 1.8 times the national 
average. I would suggest that the fact that it was lower was due 
to the initiatives of this government in diversifying our 
economy. 
 
I think an excellent example of the diversification of the 
economy are the public participation initiatives that this 
government has embarked on. The member opposite just 
accused this government of selling out to Weyerhaeuser. In fact, 
Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was once 
the money-losing Crown corporation PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company). And I remember right now with great delight 
the speech you shared in the throne speech debate just telling 
each one in this Assembly and the people in this province of the 
economic development in the Prince Albert area because of 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser employs approximately 
1,000 people in Saskatchewan, including about 100 in the saw 
mill in Big River, another 100 at a chemical plant in Saskatoon, 
and the rest working out of its pulp and paper mills in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Weyerhaeuser constructed the world-class 
paper mill, there were over 700 jobs created in the construction 
field and 169 more permanent jobs in that area of our province. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but Weyerhaeuser has just 
announced a $21 million expansion for their pulp mill, an 
expansion which will create more jobs for the young people of 
this province. Weyerhaeuser has tied this expansion directly to 
the signing of the free trade agreement, an agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is expected the mill will create 34 permanent 
jobs and about 100 man-years of construction in the 
construction of this new expansion to the mill. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the initiatives that will keep young 
people in Saskatchewan, an initiative which provides a future 
for our young people, an initiative which appears many times to 
be opposed by members opposite, rather than proposing new 
initiatives of how we can create employment to keep our young 
people here;  

in fact, to lure young people from other parts of Canada into 
this province because we do have a great province to live in. 
 
We do live in a great province. We live in a province with a lot 
of abundance. We have abundance in mineral wealth, Mr. 
Speaker, abundance that we need to learn more of how to 
explore, develop, so that we can create the jobs that are needed 
to slow down and in fact create an inflow of population versus 
the outflow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we think of Weyerhaeuser and we think of 
the fact that PAPCO was costing the taxpayers of this province 
$90,000 a day, it seems to me that in light of question period, 
the question period we just faced, that the $9 million that is 
going into the Future Corporation — $9 million which is going 
to be put into the Future Corporation, which is an incentive to 
create employment, to promote our province, so that the youth 
of this province have something to look forward to and indeed 
more jobs created so that they will continue to stay and work 
within our province — not just in the cities and the large urban 
sectors, but I’m sure the members opposite will agree that they 
would like to see the youth in the small urban communities and 
on the farm as well. Mr. Speaker, that $90 million a day that we 
were losing, or $90,000, pardon me, could have been used to 
diversify our economy. 
 
And then we have developments such as the Meadow Lake 
Sawmill. Since this government sold it to the employees and the 
local Indian bands, many millions of dollars are being invested 
in that area, and there are more than 400 new jobs projected to 
develop. New jobs, not only for all youth of Saskatchewan but 
even for the natives of our province, for the Indian community 
who want to create initiative and employment for their own. 
 
When WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation with the 
employees and Indian bands are providing a future for their 
young people, what do the opposition do, Mr. Speaker? They 
oppose it, Mr. Speaker. When WESTBRIDGE Computer 
Corporation was initiated with a $13.9 million share issue to its 
employees, expansion was almost immediate. Six million 
dollars in out-of-province contracts has already created 50 new 
jobs, and continued growth promises another 200 employment 
opportunities — 200 more jobs, Mr. Speaker, for the youth of 
this province. 
 
Public participation, creating employment, keeping our youth 
here, and the NDP propose to fight it. It appears the opposition 
shows nothing but opposition. I would like to hear some of the 
initiatives the opposition has as to how we can work together to 
create employment and create incentives for the youth of our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purchase of the unutilized natural gas reserves 
has resulted in planned gas development activities that will 
create new economic activity with 100 new gas wells and the 
potential, Mr. Speaker, for 600. There was a projected total of 
1,000 jobs to be created through this initiative — 1,000 jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, through one public . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The time is expired. 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

306 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I welcome 
the opportunity to participate in this debate over the tragic 
failure on the part of the provincial government to stop the 
out-migration of people from our province, and to encourage 
young people through positive initiatives and programs to stay 
in Saskatchewan to obtain their education and to seek 
employment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recall as a young person growing up in 
the late 1960s under a right-wing Liberal government, in this 
case a government that provided very little hope for 
Saskatchewan youth, a government that was not interested in 
providing educational opportunities and employment 
opportunities of Saskatchewan young people. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it was the young people 
in this province that decided that it was time for Ross Thatcher 
to get out of politics, and we went out in droves and worked 
against Ross Thatcher. And we went out in droves while the 
election was being conducted and we defeated Ross Thatcher, 
and I suggest to you that that will again happen in 1989 or 
1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I also recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being a 
candidate for government in the 1982 election, and the theme 
that I heard over and over again, on behalf of the members 
opposite, was bring the children home; that somehow children, 
young people were leaving Saskatchewan in droves because 
under an NDP government there were no job opportunities and 
no educational opportunities. 
 
And I kind of smile about that now; I kind of smile about that 
now because, as a young person growing up in the 1970s and 
receiving my post-secondary education and obtaining 
employment in this province, we had hope. We had job 
opportunities, we had access to the University of Saskatchewan 
or technical institutions, and that certainly is not the case now. 
We had hope; we had a future. We planned to raise our children 
here in Saskatchewan, but that is not the case now. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We had socialism. That’s what we had; 
it was socialism. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And the member opposite says that we had 
socialism. I call it democracy, Mr. Minister of Education. We 
had opportunity, we had fairness, we had democracy, and we no 
longer have that in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now the member from Moosomin just spoke 
about the agricultural crisis in Saskatchewan and how his 
government is moving towards diversification in order to keep 
people in Saskatchewan. And I want to recall the diversification 
that we see. 
 
He says we want to have a diversification program because 
agriculture is gloomy; that we have the European  

Economic Community and the Americans to contend with. 
These people have no hope for agriculture; they’ve already 
given up, and I’ll explain to you why. 
 
What do we have? We have a rural transition program for 
farmers who can no longer stay on the land because of the 
economic agricultural policies of the people opposite. And what 
do what they want to do? They want to move those people into 
the city. That’s what the rural transition program’s all about. 
 
We have a situation where we will soon see farmers paying an 
additional $2 a tonne to transport their grain to market. That’s 
under a Tory government. 
 
We have a Tory government that has just removed oats from the 
Canadian Wheat Board. We have a Tory government that has 
just talked about equity financing — let’s turn the farmers’ land 
over to the big wealthy investors. That is not my idea of what 
should happen in rural Saskatchewan. Farms should continue to 
be operated by family operators, family farmers, not some 
bigwig from Ontario or Toronto or Washington or whatever. It 
should be owned by the people of Saskatchewan, not people in 
Hong Kong. 
 
And then we have a Tory government that has just hitched its 
wagon to the free trade agreement with the United States. And 
what we have here is a government that is dependent upon . . . 
is going to hitch its wagon to the free market system of the 
Americans, and that simply has not worked for the United 
States, and it won’t work for us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I recall the Premier, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan had a major celebration when we welcomed the 
one-millionth person to the province. And there was a huge 
celebration, and the press were called and everybody was there. 
And he was singing the Hallelujah Chorus because we now had 
1 million people in our province. But it’s interesting. When the 
population of our province dropped below 1 million people in 
the month of February, did this government have a farewell 
party? Did they say goodbye? No. They tried to bury it, and 
they’re denying it. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 7,171 people left our province last 
last month, and in total we had a loss of 6,261 people. That is 
the most phenomenal number of people leaving our province 
that I can remember since I in fact was born in 1952. That is 
phenomenal. And 25 per cent of those people were young 
people. Now why are they leaving? 
 
This government, in 1986 . . . 1987, I should say, moved to cut 
post-secondary educational opportunities in this province, and 
in fact over 1,000 spaces were lost. We saw the nursing 
program cut at the Wascana and Kelsey institute. We saw a 
number of hairdressing spaces cut, beauty parlour spaces cut. 
The numbers were phenomenal. And as a result we’ve seen a 
tremendous increase in private education in this province. 
People who can no longer get into post-secondary institutions in 
our province are going over to private education institutions. 
 
And while some of those private education institutions  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

307 
 

offer good quality educational opportunities, many of them do 
not. Many of them do not. They set up courses for a travel 
position, for instance, and when you look at the number of 
spaces that they’re offering, we don’t have those number of jobs 
in Saskatchewan. And when those young people go to get a job 
at a travel agency, their certificate isn’t worth the paper it’s 
written on because it’s not recognized anywhere. 
 
And has this government moved to do anything about private 
education? Not that we can see, Mr. Minister, and I’ll be darn 
interested to know how many of students who are going into 
those programs are defaulting on student loans because they 
can’t get work. They can’t get work because, if you look at 
what’s happening in the United States with private education, 
over 50 per cent of those students in those programs are 
defaulting because they’re not worth . . . those programs aren’t 
worth the paper they’re written on, and those young people 
can’t get job opportunities because of the poor quality of 
education. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to review for the record, 
because that’s what my colleague, the member from Moosomin 
did; I just want to review for the record some job creation 
statistics that have occurred in our province. In the last six years 
the number of jobs created by the Tory government has been a 
tremendous disappointment. 
 
From 1981 to 1988 the number of jobs created yearly was about 
3,714 jobs. But under a New Democrat government, from 1971 
to 1981 the average number of jobs created was 9,100 new jobs 
each year. Compare the record — compare the record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — In 1981, there were 334,000 jobs in this 
province. In 1981, there were 425,000 jobs in this province, for 
an average of 9,100 jobs each year. And in 1988 the number of 
jobs in this province was 4,500, or, pardon me, 451,000, for an 
average of 3,714 new jobs per year. 
 
Now let’s look at unemployment under this Tory government 
opposite. In 1981 there were 21,000 people unemployed. And 
as far as I’m concerned, when you’re unemployed any 
unemployment is unacceptable. We have to have a full 
employment policy in our province. But in 1987 under a Tory 
government there were 36,000 unemployed. 
 
The unemployment rate in our province soared from 4.1 per 
cent in ’81 to something like 7.5 per cent in 1987, and in 
February last month it was 9.1 per cent, and that’s totally 
unacceptable, totally unacceptable. In NDP years we never had 
an unemployment rate over 5, and in PC years we’ve never had 
an unemployment rate under 6. 
 
Now let’s look at youth unemployment. In 1981 there were 100 
. . . pardon me, youth employment. In 1981 there are 110,000 
jobs for young people in this province, and in 1988 under the 
Tories there were 90,000 jobs, for a loss of jobs for young 
people in the neighbourhood of 20,000 jobs. And that, my 
friends, is why Saskatchewan young people and Saskatchewan 
people are leaving this  

place in droves because they can’t find work. And that in fact is 
the truth. Now we can continue to discuss . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d ask leave to 
introduce some students please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr.Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a real pleasure for me this afternoon to introduce some 
exchange students from the state of Kentucky in the United 
States who are attending the Yorkton Regional High School in 
my home town. And there are four students, grades 10, 11, and 
12, and they are accompanied today by their teachers, Barry 
Sharpe and Bill Dosch. I hope I’ve pronounced your last name 
correctly, Bill. 
 
But it’s a real pleasure for me to introduce these students from 
the United States. I have a soft spot in my heart because two of 
my children went down to North Dakota for their university, a 
son in Dickinson State College and my daughter at Mary 
College in Bismarck, so we certainly enjoy having you come to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
We hope you’re enjoying your studies at our high school in 
Yorkton, and I’ll be meeting with you shortly after 4 o’clock for 
pictures and some drinks, and we can have a session of question 
and answer about our parliamentary system here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would ask all members to please welcome these students to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I’d also like to welcome the students, as the 
opposition’s education critic. On behalf of the opposition, I’d 
like to welcome the students from Kentucky to the legislature. 
 
We in Saskatchewan take our politics very, very seriously. Our 
system is much different than the American system. We have a 
parliamentary tradition, and I hope that you have the 
opportunity to learn about our democratic traditions in this 
country as we have had the opportunity to learn about yours. 
And I hope you have a wonderful time at the legislature and 
have a wonderful time in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Decrease in Population of Saskatchewan (continued) 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard for the last . . .  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

308 
 

the last three speakers on the opposite side have reeled off a 
whole bunch of statistics. People come and go in this province. 
People follow the economy of Canada, wherever it may be. 
Yes, we’ve lost a number of people this last year, and I think 
the Premier pointed out quite clearly that some in the 
neighbourhood of 10,000 jobs were lost in the agricultural 
industry last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really doesn’t do anybody on either side of the 
House a lot of good, as far as I’m concerned, to sit here and talk 
about statistics — people coming and going. Most of the people 
out there don’t understand them anyway. 
 
The point I’d like to make, Mr. Speaker, is: what are we going 
to do about it? That’s the question. These people opposite, the 
NDP, have not come up with one suggestion to solve any 
problem in the last four or five years, and I don’t suppose they 
will because they don’t have an agricultural policy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me talk about, just briefly, about the 
agricultural industry. I’m by no means an expert on agricultural 
industry, but let me point out some of the things that I am aware 
of that have done to help the people of this province. 
 
The member from Nutana spoke about keeping people on the 
farms, and absolutely, I totally agree with that. It may be the 
only things they said all afternoon that I would agree with, and 
this government has tried very hard introducing initiatives to 
keep people on the farms. 
 
For instance, agricultural credit initiatives, Mr. Speaker, 
agricultural development fund, livestock facilities tax credit, the 
livestock investment tax credit, livestock cash advance, $25 for 
each of the hogs for the hog farmers, $125 for beef for each of 
the beef farmers. These things all help. They’re interest free, 
Mr. Speaker, and they work to keep the farmers on the land. 
 
But the big question is, from my point of view as a father of 
four daughters attending university in this province, my concern 
is: are there going to be jobs available for them? Now the NDP 
will say, no, there aren’t going to be jobs for them. Well 
fortunately my children are far more enthusiastic and 
encouraged than these people are. 
 
We have to, as the member from Saskatoon Eastview said, 
priorize education. And I absolutely agree with him — priorize 
education. And this government has tried very hard to priorize 
education during the last eight years. We must, of course, seek 
new ways to provide adequate learning opportunities for all the 
people who want them, regardless of age, economic 
circumstances, and geographic location. I think the term 
geographic location points out . . . is what I’d like to speak 
about for a moment or two. 
 
For instance, we’ve introduced a wide range of first and second 
year arts and science classes all over Saskatchewan through the 
regional college network. We are looking for ways to make 
credits more portable, easier to transfer from one institution to 
another in the province. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, living as you do, away from a  

major city, that many, many young people going to first year 
university find it very difficult moving into a city, into 
Saskatoon or Regina, where heretofore they have had to attend 
universities. It’s very difficult to go to first year university if 
you live in a smaller community because, I mean, not only is 
the expense prohibitive in many cases, because of the cost of 
having to rent an apartment, or whatever, getting back and forth 
to the communities. 
 
So we felt, our government felt, and the Minister of Education 
drove this initiative the last couple of years to introduce classes, 
first and second year university classes, to outlying areas as it 
were — outlying areas in a sense that are away from the major 
cities, like Yorkton, or Melfort, or North Battleford, or Swift 
Current, or Weyburn, or those kinds of communities where 
young people ready for university could stay in the home 
community and attend universities. 
 
But not only young people, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about 
people, perhaps housewives who completed part of a university 
course and then went on and got married. Or maybe we’re 
talking about nurses who worked as nurses for a few years and 
then had to . . . and then got married and moved out to the 
country, wherever they were living, and would like to continue 
to educate themselves, look for new courses. 
 
So those kinds of things will be available not only through the 
regional college network but through all distance education 
programs, like the distance education that now exists at the 
University of Saskatchewan and the very fine distance 
education program that exists at the University of Regina — 
one that I’m particularly interested in. So those kinds of 
initiatives, I think, Mr. Speaker, are very important to the youth 
and to the mature students of this province. 
 
But now let’s move on to another area. Let’s talk for a moment, 
let me talk for a moment about our four daughters, as I 
mentioned earlier, four daughters the age of these people up in 
the Speaker’s gallery. What are they going to do when they get 
out of university? Well, they have to have jobs, and one of the 
ways that we’ve done that is to try to build Saskatchewan’s 
economy. 
 
And why do you want to build Saskatchewan’s economy? Well, 
you want to have investment at home; you want to create jobs. 
And of course by building the economy, it increases investment, 
diversifies the economy. Now what does it do for the people of 
Saskatchewan? Well it provides opportunities, increases 
incomes, creates employment, lower taxes, increases 
participation, etc., etc., etc. As the Premier said just the other 
day, Saskatchewan people want to be independent. We do not 
want to have to rely on the people in eastern Canada for our job 
opportunities. 
 
Now let me talk about some of the initiatives that have occurred 
in just the last couple of years where jobs have been created. 
The Meadow Lake Sawmill, I think, is an excellent example. 
This is a sale . . . the saw mill was sold to the employees and to 
10 local Indian bands and has attracted substantial new 
investment in the area. For instance, Miller Western Pulp Ltd. is 
going to invest $236 million. King, Murphy, Lavelin, that’s a 
chopstick factory,  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

309 
 

is going to invest $11 million. And the saw mill modernization 
plans will realize $3.2 million in the Meadow Lake area. There 
are over 400 jobs projected in that one initiative alone. 
 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation — this company’s 
quick rate of growth has already created new employment 
opportunities, continued expansion, promises additional jobs. 
Fifty jobs created, 200 jobs projected, and since forming, 
WESTBRIDGE has earned new revenue in out-of-province 
contracts worth $6 million. 
 
And now the big one for Prince Albert in the Torch River area, 
Mr. Speaker — where you’re from — Weyerhaeuser: $236 
million, $250 million going into construction. We’re talking 
about 700 construction jobs, 169 permanent jobs. Monthly 
incomes of paper mill employees are being injected directly into 
the city of Prince Albert. The city of Prince Albert realizes, 
every month, $500,000 into their community. 
 
Now the offshoot from all of that, the small industries who will 
contribute to the Weyerhaeuser operation, leads into a 
considerable amount of money. 
 
Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation, Mr. Speaker. Its sale of 
two companies brought new marketing and technology 
expertise into the province — $3.4 million; modernization plans 
at $2.5 million. And on and on and on. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one more thing too. Parks, Culture and 
Recreation. Parks leasing arrangements continue to bring new 
investment and interest into the future development of the 
province’s recreation facilities of $15.1 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about new opportunities. And 
one of the things that really has excited me, and I think excited 
many people in this province, because the response has been 
simply overwhelming . . . For many, many years in this 
province, because we are so isolated, because we’re a small 
province relying on agriculture, if we wanted to do any power 
projects or telephone projects or whatever major projects . . . 
For instance, if we wanted to get power out to the people in 
rural Saskatchewan, we had to borrow the money from New 
York or from Toronto or from Japan or some other place. This 
year, this last year, Mr. Speaker, this government introduced an 
initiative called SaskPower bonds. These bonds were sold only 
to the people of Saskatchewan. We raised $340 million in this 
province from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Now that’s independence. We no longer have 
to rely . . . But the good part is, not only did we raise the $340 
million, but $34 million in interest goes back to the people of 
Saskatchewan; not to New York, not to Japan or to Toronto or 
some other place, but right back to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Now that’s participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — It’s very difficult, Mr. Speaker . . . Well it’s  

not. I was going to say it’s difficult to remain optimistic with 
the flood of pessimism that we hear from the people across the 
way. But not even, not even their pessimism on a day-to-day 
basis, not only the denigrating expressions that we hear from 
that side of the House can do anything to stop my enthusiasm or 
the enthusiasm of members on this side of the House. Mr. 
Speaker, it just gets better and better and better. 
 
Then of course we have the SaskTel bonds that the member 
from Regina . . . one of the members from Regina has 
denigrated on many, many occasions — in at $103 million; 
28,900 Saskatchewan people bought bonds — 28,900 
Saskatchewan people bought bonds, SaskTel bonds. There’s 
two kinds of bonds. There’s the credit bond which will be 
credited to the telephone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public participation and privatization initiative 
is a world-wide program, and goes on and on. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the motion brought by the member from 
Moose Jaw urges the Government of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to 
participate in this debate, and I can understand why the member 
from Wascana didn’t want to talk about the unemployment 
situation in Saskatchewan, and talked about selling SaskTel 
bonds, and SaskPower bonds. I wonder what those people who 
are unemployed, and those people who have left the province 
would say to him if that’s your only answer is to say to those 
who have the money, we’ll give you a greater opportunity to 
make the money — but we’re not concerned about you people 
who don’t have any jobs. If you want to leave, that’s tough 
luck. Talk about the programs that could have affected those 
young people; that’s what we want to do today. 
 
And I say to the member from Wascana, when you were 
amalgamating the technical institutes, when you and I went to 
the U of R the other day, they didn’t welcome you with open 
arms. If they were so grateful about the programs that you are 
providing for them, why were they so critical of you and your 
government? 
 
I say to the Minister of Education, when we met at Kelsey the 
other day, they didn’t welcome him with open arms there; they 
didn’t applaud him for all the things that he did or supposedly 
good things that he did. Why should the staff, and why should 
the students of this province welcome you people and applaud 
you when you cut their positions, when you cut programs, when 
you cut opportunities for our young people. Why should they 
applaud you? And they don’t. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we need here is some realistic 
viewpoints from the members opposite. If you were realistic 
you would appreciate the fact that if all those people who had 
left, you would now have 64,000 people unemployed in this 
province. That’s a tragedy. That doesn’t speak very well of this 
government. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they say, where are our 
programs? I say to them, we are not the government;  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

310 
 

you are the government, and it’s your responsibility to provide 
those programs and to provide those opportunities. And when 
the Premier says, when the Premier says that we, that 
Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can waste a 
little and still come out ahead, I’ll say to the Premier in this 
province, when you take a province from a net deficit of $3.4 
billion to over $12 billion, you are not breaking even and you’re 
not coming out ahead. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is money available. 
The members opposite say, well we’ve had tough times, but 
every time one of their people needs a job, as my member from 
Moose Jaw North says, or Moose Jaw South, is it North? North 
. . . Moose Jaw North says, every time a Tory gets defeated, up 
pops a job. 
 
There is money available but only for those people who are 
associated with the Tories opposite. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is unacceptable. That’s simply unacceptable. Let’s get 
our priorities in order. Let’s give some priority to education. 
Let’s give some funding to the U of R and the U of S and our 
technical institutes so our students, the ones that are qualified, 
the ones that have met the standards in the past, are able to 
attend our universities. It is our bright and future leaders, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, sad to say, that have to leave this province, 
that have to leave this province for opportunities somewhere 
else. And it’s about time that members opposite recognize that. 
 
(1545) 
 
I remember full well 1982 when the Premier, over and over and 
over again, said, let’s bring our children home. Why is he now, 
why is he now chasing those people outside the province? If he 
and his ministers spent less time on privatizing and spent more 
time on devising programs of employment for our young people 
and opportunities for our young people, I think the people of 
this province would be more appreciative of your efforts. 
 
But all we hear, day in and day out, if a particular agency is 
profitable it’s a good candidate for privatization. SaskPower, 
natural gas, very profitable — it’s a candidate for privatization. 
Let’s sell it off and let’s give all that money to the private sector 
and have none for our own programs. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t make sense. But it makes sense over there if you are a 
friend of the government. 
 
We heard today again, heard today again, advertising by this 
government. We heard the other day the member from 
Westmount — $32.5 million went to Dome Advertising in less 
than two years. But no money, no money for programs for our 
young people, no money for programs. We heard today a 
member bringing forth an incident where we have a company 
doing a consultative study for $77,000, and the minister refuses 
to tell the people of Saskatchewan what that study was all 
about. 
 
We heard a question directed to the Premier today, a study done 
by Remai — twenty-two-point-some thousand dollars — and 
again no intelligent answer given to the people of this province 
as to why that money is spent in that fashion. 

We have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a wastage of $34,000 a day of 
leased property that is not needed by the government — empty 
spaces not needed by this government. And I say to the 
members opposite, if you took all those millions of dollars and 
applied only a portion of that to create jobs for our young 
people, we wouldn’t have had the exodus of over 7,000 people 
in the month of February, just a few months ago. 
 
But you people don’t seem to care. You don’t seem to care that 
our young people have to leave and can’t find any opportunities 
here. But I say to the members opposite that these are our young 
people who should be the future leaders, not in other provinces, 
but they should be the future leaders here in this province. They 
should be the ones that we should be relying upon. 
 
And I say to the members opposite and particularly the Premier, 
unless you have a vibrant economy, unless you take a hold of 
all the sectors of this economy — and that is the private and the 
public and the co-operative sector — you cannot, you cannot 
provide those opportunities. And if you rely only on the free 
market principle, this province will not endure and it will not 
provide the opportunities that we need for our young people so 
that they can stay in this province. 
 
When you privatize, we saw in the past privatization of our 
highway workers, hundreds of people put out of work. We saw 
the children’s dental program privatized — 3 to 400 people out 
of work. We saw Saskoil sold off — another 25 per cent of the 
employees in Saskatchewan out of work. Oh, lots of jobs 
created in Alberta where Saskoil went to invest, but no jobs for 
our people here. 
 
I say to the members opposite, you have your priorities all 
mixed up. When the member from Wascana says that, oh well, 
PAPCO was losing money, it only lost money when the 
members opposite took over. They sold Saskoil. They sold 
PAPCO for $100 million less than it was worth. They sold Sask 
Minerals. They had it assessed themselves. They sold it for $7 
million less. I say to the members opposite, just those two alone 
of $107 million, if you had taken only a portion of that and put 
it into programs for our young people they wouldn’t have to 
leave this province. They could stay here and work here and 
earn their livelihood in this province. 
 
And Minister of Education, it’s about time that you start 
recognizing that it’s your responsibility to make certain that our 
young people can attend technical schools and the universities. 
So don’t cut programs; don’t cut the spaces. And see to it that 
there is adequate funding, adequate funding for our students in 
this province so that they can get their post-secondary 
education. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is your job. That’s why you were assigned 
that job and I hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the minister will 
take those things seriously and see to it that he gets through to 
the Minister of Finance so that adequate funding, adequate 
funding will be available for education. 
 
Our libraries rated about eighth or ninth on a scale of 10 last 
year in the whole country of Canada. The U of S  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

311 
 

library was so badly outdated and didn’t have the updated 
books that they needed for the programs available. And the 
Minister of Education says, but we’re short of money; times are 
tough. And I say to the minister, I’ve given you several 
examples today where you could have had adequate funding for 
those programs. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s somewhat sad that I have to be speaking on part of 
a resolution that was brought forward from members of the 
opposition in regards to the exodus and migration of young 
people from the province of Saskatchewan and other areas of 
the country. 
 
I’d like to touch on some basics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not like 
that of the member from Saskatoon South that’s been kind of 
talking and sounding his horn. But I’d like to indicate to the 
member from Saskatoon South and to all members of the 
opposition that this government has reacted in many different 
ways as far as job creation and enhancing the security of 
Saskatchewan young people and seniors, and in fact including 
everyone in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has taken many 
initiatives, and those initiatives are definitely cited and very 
much a part of us as far as the public participation is going in 
this province. 
 
But I want to take you back a little further. I want to take you 
back to the point in time where the NDP opposition were the 
then government, and I want to relate this to my particular 
constituency. I want to relate this to my particular constituency 
where there is an oil economy as well as an agricultural sector 
out in my particular area. I want to indicate to the NDP 
opposition that they were the individuals that . . . and their 
federal NDP caucus members were the individuals that tossed 
out . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the member from 
Moose Jaw North to allow the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster to make his comments. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thank you 
for your ruling. I know I touch nerves when we touch into the 
realm of the way they used to operate as a government in this 
province. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that along with their federal 
counterparts, their NDP federal members here in Saskatchewan, 
I want to indicate to you that those were the members that sided 
with the Liberal government of that time to oust a Tory 
administration that was definitely aware of the western 
Canadian . . . and in fact in the economy, and that takes into 
consideration Saskatchewan’s economy and jobs for young 
people. 
 
And I want to say to you, I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we inherited, for instance, the energy program 
here, the national energy program here through Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau’s day and the NDP opposition were  

those that sided with him. 
 
And I want to talk to you about exodus. I’ll tell you, it had 
brought us down to our knees in my riding. It had brought it to 
the point where people were leaving in hordes into the U.S. for 
jobs in drilling and exploring for new oil reserves. And they 
disrupted families. They just uprooted these families that 
thought they had long-term secure jobs in my constituency. 
 
And that’s not only my riding, but you can look at the Estevan 
riding. You can look at Weyburn and all throughout the 
province in regards to the oil and gas program. In fact, under 
their administration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 
opposite, as they were in government for I believe 10, 11 years 
under the NDP logo, they did not I believe even hit the 100 in 
numbers for the number of gas wells drilled in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to indicate to the members opposite that if you look 
back at a change in our policies here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we had had close to 800 natural gas wells 
drilled and put into production here in our province. It had 
created many jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for man, woman and 
the young people of this province. 
 
And I want to indicate the spin-off factors, the spin-off factors 
for small business and allowing our high school students and 
our university students an opportunity for those jobs. 
 
And I understand and I listen to the members talk about cuts, 
cuts, cuts. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I challenge any one of those 
members to show to anybody where there has actually been any 
cuts in any one of the various different departments that they so 
point out. I asked them to show me in Health; I asked them to 
show me in Education; I asked them to show me in any 
department that they wish. I will guarantee to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there have been increased expenditures in every 
year in every department for every particular main social and 
government service department. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if these guys 
would come out and tell the truth about the fact of the 
expenditures, instead of trying to sing the old story that they’re 
so used to singing, I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there has to be, and it’s true, a great change in 
attitude from those members. 
 
I ask the people of Saskatchewan, whenever you hear one of 
those NDP opposition members run down our policies and what 
we’re trying to do to enhance the job and the secured living of 
people in our province, and they run it down, what’s the 
alternative? What are they giving to the people in this province 
as an alternative? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have not, to this day, since this 
session, this here latest session started, they have not offered 
one idea, one new little idea that would have enhanced 
anything. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that they talk about the migration 
of people. Saskatchewan, under their administration, has never 
been in a population of a  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

312 
 

million-plus people. And I’ll tell you today, to this day 
Saskatchewan is still a million-plus people. So where are they 
coming from? I ask you, where are the NDP opposition coming 
from? 
 
We’ve had a poor economic situation in agriculture. We’ve had 
poor economic situation in oil, in revenues, in resource 
revenues. And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been 
not once that this administration, this PC government under our 
leader, our great Premier, that has ever turned his back or the 
government’s back on any of the people in this province. 
 
When the member from Saskatoon South talks about cuts in 
health care, he was the one that put the moratorium on nursing 
homes and hospitals. That didn’t create jobs in the building 
industry as well as the service sector — jobs for nurses and 
doctors and everyone else that had to do with it. 
 
(1600) 
 
I want to indicate to you, the member from Saskatoon South 
was then the Minister of Health, and all he could think of was 
moratoriums. His greatest expenditure into the health system 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was about $700 
million and that was still in 1982. 
 
When this administration took over, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have doubled that expenditure. And that member over there has 
the gall to stand up, the member from Saskatoon South has the 
gall to stand up and criticize this administration because we’re 
doing nothing for health care enhancement. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that on the point of 
health care I’ll give you an example. In my riding, Mr. Speaker, 
my riding has received three brand-new hospitals; it’s received 
a couple of brand-new nursing homes. And I want to tell you 
that those were . . . the NDP had gone through three elections 
promising those facilities and it took a Tory government to 
deliver. 
 
And I want to say that the people in my riding will not forget; 
they will not forget. In fact, I want to indicate to you that jobs 
were under way, the carpenters were building these facilities. 
And this was in the 1986 election when we were having a 
nursing home being built . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to 
take part in the debate. There were some introductions during 
the debate, and I don’t know how much time is left. Could you 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — All I have here, according to our records, 
we’re at 73:14. So you have almost two minutes, not quite. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to use 
the time, Mr. Speaker, that’s available to me to put forward 
some of the facts with regard to the resolution that’s before us. 

The motion before us laments the fact that over 6,000 people 
left the province of Saskatchewan in February 1989. And the 
answer to the problem, which is contained in the motion, is that 
jobs should be provided in Saskatchewan for those people that 
are leaving Saskatchewan for jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I speak of this from a personal point of view 
as well. I have a son who has graduated at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He has a master’s degree. He left the province in 
January, 1989, and he obtained a very good job outside of 
Saskatchewan. So I have some personal experience with this 
particular problem. 
 
The facts of the matter are, Mr. Speaker, the labour force of 
Saskatchewan — 1988 February, compared to February 1989 
— has dropped 6,000 people. The persons employed has 
dropped by 12,000 people from February ’88 to February ’89. 
The population, of course, has dropped 6,260 people. The 
aggregate drop in population in this year, January and February 
of this year, is over 8,000. 
 
The problem with this government is that they won’t admit 
there’s a problem. That’s the problem. Mr. Speaker, what are 
the human consequential effects of this? The consequential 
effects of the policies followed by this government are that 
people are unemployed in greater numbers in Saskatchewan and 
people are leaving in greater numbers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 4 — Financial Situation in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I shall 
at the conclusion of my remarks move a motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the waste and financial 
mismanagement of the provincial government, which have 
caused an alarming provincial deficit and an unfair tax 
increase on Saskatchewan people. 
 

The hon. member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden wants to know if 
I want to talk about the clock. That makes about as much sense 
as some of the budgets he’s brought in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the 1982 campaign where I 
think all of this began. The hon. members opposite ran that 
campaign on the basis of what at the time must have been 
known to them to have been irresponsible, and certainly it has 
proved to have been since. 
 
They promised money in your pocket. I wonder how many 
Saskatchewan people remember those campaign slogans, 
“Money in your pocket.” They abolished thereafter the gas tax, 
reduced oil royalties, and lo and behold!, produced a deficit — 
a deficit that began at $312 million. 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

313 
 

I recall asking the member from Kindersley, who was the first 
Finance minister, when he thought they might balance the 
budget. After prodding him in his estimates for a few moments, 
he finally ventured a guess that he thought he would probably 
succeed in balancing the budget by the time the 1986 election 
rolled around. Oops, he missed. Not only did he not eliminate 
the deficit; by the time the 1986 election rolled around, the 
deficit had increased by almost an arithmetic progression to 1.2 
billion. 
 
If viewed with hindsight, those four years were the height of 
folly, Mr. Speaker. Simply put, we took off the gas tax, ran up a 
deficit that’s $3.8 billion, and now we’ve reinserted the gas tax 
and we’ve still got the deficit. I wonder if it isn’t obvious even 
to members opposite that that was folly, that was 
mismanagement of the highest order. 
 
Not only do we have, Mr. Speaker, the gas tax back on at an 
increased level, we see, we learn in the last few days, we’ve a 
sales tax which is higher at 7 per cent, a flat tax of 2 per cent 
which produces a high level of taxes for Saskatchewan people, 
and any number of small nuisance taxes. They’re just endless. 
Everything from increased park fees to fees for incorporating 
companies that have increased by . . . that have trebled since 
these people took office — just endless. Increased hunting fees. 
Every time one pays a fee to this government, it seems to have 
gone up. 
 
We’re carrying a much, much higher tax load; at the same time 
we have a much poorer level of services. One would not have 
thought it possible, but it has happened. We have a higher tax 
load, not because we have better hospitals — the public of 
Saskatchewan are acutely aware of how seriously our health 
system is underfunded; not because we give our young people a 
higher quality education in our schools and universities. 
Anyone who has visited a university, as I have, is embarrassed 
that our young people would be getting an education in an 
institution which is so seriously underfunded. I find it 
embarrassing the way we treat young people. 
 
We’re not paying a higher level of taxes because we have better 
roads. No one can walk down the streets without realizing that 
isn’t the case. We suffer, as bizarre as it seems, we suffer from a 
higher level of taxes and a poorer level of services. 
 
How could that have come about? Well it comes about in part, 
Mr. Speaker, because we’ve still got the $3.8 million deficit. 
We have the gas tax back, we have other taxes on a higher 
level, and we’ve still got the deficit. Even members opposite 
must realize how foolish those four years were. 
 
It’s a fact, Mr. Speaker, that in the last budget only three 
departments enjoyed a higher allocation of money than we 
spent on interest. And I will predict that in the next budget, only 
in Health and Education will we spend more than we will on 
interest. We will this year go to spending more on interest than 
we do on social services. It’s a fact, Mr. Speaker, that we spend 
more money feeding the bankers in New York and Tokyo and 
Hong Kong and  

Zurich than we do in feeding the poor in Saskatchewan. And 
that ought to embarrass members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have money for an advertising program which 
must be totalled in the tens of millions of dollars, and we don’t 
have a few hundred thousand dollars for a fresh food program 
for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we enjoy . . . we are afflicted with, I should say, a 
higher level of taxes and a poorer level of services, not just 
because of the deficit but because there is an enormous amount 
of waste and mismanagement in this government. The public of 
Saskatchewan are coming to understand how expensive it is to 
run a government which is based on patronage. Patronage is a 
very, very expensive way to waste money and to run a 
government. Not only do you have people in office who don’t 
know what they’re doing, but you’ve people in office who 
simply aren’t needed. 
 
There’s an endless amount of patronage. Perhaps the most 
brazen illustration of that is one of the oldest, Dome 
Advertising. This government had not found out where the 
washrooms were in this building when they announced that all 
advertising would be handled through Dome Advertising. 
That’s also the same company, not by chance, which does all 
the advertising for the Conservative Party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Imagine that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Imagine that, the member from Weyburn 
says. It appears not to bother his conscience that those two 
accounts can get mixed up and undoubtedly do — undoubtedly 
do. Undoubtedly, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers pay for the lavish 
advertising programs that the Conservative Party treats the 
public in Saskatchewan to. Undoubtedly that’s true. And if it 
isn’t true, I invite members opposite to give us the answers to 
the orders for returns which would establish that. 
 
If the members opposite say it’s not true, then I say to the 
members opposite, we will be moving some motions for return 
which would prove your innocence. All you have to do is pass 
them rather than amend them. I know full well, because this is 
seven years I have sat opposite watching this scam; I know full 
well that those orders for return will never be passed. They will 
be amended into some harmless form. Once again we will know 
that you are funding Conservative Party advertising with tax 
dollars, and so will the public in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if one compares the ’81-82 year to the ’88-89 
year, the year which will be completed in a few days, the 
mismanagement in this government comes into stark contrast. 
Since February 1, 1982, the cost of living in Canada has 
increased by 38 per cent. The expenditures of this government 
have increased by 55 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The level of 
expenditures has gone up much more rapidly than the cost of 
living. While hospital waiting lists sit at a level which is simply 
not acceptable, while schools and universities embarrass 
responsible people who care about young people, while the 
highways and streets are almost impassable, and while food 
banks are unable to meet the demand — all of the time that the 
public of Saskatchewan suffer through these  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

314 
 

indignities and this degradation of public services, expenditures 
in this province have increased by roughly half again as fast as 
the level of inflation. 
 
(1615) 
 
How can that happen? How could we have a runaway level of 
expenditures and a collapsing level of services? Well it 
happens, as I said, because patronage and waste . . . patronage is 
a very expensive way to run a government. There’s any number 
of examples of it. If one had to kill time, if that were my 
ambition, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t think of a better subject to do 
it on than the patronage in this government. There’s just an 
endless number of illustrations. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We can’t even match you guys. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I say to the member from Weyburn, who is 
making his usual sparkling contribution from his seat, that you 
will have an opportunity, you’ll have an opportunity to defend 
your record, and I’ll venture to say the member from Weyburn 
won’t take it. I’ll venture to say the member from Weyburn will 
be a great deal quieter when he gets an opportunity to stand 
than he is from his seat. The member from Weyburn will have 
his chance, and I know his contribution will be every bit as 
sparkling from his feet as it is from his seat. 
 
There’s any number of examples of this. We saw yet another 
one today. And some of these examples just go on endlessly. 
 
Last year the public of Saskatchewan were outraged by the fact 
that we had rented a hotel as an office building for public 
servants. An ex-cabinet minister, Mr. Embury’s response was: 
oh, good heavens! they didn’t do it, did they? Well they did. 
They rented a hotel at an exorbitant cost per square foot, then 
they left it empty for a period of time, paid rent on an empty 
building. 
 
Now we find out, Mr. Speaker, that they commissioned a study 
by the people who were going to rent them the space to 
determine whether or not the government ought to lease the 
space from them. I have, in my years that I’ve been in office, 
Mr. Speaker, seen some incredibly useless studies, but I cannot 
imagine a more useless expenditure than commissioning 
someone who you’re going to lease from to do a study to tell 
you whether or not you ought to lease it. That strikes me as 
something that you might want an outside opinion on. 
 
As I say, the list is just endless, and these examples just go on 
endlessly. But while the Renaissance Hotel may be an 
outrageous example, the sums are trifling when you compare 
them with some of the waste that goes on elsewhere — 
absolutely trifling, infinitesimally small. 
 
I’ll mention just one of them: the Rafferty dam. I think it’s 
apparent, Mr. Speaker, that there are a number of alternatives to 
the Rafferty dam. The best one is the cheapest, and that’s 
conservation; that is relatively cheap. And I think it’s becoming 
apparent, Mr. Speaker, that we need to conserve energy rather 
than try and promote its use, which is what the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation does under your auspices. Under the  

auspices of members opposite, the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation encourages the use of energy and promotes it and 
does nothing to promote conservation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is true . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well now, I must say I’ve done something I didn’t think was 
possible. I’ve offended the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
I am most surprised. Nothing I said was . . . I assure the 
member, nothing I said was in any way designed, Mr. Member, 
to ruffle your feathers, and I’m dreadfully sorry that I’ve done 
so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1970s we went through the energy crisis. 
Ten years later we’re going through an ecological crisis — 
1988 may well be the year that the earth said, ouch! We had, at 
one and the same time, a discussion of a greenhouse effect, the 
depletion of the ozone layer. It is apparent, Mr. Speaker, that in 
the long run, and perhaps even in the short run, we don’t have 
any option but to be a lot more conservative in our use of the 
earth’s resources. That is what members opposite ought to be 
doing, but they’re not. 
 
Let’s supposing just for the moment, Mr. Speaker, that the 
power is needed. We have at Coronach a partially utilized 
power plant. It’s designed for four generating units; it does not 
happen — it has two. It is apparent even to people who aren’t of 
an engineering bent, Mr. Speaker, that for approximately $300 
million those units could be brought on stream, with few 
additional ecological problems. Are they doing that? No, of 
course they’re not. Instead, they’re building at Estevan, in the 
Premier’s riding, the Rafferty dam at a cost of two to three 
times that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Rafferty dam illustrates something else, and 
that is that the mismanagement in this government is not due to 
incompetence. That would be a very generous statement, and I 
wished I could believe it. I wished I could believe of members 
opposite that their waste and mismanagement was due to 
incompetence. Some of it is clearly intentional; it is patronage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see another illustration of that as a result of the 
Rafferty fiasco. Not only has . . . There is a group which all 
members will be familiar with, SCRAP (Stop Construction of 
the Rafferty and Alameda Project). It has sued members 
opposite, and may well succeed, because they bypassed the 
process by which these things are evaluated. 
 
Just last month, Mr. Speaker, it introduced yet another novel 
idea and one that I dearly hope bears some fruition. They asked 
the RCMP to press criminal charges against this government; 
did so on the following basis: if I am a trustee of private 
property and I utilize that property not for the benefit of those 
for whom the property is held but for my own personal gain, 
I’m guilty of a criminal breach of trust. What they have said is, 
there’s a similar concept with respect to public property. If you 
take public property and knowingly use it for your own 
purposes rather than in the best interests of the public, you’re 
guilty of a public breach of trust. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s an interesting concept, and I sincerely 
wish they proceed. I don’t have a whole lot of optimism they’re 
going to, because for that to happen  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

315 
 

would require the consent of the Justice department. I dearly 
wish I could believe that the Justice department in this 
government is honestly and fairly run, but I don’t, and neither 
do most other observers who have watched this government. 
 
What we have seen in the last brief while, with respect to 
Rafferty, is this government hiding information, this 
government attempting to manipulate the processes by which 
public decisions are made, so that the federal government won’t 
catch up to them, so that the Manitoba government won’t catch 
up to them, and so that the public of Saskatchewan won’t catch 
up to them. 
 
Well I’ve got news for them, Mr. Speaker. The public of 
Saskatchewan are going to catch up to them. It may come this 
year. If it doesn’t, it will come next year in the form of an 
election. And when the Saskatchewan public catches up to 
them, they will finally get that which is their just deserts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have hidden information in other ways. I 
mentioned the property management corporation. The 
expenditures of this government increased very rapidly when 
the property management corporation came into being. 
Expenditures within a year increased by 25 per cent. The 
property management corporation, as members opposite and as 
the public will know, basically provides the lease space for the 
government in buildings and provides the property — the pens, 
the pencils, the waste-baskets, the desks, etc., that this 
government uses. We no longer have really any means of 
finding out how that money is spent. 
 
One of the acts which endeared this government to the public 
early in its reign was in the summer of 1982 in the midst of a 
very serious water problem in Regina. Their response was not 
to do anything about it, but to look after themselves. They 
installed Nimbus water treaters in each of their offices. It 
outraged the public, as well it should. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, today we’d never know that happened. With 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation in place, 
we’d have no means of ever knowing such a thing had 
happened. Basically, Mr. Speaker, it is fair to say that since the 
property management corporation has been brought into being, 
we have no means of finding out how a large portion of the 
public funds are spent. 
 
The auditor, Willard Lutz, referred to this fact, referred to the 
fact that the Crown corporations are being used to keep 
information from members of this legislature, and what 
happened? He was pilloried by members opposite who sat on 
that committee. For several days the Public Accounts 
Committee was stalemated by the issue. And finally, I believe 
more to get public accounts working than because he felt any 
sense of remorse for what he said, he partially at least, withdrew 
the remark. 
 
I would mention this while the tabling of the Public Accounts 
. . . Until this government took office, the Public Accounts 
were available and tabled in the fall, usually in November or 
December. They have not, Mr. Speaker, been tabled by this 
government, with one exception, before the spring. 

Mr. Speaker, there was one occasion when the former Paul 
Rousseau, the member from Regina South, did table the Public 
Accounts in February. And when some people used the Public 
Accounts to do what this legislature is here for, that is to hold 
the government to account, he said he was never going to 
introduce them again, and hasn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could mention the activities of the Public 
Accounts Committee in attempting to gag members of this 
opposition who ask questions, legitimate questions about the 
Minister of Finance and how much he knew previous to 1968. 
Perfectly legitimate questions, questions the public accounts 
should be asking about the minister’s activities in 1986, and 
members opposite attempted to gag our members. I don’t think, 
frankly, they succeeded. 
 
I could mention the orders for returns, some of which were over 
two years old, that have not been answered. This is information 
which we are supposed to be given so that we can do our job, 
we can do what this legislature is here for, and that is to call this 
government to account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all of those reasons I know members opposite 
will suffer some very severe pangs of conscience if they don’t 
vote for the following resolution which I now move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the waste and financial 
mismanagement of the provincial government, which have 
caused an alarming provincial deficit and unfair tax 
increases on Saskatchewan people. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Let’s . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We’ll be very certain we leave sufficient 
time for the member from Weyburn to come to his defence. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
this is a very important motion to bring before this House, and a 
very important subject to speak about and remind the people of 
Saskatchewan just what’s been happening over the last seven 
years and what it means to them. 
 
The waste and financial mismanagement of this government are 
subjects that have been spoken about and brought to the 
attention of the people of this province by members of the 
opposition and by others, again and again and again. And as my 
friend from Regina Centre says, the government will be brought 
to account for those matters at the appropriate time in the 
future. 
 
I want to focus on the question of the deficit, the deficit that is a 
result of the financial mismanagement and the waste of this 
government over the past seven years. And I want to discuss it, 
Mr. Speaker, in the context of what that deficit means to this 
province this year and next year and all of the succeeding years, 
and what the result will be, what the consequences will be for 
the people of this province. 
  



 
March 21, 1989 

316 
 

The deficit, as we all know, has risen to a level of 3.7 to $3.8 
billion. Now that’s a very, very large amount of money. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very difficult for a person making say $30,000 a 
year to even comprehend how much three billion eight hundred 
million dollars actually is. It’s just one of those numbers that 
are so fantastically large that you can’t envision how much it is. 
 
Well to give it some perspective, Mr. Speaker, let’s just look at 
the cost of that deficit year after year so far as the people of this 
province are concerned. And the cost is the interest payments 
that we have to make just in order to pay for that money which 
we’ve borrowed over the last seven years. 
 
And it’s important to keep reminding ourself that we have 
borrowed that money over the last seven years. Because as we 
have said over and over again, until the year 1982 there was no 
deficit in this province; there was a surplus. And all of this 
outrage, all of this $3.8 billion has been run up since my friends 
opposite have been elected. And the blame for that lies upon 
them and they must bear the consequences of it. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now the interest rate, Mr. Speaker, is the figure provided by the 
government in its estimates, and it is $330 million; $330 million 
is the amount that I think we’ll see when the Minister of 
Finance tables his budget at the end of this month. 
 
Now $330 million, Mr. Speaker, can be understood if you think 
about it in terms of how much that is each day, and it is almost 
a million dollars each day, seven days a week, 365 days a year. 
You wake up tomorrow morning, Mr. Speaker, and it’s with the 
certain knowledge that today our province is going to have to 
pay a million dollars to finance that deficit of 3.8 billion — $1 
million dollars. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is there another way you can put that? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now I think that I’ll respond to the question 
just asked by the member from Weyburn, and that is, can I put 
it in another context, give it another perspective. Let me just do 
this. Imagine that . . . let me do it in this way. Imagine that a 
child care program was to be introduced in this province next 
month, a really comprehensive, meaningful child care program. 
Let’s say that that child care program is to cost us, say, $12 
million — and you could mount quite a meaningful child care 
program for $12 million. That would be the equivalent of 12 
days interest — 12 days interest. Now how’s that for a 
perspective? 
 
If we think, for example, that the . . . let’s look at the drug plan 
for a moment — look at the drug plan, the changes to the drug 
plan with the introduction of the deductible, the annual 
deductible, and the introduction of a 20 per cent charge for the 
drugs covered by the plan. And think about how much the 
government thinks it’s saving, how much the people are having 
to pay for drugs that used to be obtained for free. Is that figure, 
what, $30 million? Say the figure is $30 million, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s only one month’s interest — one month’s interest on this 
debt. And  

that’s all attributable to the mismanagement of this government 
over the past seven years. 
 
Now consider it in this perspective, if the House needs still 
another perspective in order to understand the point. We have in 
this province an annual expenditure of $330 million which we 
just simply didn’t have before. It wasn’t here. In order to 
achieve a balanced budget in Saskatchewan, we’re going to 
have to come up with 330 million more dollars than we would 
have had to in 1982, because that expenditure just wasn’t there. 
 
In other words, the Blakeney government could balance the 
budget, but if the Blakeney government had to pay the kind of 
interest that this government has to pay today, it starts off with a 
deficit of $330 million, makes it almost impossible for my 
friends opposite to ever achieve a balanced budget, and I don’t 
think they ever will. I don’t see how they can do it. 
 
In order to do it, they’re going to have to cut services to the 
people of this province to an unacceptable level. A new 
government is required, Mr. Speaker, a new government which 
can get Saskatchewan going again, generate the kind of 
revenues that have to be generated in order to put this province 
back on a sound financial footing again. 
 
Now how did it happen? You know, the fact is that nobody 
knows how it happened, at least nobody outside of a few people 
in this House. Something serious went wrong, Mr. Speaker, 
back about 1982, 1983, when this government, when this party 
took over the government of this province. 
 
And yet, and yet, what was it? Whenever they speak to the 
subject, which is very seldom, they’re inclined to say, well 
we’ve just had a lot of bad luck; we’ve had a lot of bad luck. 
Oil prices are bad; potash prices are bad; farming situation’s 
been bad. In other words, none of it is their fault, Mr. Speaker, 
none of it is their fault at all. They’re just sitting there sort of 
the unlucky victims of a lot of international circumstances that 
combined, or conspired, to put them into this dreadful position. 
 
And that’s nonsense, Mr. Speaker, that just doesn’t bear up to 
examination. If you look at oil prices over the past seven years, 
oil prices go up, oil prices go down, but on the whole the oil 
prices haven’t been bad. Today as we speak, they’re not bad. 
They weren’t bad at this time last year. So that that can’t be an 
excuse. 
 
You look at the potash prices, and the potash prices over the last 
seven years haven’t been bad either. It was a cyclical market 
again. It took a dip in the last two years, but it was strong before 
that and it’s strong now. And you can’t blame any part of this 
deficit, or any but a small part of this deficit, on the potash 
prices. 
 
And so it goes, Mr. Speaker. There’s no obvious answer. 
There’s nothing that these people can point to to blame and say, 
that’s why we have a deficit. The answer, rather, lies in the way 
in which they’ve conducted themself in government, in the way 
in which they’ve squandered and foolishly wasted the money, 
the resources of this province; and the way in which, at the 
same time, they have not behaved properly as far as collecting 
revenue is  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

317 
 

concerned. 
 
And let me give you what I think is the outstanding example. It 
is the way in which this government has treated the oil industry. 
Now in 1982, which is the year of course in which they attained 
office — so part of this is their numbers as well as the former 
government — in 1982, the value of production was about 1.3 
million. That’s $1.3 million. That’s the value of production. 
And the provincial revenue taken from that production was 700 
million. 
 
The production in 1987 was higher than that. It was about $1.5 
billion worth of production — about the same as it was in 1982. 
But the provincial revenue taken from it was less than half, Mr. 
Speaker. The provincial revenue taken from that production was 
347 million. 
 
The oil industry, producing more oil in 1987 than it produced in 
1982, was having to pay to the provincial government less than 
half of the taxes and royalties that it paid in 1982. Now that’s a 
lot of money. And if you look at the figures between 1982 and 
1987, you get some very significant figures. 
 
In 1983, production rose to 1.7 billion; and in 1984, to 2.1 
billion; in 1985, to 2.4 billion, and so on, Mr. Speaker. And 
during that time, the revenue figures gradually declined until, as 
I say, in 1987 it is only half of what it was in 1982. 
 
That’s the kind of financial mismanagement that we’re talking 
about. That’s the kind of financial mismanagement that just 
makes a mockery out of the notion that the financial fix of this 
government, the financial difficulties therein, are as a result of 
forces over which they have no control. The fact of the matter is 
they have a lot of control over these forces, and they have 
allowed themselves to get into this ridiculous, ridiculous 
financial situation. 
 
So I repeat again — and I fear we have to keep repeating these 
numbers so that the people of the province will clearly 
understand them. That deficit is so high today that this province 
pays $1 million per day in interest — $330 million a year. And 
that money has to be paid before anything else is paid in this 
province. To achieve a balanced budget, we have to be in the 
same position as we would have in 1982 to achieve a surplus of 
$330 million, and that kind of surplus, Mr. Speaker, is just 
never, ever achieved by government. That’s the kind of 
financial situation that we’re in. 
 
And when you think about what you could do with that money, 
what you could do with that $1 million a year, it’s enough to 
bring tears to your eyes. Think of a lavish program that may 
cost $60 million and these people would say we can’t afford 
that kind of a program because we don’t have the money. Mr. 
Speaker, it is two months interest, and if we hadn’t been led 
down this awful garden path, we would be able to afford that 
kind of new programming that is so much required by the 
people of this province. 
 
Now while the oil companies have been getting a good revenue 
break as I’ve just described, Mr. Speaker, some of the other 
people in this province haven’t done as well. Some of  

the other people in this province haven’t done as well at all. 
Some of the other people in this province haven’t done as well 
at all. 
 
The reality is, as we pointed out before, that a Saskatchewan 
family of four with a total income of $40,000 pays the highest 
provincial income tax in Canada. That didn’t used to be the 
case. A flat tax was introduced in 1985 and has been bumped up 
since then to the point now where it is 2 per cent of net income, 
and for a lot of people in my constituency that amounts to $600 
a year which they didn’t used to have to pay. So they’re 
certainly paying their part. They’re certainly making a 
contribution to this government to try and balance its books. 
 
Between 1982 and 1987 farm operating costs in this province 
increased by 10 per cent, but over that same period the total 
property taxes paid on Saskatchewan farms jumped by 44 per 
cent. Now over this same period, 1982 to 1987, the annual 
revenue from individual income tax increased by 36 per cent. 
Now not all people have shared in this same kind of pay, Mr. 
Speaker, because Saskatchewan corporations, at the same time, 
paid an increase of only 25 per cent, and the revenue realized 
from corporate income tax only increased by 25 per cent. The 
amount realized from individual income tax increased by 36 per 
cent, and a good deal of that lies at the foot of the flat tax. 
 
Property taxes increased at the same time. Property taxes 
increased because the municipalities had to increase them. They 
weren’t able to look to this government to provide them with 
the funds that would normally have been provided to municipal 
governments. And as a result, Saskatoon property taxes 
increased by 65 per cent, Regina property taxes by 55 per cent, 
Yorkton property taxes by 55 per cent. This is a terrible load for 
the people in this province to be paying. 
 
And while they’re paying it, they still see a government which 
is not able to manage the financial affairs of this province, a 
government that continues to run a deficit, continues to get us 
deeper and deeper into the hole, and creates a situation, Mr. 
Speaker, where our children and our grandchildren are going to 
have to be suffering the consequences of this mismanagement 
for decades — for decades. 
 
Now I am going to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, because 
we do want to hear from the member from Weyburn. But I want 
to go back once more to this very, very important idea, this very 
important reality that it is the members opposite that have 
created this deficit. There is no excuse for them having created 
it. They have never, ever been able to justify or to explain to the 
people of this province how they got us into this mess, what 
they did, or what they had to do that justified it. 
 
The fact of the matter is that during those seven years, Mr. 
Speaker, resource prices have, on the whole, been strong. 
They’ve dipped up, they’ve dipped down, but on the whole 
they’re strong. The fact of the matter is that Saskatchewan net 
income has been high. Sectors have suffered; other sectors have 
done well. But on the whole the income has remained high and 
the level of taxation  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

318 
 

from that source has remained high. 
 
But this government has foolishly squandered the money of the 
people of this province and have gotten us into a situation 
which is so deplorable and which will be a millstone around the 
neck of we in this House and we in this generation and our 
children and our grandchildren. And for that, these people are 
going to have to be brought to account by the electors of this 
province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
enter into this debate this afternoon on resolution no. 4, that this 
Assembly condemns the waste and financial mismanagement of 
the provincial government causing alarming provincial debt and 
unfair tax increases on Saskatchewan people, as proposed by 
the NDP. 
 
I find it probably disappointing, Mr. Speaker, that in the first 
private members’ day since the legislature got under way, that 
the big issue, that the main issue in the NDP’s minds facing 
Saskatchewan people is not the reality of the small-business 
sector; it’s not the reality of what our farm sector is facing; it’s 
not the reality of what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan; it’s 
not that they’re prepared to face the challenges of our health 
care industry; it’s not that they want to talk about the education 
of our young people. No, Mr. Speaker, all of those things are 
important, but the NDP refuse to grapple with those realities, 
Mr. Speaker. They refuse to grapple with those realities. 
 
(1645) 
 
We hear this afternoon a resuscitation of the things, quite 
frankly, we’ve heard in this legislature in 1982, 1983, 1984, 
1985, 1986 from that same NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker. They 
are that same group of doom mongers and naysayers and 
changer resisters that we’ve come to know as the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The simple question is this, Mr. Speaker: where is the NDP’s 
vision of the future? Where is their blueprint for the future in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker? Where is their economic development 
strategy for the future, Mr. Speaker? Where is their health care 
plan for the future, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The reality is they do not have one. They can stand and take 
their places, one after another, and talk about the changes that 
we’ve put in place and how they do not like them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was reminded when I listened to this of a lecture 
I attended the other night at the University of Regina, because 
all we hear, Mr. Speaker, here, is the politics of despair. That’s 
all we hear from the NDP — the politics of despair. Doom 
mongering, naysayering, they are the change resisters, they are 
the agents of despair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why I say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think I’ve hit a 
nerve, Mr. Speaker, over there; I think I’ve hit a  

nerve. What I was reminded . . . When I heard those speeches 
this afternoon, I was reminded of a lecture I attended at the 
University of Regina the other night. It was the Luther lecture 
on the occasion of their 75th birthday, Mr. Speaker — if you 
like, 75 years of Luther College in this province. And as their 
guest lecturers at the Luther lecture which is now their 13th, I 
think — they hold them annually — they had a couple of 
people there, a couple. He was 76 years old and I think she was 
probably about the same age, absolutely bright, absolutely 
cogent, absolutely delightful. Their names were Drs. Howard 
and Edna Hong, and their area of expertise particularly is the 
writings of Kierkegaard. 
 
Now I openly admit, Mr. Speaker, that I do not know a lot 
about Kierkegaard, and that is why I thought it would be 
interesting to go to that lecture. And the topic of their lecture on 
Kierkegaard’s works, Mr. Speaker, was this — and that’s what I 
was reminded of when I listened to these speakers over here — 
the topic of the lecture was, “Kierkegaard: Hope and Despair.” 
Because here we have despair, epitomized by the NDP; and on 
this side with our Premier, we have the hope for the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And a word that Dr. Hong used, and as I understood it he got 
from his study of Kierkegaard’s work, was this term — and I 
thought, now how apt this is when you think about the NDP and 
the despair that they spell out for this province regularly; I 
thought how apt this word was — and he used the word, as 
Kierkegaard has used it, called “radical pessimism.” And I think 
over here in the NDP, we have the most radical pessimists ever 
known to Saskatchewan society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the only other word, the only other word that I can think 
of, what I heard here today, and it came to mind when I was 
reading this last edition of The Economist, dated 4-10, March, 
1989, Mr. Speaker. And in this Economist there’s an article 
entitled “Tomorrow’s Companies: New products, new markets, 
new competition, new thinking”. And this fellow writing in here 
goes on to talk about what he sees as the 10 new realities of the 
future in so far as companies and their employees and how the 
world of work in the future is going to unfold. And he talks 
about things like unprecedented uncertainty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talks about things like that markets are being fractured and 
products will have to become increasingly customized. He talks 
about giant firms no longer being able to behave as they used 
to. As he said, “Wake up, Goliath.” I could say, wake up, NDP. 
 
He talks about the fact that we have to look at new 
organizational configurations, Mr. Speaker. And I want to come 
back to that one in a minute. And he talks about this, Mr. 
Speaker, he talks about this. He says, “Old ideas are being 
challenged”; we can’t afford to have our blinkers on, like we 
used to have on the horses, that they just sort of keep on the 
straight and narrow. It’s a big world out there and there’s no 
idea any more that is sacred, Mr. Speaker. And he talks about 
the idea of internationalism for all taking root. 
 
Now I’ve only picked out a few passages, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to come back to this one about organizational  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

319 
 

configurations, because in a way it talks about a major 
difference between the NDP and the Progressive Conservatives, 
and that is privatization, Mr. Speaker. You see, their whole 
economic policies of the ’70s, and the one they continue to 
cling to, Mr. Speaker, is to nationalize, nationalize, nationalize; 
Crown corporations for all; don’t let the public participate in a 
mixed economy and in a partnership. Nationalization, 
nationalism, nationalism, Mr. Speaker, is the order of the day 
for them. 
 
Through the ’70s, which were the heady days, really, if you 
think back on it, when the NDP were in power. The ’70s were 
really the heady days in this province. Okay. Inflation, land 
prices were going up, driven by the NDP policy of the land 
bank competing with our young farmers. They were buying 
potash mines, uranium mines, farm land. They were building 
Crown corporation buildings one after the other, Mr. Speaker. 
Everything that moved, they nationalized. 
 
Really what they were practising, Mr. Speaker, if you analyse 
it, was Keynesian economics, and that is where the government 
intervenes in sort of down times to provide a stabilizing force. 
That is to say, if the economy itself isn’t going up, the 
government will pour some money in to stabilize it. 
 
Now where that was wrong, Mr. Speaker, where that was 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, was that the ’70s were buoyant times. We 
didn’t need the government intervening with its family of 
Crown corporations. It was the real families that people were 
looking to to see some help for, because their administration 
was the administration of high interest rates — 22 per cent 
interest rates. There was help for the family of Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, but was there any help for those 
families that had mortgages at 20 per cent? No. Money to buy 
potash mines, Mr. Speaker, but was there help for the young 
farmers who were faced at buying land at 22 per cent? No, Mr. 
Speaker, there was no help. Mr. Speaker, there was help; there 
was help to buy uranium mines. There was help to buy uranium 
mines, Mr. Speaker. Was there help for the small-business 
sector, Mr. Speaker? Once again, once again, no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t the first one to notice this 
misguided economic philosophy that the NDP had. The people 
of this province noticed it. They were then known in ’82 as the 
state capitalists. They were the state capitalists. They would trot 
off every six months or so with their suitcases, off to New York 
to get them loaded up with some money, to come back and buy 
somebody else’s farm or potash mine that was already in 
existence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They had this notion of state capitalist: trot back with the 
money borrowed at some bank at who knows what rates, okay, 
as opposed to, as opposed to — as my colleague from Regina 
Wascana talked about this afternoon — a more sane and more 
sensible, logical economic policy where we offer bonds to the 
people to invest in this province; have the interest paid here; 
have the money borrowed here; have the people here have a 
chance to participate. 

But I, even all of the people in Saskatchewan were not the first 
to notice, because they turfed the NDP out in 1982, and it’s 
been Tories ever since, Mr. Speaker. There was a person in the 
NDP who noticed as well that their policies were misguided, 
and his name was James Laxer. And he wrote a rather stinging 
report about the NDP — in 1982-83, it was. And the reality is, 
Mr. Speaker, they are grappling with that same issue today. 
What Laxer said is that their Keynesian economics that they 
practised through the ’70s was a policy out of tune with the 
times, a policy out of tune with the times. 
 
And he said the NDP must come to, must grapple with and 
come up with an economic policy, an industrial policy, a 
post-industrial policy, Mr. Speaker. To this day they have not. 
They do not have an agricultural policy, Mr. Speaker; they do 
not have an industrial development policy. Mr. Speaker, they 
are bankrupt, or as some would say, and I read from a Globe 
and Mail column of January this year, Mr. Speaker, by Thomas 
Walkom, and it was headlined: Socialism spinning its wheels. 
And the lead sentence, I think, says it all about the New 
Democratic Party today in this country, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
true today just like Mr. Laxer said it was in 1983. The lead line 
in this is: “The New Democratic . . .” And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The New Democratic Party is confused, uncertain, 
searching for the proper path. 
 

They are confused, uncertain, and searching for the proper path. 
They have no vision; they have no blueprint; they have no 
economic policy; they have no health care policy; they have no 
agriculture policy; they now have no educational policy. They 
have no policy. They don’t even know where the road is, Mr. 
Speaker. They have no map; they have no map; they have no 
map, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you contrast . . . You see, and why I raise this, Mr. 
Speaker, is because in the lack of any policy framework, in the 
face of the lack of any policy framework in economic policy, 
they cling to the old ways. They cling to the old ways. And 
what that means, Mr. Speaker, is they are deathly against of any 
government, this Progressive Conservative government, that 
would touch those jewels — the family of Crown corporations. 
They deathly fear the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we are privatizing 
them. 
 
Now, it’s well-known, it’s well-known, Mr. Speaker, in the 
U.S. election where we had Bush, the Republican, elected over 
Dukakis, the Democrat, who was defeated. One of the great 
lines that Bush used in that campaign, in my view, Mr. Speaker, 
was this. He described small “l” liberalism as being the l-word 
which sort of cast Dukakis as a wimp, Mr. Speaker, and they 
would always talk about the l-word. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in this House, in this House, 
what makes the NDP pale is the p-word: privatization. They 
can’t handle that word, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, or Saskatoon Centre, or 
Regina Rosemont, can you imagine them trying to say that 
word? Privatization, Mr. Speaker. They can’t get it out. 
 
Nor can they get the double “p” out: public participation.  
  



 
March 21, 1989 

320 
 

They can’t get the p-word out. But it goes beyond that, Mr. 
Speaker. They can’t get the e-word out either. Entrepreneurship. 
Say it. Can you say it over there? Entrepreneurship. Oh, that’s 
another dirty word, Mr. Speaker, amongst the NDP. Or 
enterprise. Could you say that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I’m just getting started. I will 
have much more to say on this silly resolution, Mr. Speaker, but 
right now I would move that we adjourn debate on this 
resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


