


















































April 10, 1989 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 10, 1989 
 
 

675 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave I'd ask 
permission to introduce some guests this evening. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you this evening, and 
through you to my colleagues in the legislature, a number of 
Scouts in your balcony. We have 20 Scouts from the 87th Scout 
Troop, and they're accompanied by Dennis Len and some other 
chaperons. 
 
I'd like to take this opportunity to welcome each of you to the 
Legislative Assembly. I hope that you enjoy the proceedings 
this evening. I hope you enjoy the tour. And I look forward to 
meeting with you at 8 o'clock for some discussion and some 
refreshments, about the tour and about politics in 
Saskatchewan. So I ask members to join with me in welcoming 
the Scouts from the 87th Scout Troop. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, hon. members and Mr. Speaker. It's a 
great pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members 
of the Legislative Assembly, a second group of very 
good-looking Cubs. This is the 81st Regina Pack, which is back 
for the second year running. And accompanying the 19 Cubs in 
the Speaker's gallery, in your gallery, is the leader, Don Ruel, 
and the assistant leaders are Henry Sobchyshyn, Barry Ritco, 
and Bill Neil. 
 
I'll be meeting with you gentlemen of various ages at 8 o'clock. 
I understand we're having pictures taken on the steps, and then 
we'll have some refreshments and a chance to discuss what you 
see here and any other concerns you may have. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming the 81st Cub Pack. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The question before the committee is 
Urban Affairs estimates. Would the minister introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I should maybe 
start by acknowledging to our guests in the Speaker's gallery 
that we're into a little formal, a little different session of the 
legislature for you this evening. This is the first time that we've 
had the opportunity to go into committee to do what we call the 
Committee of Finance. The budget has now been approved as 
was presented by our Minister of Finance and this is an  

opportunity for the opposition to go line-by-line over the 
budget. 
 
We're starting tonight with the budget of Urban Affairs. The 
critic for the opposition members will be questioning me and 
tonight I have the luxury of having with me the officials from 
my department, that I will introduce to the Assembly in a 
moment, who provide me with the technical answers that the 
opposition might ask. So I welcome you and I hope that you do 
enjoy this visit tonight to the Assembly. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, to my right is my deputy minister, 
Dave Innes; and behind me here is Don Harazny, my director of 
administration; Ron Davis is our executive director of 
municipal finance; and Keith Schneider, my assistant deputy 
minister, is to Mr. Innes's right. And Henry McCutcheon is at 
the back there, director of northern municipal services. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I suppose that I could begin by saying that the 
department goals and mission statement is to support and 
maintain a viable system of urban government within the 
province by providing administrative, financial, and technical 
assistance to urban and northern municipalities and assisting 
them, meeting the needs of their residents for service and 
facilities. And as my annual report points out, when you go 
through it you can see the outline of work done in the 
administrative services department and community planning 
services and municipal advisory services and municipal finance 
and the like, as well as northern municipal services. That kind 
of describes in greater detail the functions of this department. 
 
While the members opposite do indeed have a critic that will be 
questioning me tonight, Mr. Chairman, I should point out that 
probably one of our greatest critics is SUMA, the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, which represents some 
500-plus communities in an association that works very closely 
with me and with my department in the establishment of 
programs and policies that affect urban municipalities 
throughout the province. 
 
I was pleased to read their official news release following the 
budget, Mr. Chairman, and in it, following the budget, some 
items that I can point to were quotes from the president, who 
said: 
 

Yesterday's provincial budget holds some promise for 
urban municipalities, according to alderman Ted Cholod, 
president of Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, calling it a budget that we can build on. 
 

And president Cholod indicated that SUMA welcomes several 
of the budget items. So it appears as though initially we have 
seemed to satisfy their concerns. 
 
He goes on to say that SUMA had taken the position that capital 
funding needs were a top priority. And this budget demonstrates 
that the provincial government recognizes these needs, he said, 
and the long-term nature of these capital funding commitments 
is of particular importance to our members. So again, another 
request of theirs was  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

676 
 

satisfied. 
 

Our member municipalities know that this program 
(referring to capital) will give a big boost to their efforts 
and maintain and improve local infrastructure and other 
facilities. The SUMA president said that he expects that 
the provincial government will consult with SUMA 
regarding the details of the new municipal capital program. 
 

And I'll deviate for just a moment to say that, as a matter of 
fact, this news release is right on; I will be meeting with the 
SUMA executive later this week to begin, indeed, discussing 
and consulting with SUMA, as we always do with regard to 
their various programs. 
 
I see my critic is getting a little uneasy about all this, but he'll 
have his opportunity in a moment. 
 

We look forward to those discussions taking place in the 
very near future so that our members can make 
adjustments to their own budget plans as soon as possible 
(is what Mr. Cholod said). We welcome the expressed 
intention to give a high priority to water and sewer 
projects, the opportunity for obtaining up to 100 per cent 
of debenture financing for water and sewer projects 
through the Municipal Financing Corporation, and longer 
term financing approvals from the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board (were two other initiatives mentioned in 
the budget). We will have to see how all of these 
alternatives, including existing Sask Water grant programs, 
can best be combined to fund water and sewer projects, the 
SUMA president said. 
 

He went on to say: 
 

A comparable level of funding in the last five-year 
program generated more than $100 million worth of local 
construction, and we expect that this new funding will 
have the same positive effect. A much appreciated 
additional form of support for facilities operation was the 
recent announcement that SaskPower intends to cut power 
rate charges by 50 per cent later this year for skating and 
curling rinks throughout the province. 
 

It seems that all areas of government have touched on SUMA 
this year, and they certainly respect the fact that the government 
was paying attention and is addressing some of their needs. 
 
Mr. Cholod went on to say with the $1 million increase in 
funding for urban highway construction — under the urban 
assistance program — and noted that that was a 20 per cent 
increase. 
 

Despite continuing concerns, president Cholod concluded 
that the budget contained more good news than bad news 
for SUMA members, and he looked forward to working 
with his colleagues and building on the gains that had been 
achieved. 
 

So all in all, Mr. Chairman, I am extremely pleased that indeed 
we were able to satisfy an awful lot of the  

concerns of our big lobby group, if that's what you would like to 
refer to as SUMA. I'd like to call them rather our partners in this 
together. They understand the difficult period of time that our 
government has gone through in the last couple of years, and 
they have certainly addressed their problems in a fashion that 
we expected and asked them to do. I think, all in all, they are 
reasonably satisfied with our effort in this budget. We look 
forward to continuing our good relationship with SUMA. 
 
Under the circumstances I find it extremely difficult for the 
opposition to, understandably, have much to say about it 
because of . . . SUMA's concerns have basically been 
addressed, and I'm sure that the opposition will have something 
to say, but it will be very weak arguments, and probably have to 
be limited to the political scope only because, when we have 
satisfied SUMA, it appears that we would have satisfied, 
through them, all of the property taxpayers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I might 
also make a few cursory opening remarks, and like the minister, 
I would want to indicate to the students in the gallery that . . . 
the Cubs in the gallery, that it's his job to run the department. 
It's our job to ask him questions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, to see how well he's doing his job and whether 
the money that he proposes to spend for the coming year will be 
adequate, given the needs of urban municipality and property 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we will find out, during the course of the next three hours, 
that what the minister had to say at the outset is not really 
something that's shared by a lot of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
When they write the epitaph, Mr. Chairman . . . When they 
write the epitaph of this PC government — and the people of 
Saskatchewan, I hope, will be given an opportunity in the near 
future to write that epitaph — I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will say that this is a government that in the main 
has been unfriendly to local urban governments and downright 
hostile to our larger cities and downright hostile, given the 
actions and the antics of the government over the last number of 
years. 
 
Now the minister is coming forward and saying, well we should 
put all of that behind us, put all of that behind us because this 
budget and these estimates are a reflection of how well things 
are going, and that everyone should feel good — that everyone 
should feel good. And I want to, just as an aside, say that all 
those who have a history of apologizing for this government 
will continue to apologize for this government, and will 
continue to apologize for the budget provisions for Urban 
Affairs in this particular budget and in these estimates. 
 
But I want to say to the minister, if somehow he feels that all of 
a sudden property taxpayers in Saskatchewan . . . that somehow 
urban governments in Saskatchewan should feel good on the 
basis of his words and on the basis of what's in this government, 
I don't think that's a feeling that's being shared widely by people 
out there. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

677 
 

You know, the minister reminds me of the old Mutt and Jeff 
cartoon, where Mutt is observed going outside when it's 100 
degrees above, wearing a fur coat. And Jeff asked him, well, 
why would you wear a coat like that? And Mutt answers, well, 
it feels good when I take it off. 
 
You know, and you're saying in the context of massive 
cut-backs, massive cut-backs to urban municipalities and 
massive cut-backs to property taxpayers over the years, that 
somehow now property taxpayers in Saskatchewan and urban 
municipalities in Saskatchewan should feel good. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that is simply too incredible to believe, and no one 
believes you. 
 
And I'll tell you why. The bottom line, the bottom line on all 
this is the level of property taxation in Saskatchewan. The net 
level of property taxation in Saskatchewan is the second highest 
in all of Canada — only after Ontario. The net property taxation 
level, the load in Saskatchewan, is the second highest in all of 
Canada — the second highest in all of Canada. And that is a 
direct result of the policies of your government. That is the 
situation that you created and that is the situation that you have 
continued to make worse over the years. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now that's not something that's going to escape the notice of 
property taxpayers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. I think 
people know that this is a government that has been unfriendly 
to property taxpayers, continues to be unfriendly to property 
taxpayers, and it's not the government that should be entrusted 
any longer with the stewardship of urban affairs. 
 
And I strongly believe that when they write the epitaph of this 
government they will say that this is a government that, in the 
main, was unfriendly to local government and, I might say, that 
there probably will be a minor footnote there somewhere saying 
that this minister was surely the most incompetent and surely 
the most . . . or the least influential in any provincial cabinet in 
so far as Urban Affairs ministers are concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I want to turn, in the first 
instance, to the question of revenue sharing and note that the 
amounts allocated for revenue sharing is the same this year as it 
was last year. And I just have a question for the minister, and 
I'm not asking that he provide this tonight, but if he could 
provide, as last year, a copy of the urban revenue sharing 
program distribution for 1989-90; material that would also 
display the allocation to each urban municipality for last year, 
this year and a percentage change — an alphabetical listing of 
those, and any overall distribution patterns that he may care to 
comment on. I want to ask the minister if he could provide that 
information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my critic surprised me with 
a new statistic tonight, and my officials — I hope it can be 
substantiated — and that is his comment that we, in 
Saskatchewan, are the second highest property taxpayers in the 
country. That is a new statistic. I hope that he can substantiate 
that, if he's the critic, otherwise he  

shouldn't go around making statements like that because even 
my officials are not aware of that. 
 
I can tell you that while my critic sat on Regina city council he 
was . . . perhaps the second highest taxed city in the country. 
His record speaks for itself. While he sat on Regina city 
council, from 1980 to 1985, the mill rate increases were in 
double digit figures for the first couple of years. Business tax 
increases were in double digit figures almost annually while he 
sat on council. 
 
I can tell you that the municipal mill rate increases since this 
government has come in . . . And I will read these figures to 
you. In 1981, the last year of the NDP administration, property 
tax mill rate, municipal mill rate percentage of increase, was 
over 11 per cent — over 11 per cent. In 1982, the first year of 
our administration, we took that down below 9. It then dropped 
below 6 in 1983, below 4 in 1984, and below 1 per cent in 1985 
in terms of percentage increase. 
 
I think that the statements that the member from Regina 
Victoria made are totally unfounded. I will go on because, yes, 
there have been percentages of mill rate increases over the last 
few years: 1986 saw 2.89; 1987 saw 3.13; and 1988 saw a 2.66 
percentage increase in municipal mill rates — but far from the 
11 per cent in 1981, the 6 per cent in 1980, the almost 11 per 
cent in 1977. 
 
I think a lot of his statements concerning the property taxpayer 
are absolutely, totally unfounded. I am also the minister for the 
entire province, not just for the two cities. If he wants to get into 
an argument about the two larger cities in this province, I'm 
prepared to do that. I would flag his record in his face, his 
aldermanic record which he must be totally embarrassed to 
hear, just absolutely, totally embarrassed. I have a lot of those 
numbers available. If he wants to get into that kind of an 
argument, I'd be prepared to do that. 
 
As far as his request is concerned for the municipal 
revenue-sharing percentage figures from this year versus last 
year, we will have them available. If we can make them 
available this evening during the course of the questions, we 
will send them over. If not, we will send them over by the end 
of the week. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I thank the minister for 
undertaking to provide me with that information. And I just 
want to go back to something that he said. He's very fond of 
somehow trying to justify his actions in the area of Urban 
Affairs by going back to previous years of my record on city 
council. And he invites comparison. And I want to ask the 
minister, or I want to point out to the minister that when I was 
on Regina city council and while you were a member of the PC 
government, expenditure growth for the province of 
Saskatchewan — and that's something that both levels of 
government had something . . . or at least have control over — 
expenditure growth, the amount of money that you spent, was 
higher for the province of Saskatchewan than it was for the city 
of Regina. 
 
Now as for taxation increases, well, people of Saskatchewan 
and people of Regina will have to answer  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

678 
 

that for themselves. They'll have to look at the property taxes 
which are well documented on the one hand, but they'll have to 
look at things like the flat taxes and other forms of increases on 
the other hand and have to make their own conclusion, draw 
their own conclusions about which government really benefitted 
the most and which one benefitted the least; which one went on 
a tack of decreasing services; which government it was that 
took away the property improvement grant — which was 
substantial help and relief for property taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan — to the extent of $230 a year without any 
qualifications. 
 
You know people will have to take those things into account 
and then tally it up and keep a score card as to which 
government benefitted them the most and the least. And I would 
venture to say, I would venture to say, Mr. Minister, that if the 
results of the last provincial election are any indication, where 
you barely squeaked through and the member for Wascana 
barely squeaked through, and the member from Wascana barely 
squeaked through — two out of 10 constituencies in Regina — 
I think that charge that you're making, and those concerns that 
you raised, were certainly answered in '86. And if they weren't 
answered then, I would say that they were certainly answered in 
1988 in the municipal election, where anyone who was 
identified as a strong PC, anyone who was identified as a strong 
Tory, was shot down at the polls because they don't believe in 
your style of government in the city of Regina. They don't want 
any part of it. 
 
And I would just simply say a word of caution to you, in terms 
of the next provincial election, is to watch out and concern 
yourself with trying to make things better for yourselves, and 
try to improve as a government, rather than looking back to the 
past, as you so often do. 
 
Mr. Minister, you question the figures that I threw out about 
Saskatchewan's net property taxes being the second highest in 
Canada. And I want to apologize right now. I want to apologize 
right now for having given the public and the legislature the 
wrong information. I want to apologize right now. 
 
And I want to quote from your document, sir, the final report, 
the Local Government Finance Commission, September 1986, 
which was tabled when you were the minister of Urban Affairs, 
I believe, or with your predecessor, the PC cabinet minister. I 
want to acknowledge that I was wrong in saying that 
Saskatchewan had the second highest net property taxes per 
capita in Canada. And I want to refer you to page 20 of your 
document where it says: 
 

Net property taxes per capita in Saskatchewan are the third 
highest in Canada. 
 

So I was wrong when I said the second highest in Canada; 
they're the third highest in Canada. They're just slightly behind 
Alberta; slightly behind, I think . . . $8 behind Alberta which 
was the second highest in Canada. My information, based on 
growth of property taxes in Alberta and here, suggests that 
Saskatchewan may have crept into second place. But I stand to 
be corrected and I certainly wouldn't want to claim that 
Saskatchewan's net property  

taxes per capita are the second highest in all of Canada when in 
fact they are the third highest in all of Canada. So I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, would you accept my apology and my correction in 
this case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I figured for a moment your apology was 
sincere. I think rather it's said tongue in cheek. But none the 
less, you do admit the fact that you were wrong, and I think that 
for that you should be acknowledged. 
 
You mentioned earlier about all the taxes. And yes, when you 
want to compare all of the taxes across the country, the sales 
taxes, the health charges — of which we have none and other 
provinces do — the automobile premiums, and bulk all of the 
taxes, bulk all of the taxes of the taxpayers of this country so 
that you can compare fully the tax impact on all of the citizens 
across the country, you will find that Saskatchewan is still in 
probably the lowest third . . . I don't know offhand, so I would 
say in the lowest third of all of the provinces throughout the 
country in terms of total taxes. 
 
When you start talking about this great property improvement 
grant that our government did away with, somehow or other 
you've got a little bit of confusion going there. The $230 that 
the home owners used to receive at one time, that you say was 
removed and all the rest of it, did it really go to the taxes? How 
do you know where the people spent that money? How do you 
know where the people spent their money? They may have 
spent it on clothing, they may have spent it on a vacation, they 
may have spent it on whatever they spent it on. 
 
I can tell you this, Mr. Chairman, and they still don't like to hear 
it; you still don't like to hear it. What about the home 
improvement program that is much, much richer than the 
property improvement grant ever was, and yet it wasn't a 
give-away? We simply didn't go into the Consolidated Fund and 
say, here you are, here's $230, and we'll send it to you and 
spend it any way that you want. But rather we said, we will 
form a partnership with you, Mr. Taxpayer, and we will match 
your dollars on the home improvement program. And as a result 
of the activity, what has happened? What has happened? The 
people that are taking advantage of that program . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The rich. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And oh the rich, the rich, the member from 
Saskatoon says. Well I've got news for you. It's not the rich. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's an insult. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That's an . . . What you're saying is an 
insult to the taxpayers of this province. There are over 220,000 
applicants so far, Mr. Chairman. Let him go out . . . 
 
You're talking about an election. Don't worry about my 
re-election; when the time comes, this government and the 
Premier are going to be fine. And the people will show that to 
you in the same way the people have shown you in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg at a recent by-election three months 
ago. If I were you, I wouldn't be pushing for an election so 
quickly. You can see the results clearly what  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

679 
 

happened in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I wouldn't be in such 
a big rush. Don't worry about our re-election one bit. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can tell you that the people by far, by far 
appreciate the home program much more than they ever did the 
$230 property improvement grant that was originally a 
give-away from the original . . . from the NDP government to 
try to buy some votes from property taxpayers. Property 
taxpayers don't need bribing, Mr. Chairman. Property taxpayers 
want to protect the largest single investment that they will 
probably ever make. 
 
Our young visitors in the gallery tonight, the largest single 
investment that most of those young people will make in their 
lifetime, Mr. Chairman, will be their homes. And they will want 
to build and improve and have a home that they will be proud 
of, so that as they grow older, their children and their children's 
children, in turn, just like mine, will have the pride of home 
ownership. When our government, Mr. Chairman, can work 
together with the home owners of this province to develop a 
program that creates employment, that stimulates the home 
building industry and the home renovation industry to do 
double what has normally been done, I believe that that is 
exactly the way to go in partnership with our people. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if the minister 
has regained his cool. If he has, then I would like to again ask 
him: will he accept the figures that I put forward from his own 
report, the Local Government Finance Commission final report, 
which says that Saskatchewan's property taxes, per capita, are 
the third highest in Canada? And I admit that I was wrong when 
I said that they are the second highest in Canada. This report 
says that they're the third highest in Canada. And will you 
confirm for me, sir, this is your government's report, and that 
these figures in this report are correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I confirmed at the outset of my remarks 
that your apology, although it was probably tongue in cheek, 
did recognize the fact that your original statement was wrong 
and in 1985, according to that report, yes, it was the third 
highest property tax. 
 
As far as losing my cool, Mr. Chairman, I don't lose my cool, 
but I have to shout above the din from the members opposite 
when they get carried away and don't want to listen to my 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find people 
paying a lot of attention to what that minister has to say. We 
have to pay a lot of attention to what that minister says because 
not all of what he says makes logical sense to everyone that's 
listening. And we have to pay very careful attention to make 
sure that we're understanding what it is that he's trying to 
communicate. 
 
I want . . . Just speaking on communication, Mr. Minister, in 
carrying on with the question of revenue sharing, you were 
quoted the day after the budget came down — you were quoted 
by the . . . Or you were reported by the Star-Phoenix as saying 
that: 
 

Changes to the allotment formula this year followed 
recommendations from the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association and are based on new 
population figures and a new assessment base. 
 

But that same day the president of SUMA, the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, Ted Cholod, said, in 
commenting on the revenue sharing pool, he said the freeze on 
the $120 million revenue-sharing pool is an issue his 
organization intends to take up with the government. 
 

We were hoping for an increase, we sat around without an 
increase, we took a reduction in 1987 and felt that perhaps 
there should be some adjustment that way, Cholod said. 
Currently the pool is divided up based on population. 
Cholod said that formula needs to be re-examined, because 
more people are leaving many Saskatchewan communities. 
In the long term, the issue of declining populations in our 
urban municipalities is one that has to be addressed by the 
provincial government, Cholod said. 
 

Now I just want to go back to this. You said that the allotment 
formula this year followed recommendations from SUMA, and 
then the president of SUMA is saying that the formula needs to 
be re-examined. Now can you explain for me and for the public 
just what's going on here? Are you saying that you made some 
changes and they're still not happy; or you made the changes, 
they don't like the kind of changes that you've made and 
therefore want changes again; or you didn't make any changes 
and they still want changes; or is there just a lack of 
communication between Mr. Cholod and yourself, which is 
strange because I understand you have very good 
communication? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don't have any trouble straightening that 
out. First of all, 1988 we were able, Mr. Chairman, to provide 
an increase to the pool, albeit very small, but an increase to 
protect the revenue-sharing formula on the safety net that 
SUMA wanted, so that this year, our 1989 was zero but it was 
the same number as '88 which was an increase over 1987. 
 
Now the changes on the distribution were made in consultation 
with SUMA, and the member from Regina Victoria, my critic, 
he knows that. He knows exactly how SUMA and this 
government works and that we consulted with them, and the 
distribution formula was arranged in consultation with SUMA. 
Understandably, SUMA would have liked to have seen an 
increase in the revenue-sharing pool. Why wouldn't they? It 
only stands to reason that everybody likes to see an increase in 
the revenue-sharing pool. 
 
However, when they looked and saw a 20 per cent increase in 
the urban assistance, in the Department of Highways; when 
they looked and saw the replacement of the capital program, 
coming back in with $100 million over six years, $33 million in 
culture, they recognized that this government is trying to 
address their concerns. And they are prepared again to try to 
hold the line as best they can on the expenditures on their side, 
to contain the  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

680 
 

revenue-sharing pool. 
 
So when Mr. Cholod says that that is the effort that they're 
going to focus their direction on, I would suspect that that is the 
last single little area left with SUMA; and once our government 
finds itself in a position to indeed increase the revenue-sharing 
pool, that all of their requests and recommendations will have 
been met. 
 
Right now, SUMA is so pleased with the significant increase in 
the return of the capital funding program that they are prepared 
to live with the revenue-sharing pool without the increase, as 
much as they would have liked to have an increase. So that's 
kind of simple to answer. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to thank the minister for that 
simple explanation. I am sure that all those who are listening at 
home will be relieved by his explanation, and will now fully 
comprehend the differences between himself and Mr. Cholod, 
the president of SUMA, when they were both interviewed 
following the tabling of the budget. 
 
I want to ask the minister . . . He will know that urban revenue 
sharing is comprised very substantially of two grants. One is a 
per capita grant, which I don't think I need to explain to people. 
It's just what it says it is. It's money that's sent to municipalities 
based on their population per capita. The other part of the 
revenue sharing is a foundation grant. There are also two other 
minor aspects of the revenue sharing, a basic grant and a 
guarantee, but in the main the revenue-sharing grant is 
comprised of a per capita portion and a foundation grant. And I 
wonder if the minister might explain just what he sees the 
purpose of the foundation grant being. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the revenue-sharing 
formula is kind of a complex technical thing that we work out 
with SUMA, and over the years it has worked out very well to 
their satisfaction. They've been pretty pleased with it. 
 
The revenue-sharing formula that is in use: 60 per cent of the 
formula is based on per capita, which is the easy side, as the 
member acknowledges. Forty per cent, though, is based on what 
we call the foundation grant, and the foundation grant utilizes 
the assessment base of the communities. And our communities 
are pretty diverse around the province, and as their assessment 
base is changed quite a bit we . . . Those with a weaker 
assessment base are taken into consideration on the foundation 
grant. Or in some instances, indeed, some of our municipalities 
have higher operational costs that are included in the foundation 
grant, and they, too, are recognized. There might be an instance 
of either higher sewer and water costs, for varying reasons, or 
something similar to that. And as a result, the foundation grant, 
the 40 per cent, tries to level off and put the communities in as 
fair a light as at least SUMA can see to treat all of their 
respective members equally and fairly. And that's why when we 
go about the task of this formula we do indeed take 
consultations with SUMA into effect, because they are the ones 
that are trying to satisfy their membership totally. So that 40 per 
cent is the foundation grant based on those figures. 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to thank the minister for that 
explanation. As I understood the foundation grant, and he's 
confirmed that, is to equalize the tax base, if you like, between 
wealthier and less wealthy communities. 
 
I think the Local Government Finance Commission took the 
situation of Rosetown and Meadow Lake, where Rosetown . . . 
communities of relatively similar populations, but where 
Rosetown might have a higher assessment base, and probably in 
part because it's got a wider trading area to draw on. There's 
more businesses that can be developed there, as opposed to 
Meadow Lake which is more or less isolated in relative terms. 
The foundation grant proposes to recognize that, as the 
minister's indicated, there are diverse communities and some 
may be wealthier than others. 
 
And I want to ask the minister how freezing the urban 
revenue-sharing grants this year, on top of freezing and a minor 
increase last year, how that helps to promote equalization — 
that is, to level out the tax load in a number of diverse 
communities throughout Saskatchewan. I want to ask the 
minister how he sees this budget as achieving that objective or 
that purpose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The freezing of the total pool — 
revenue-sharing pool — really doesn't affect the fairness of the 
equalization portion, because each year that part of the 
equalization formula is examined by the department and by 
SUMA. And as the assessment base or the assessment rolls for 
a given community goes up or down, so does their foundation 
grant go up or down. 
 
And we are using up-to-date population figures. Originally, and 
I believe that under the prior administration, under the NDP 
administration, that the population figures were only used from 
the census which was every four or five years. SUMA asked for 
a change and we are presently using our hospitalization and 
medical statistic numbers for that, so that we are catching that 
part of it and adjusting every year on that end of it and we are 
adjusting every year on the equalization end of it. So that, 
really, the freezing of the pool doesn't affect the fairness in any 
way, shape, or form. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I want to go back to your 
report again, this Local Government Finance Commission, who 
said on page 136 of their final report — and again I want to 
point out that this is your commission, not some opposition 
group but a government body — and they said that: 
 

In short, the Commission has concluded that there are 
insufficient moneys in the urban revenue sharing pool in 
order to bring about a full equalization in a practical way. 
 

And they go on to say: 
 

In summary, the Commission has concluded that there are 
means of providing full equalization and eliminating 
disparities in mill rate requirements under a number of 
options that would entail the addition of approximately $17 
million to the urban revenue sharing pool. 
 

  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

681 
 

(1945) 
 
Now they said in 1985 that there was not enough money in this 
revenue-sharing pool to bring about full equalization. They said 
that an additional $17 million was required to achieve full 
equalization. Yet since that report has come out, your 
government has mostly frozen the revenue-sharing pool and has 
frozen the amount of money going to municipalities. 
 
So I wonder if you can explain then by what magic you have 
been able to achieve full equalization or move in that direction 
by freezing the urban revenue-sharing pool. Is there some 
explanation you have that was perhaps lost on the Local 
Government Finance Commission which, by all accounts, was a 
very authoritative study of urban municipal financing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that it's fair to say 
that the Local Government Finance Commission recommend a 
lot of things. And I guess if we were living in a perfect world 
and our government had not suffered the severe decline in 
revenues that indeed we had suffered as I've spoken on several 
times, as our government has spoken on several times . . . And 
just when you might think that a recovery is starting, all of a 
sudden you get hit by a drought, with the worst one since the 
’30s and like that. We've been struggling, and our revenues 
have suffered dramatically. So I don't think that even if you 
study that local government finance report that even they 
indicated that full equalization would ever be able to be 
achieved except in a perfect world. 
 
And I think that if you wanted to, I suppose you could pick and 
choose certain recommendations out of that local government 
finance report. Obviously my critic chooses to do that. Well we 
on the government haven't accepted that report verbatim, we 
haven't referred to it very often in many of our deliberations and 
certainly in our various budget presentations, and I suppose 
well we could because in some areas we've probably 
over-exceeded their expectations. 
 
So if you choose to go through the local government finance 
report piece by piece, then I suppose all I can do is give you the 
same answer. In a perfect world it might work out fine; 
unfortunately this isn't. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just wanted to make it clear. I wanted 
to make it clear, Mr. Minister, that you had an option, that you 
had a choice, that you could have provided more money to 
urban municipalities, that you could have made the load just a 
little bit easier for some of those municipalities with limited 
assessment bases, could have made the lives of those property 
taxpayers just a little bit easier, but you chose not to. You talk 
about a perfect world and then you go on with all the excuses 
all of a sudden about, well, you know, if it wasn't for the 
drought and if it wasn't for this and if it wasn't for that, that 
somehow these things would be corrected. 
 
And I simply want to say now that it's a matter of choice and it's 
a matter of the decisions that your government had to make 
about where it wanted to expend its dollars, and that the priority 
was not — was not, I would submit to you — was not in terms 
of urban government. Your  

priority was not to support urban governments; your priority 
was not the property tax load for property taxpayers in urban 
Saskatchewan. That was not your priorities. You did have the 
money for other priorities, but for urban governments that was 
not your priority and I wanted to make that very clear. And I 
wanted to make it clear, Mr. Minister, that under your 
government, poor municipalities stay as poor municipalities, 
and they have no hope. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you advise at this point just what distribution 
formula you have, which takes into account rapidly shifting 
population figures in Saskatchewan, and how frequently you 
update those figures? Is that done now on an annual basis? I 
know that for a period of years your government was given to 
making across-the-board increases to municipalities. 
Municipalities might see their populations decrease but they 
were getting increases. Others with large increases in 
population were getting the same kind of increase. And that 
situation prevailed for awhile. 
 
Can you tell us now how you propose, or how you will be 
monitoring populations on an annual basis to take into account 
rapid population shifts in Saskatchewan, and so as to ensure that 
the per capita portions of the revenue-sharing formula will be 
done with the latest information possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, just to finish off on the 
local government finance report. We will be sitting down with 
SUMA over this year and discussing our review to the formula, 
so I will thank my critic for his observations and we will indeed 
throw his ideas into the working mill with SUMA and see what 
they believe to think about his insertion into that. 
 
Presently we don't hear an awful lot of communities 
complaining. Even SUMA rightfully respect what our 
government has tried to do. And although the revenue sharing is 
the last little, small bit left to go — even if we would have had a 
5 per cent increase, you're talking about $3 million — the blue 
book this year shows a $30 million increase in this budget, $30 
million of new money. For my critic to stand there and try to 
fool the taxpayers of this province by saying that we are 
short-changing the municipalities is just a joke. I thought that 
his knowledge in urban municipal government was greater than 
that kind of a silly statement. This government has increased by 
$30 million in new money this department's budget, so for him 
to say that we don't give urban governments a priority . . . the 
capital funding alone, $133 million — $133 million. SUMA 
recognizes what we're doing. 
 
The business tax program, $10 million a year of assistance to 
urban government on their tax — not this government's tax, on 
the municipal government's tax — $10 million a year. For that 
member to stand there and say that this government has no 
priority for municipal governments is a ludicrous statement, and 
SUMA must be giggling when they hear him talking like that. 
Surely he can come up with something better than that. The 
taxpayers of this province will recognize that those statements 
are a bunch of malarkey, that the dollars are there, and by this 
government stepping in and assisting,  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

682 
 

that the burden of the business tax won't be transferred to the 
property tax owners. 
 
Now as far as it relates to the numbers on the revenue-sharing 
pool, again, in consultation with SUMA, Mr. Chairman, SUMA 
wanted to use new annual population figures. It's not something 
that this government arbitrarily chose to do, but rather in 
consultation with SUMA. They indicated that they want annual 
population changes. 
 
It was the NDP that wouldn't do it. They went about it every 
four or five years with the federal census. SUMA had been 
saying, let's do this every year. We're doing it every year and 
we're using the health insurance registration formula which 
SUMA is totally satisfied to use. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just might say, Mr. Chairman, how 
pleased I am to hear that the minister is going to sit down and 
listen to SUMA this year. Surely there has been no firmer 
indication yet that an election must be coming next year, if he's 
prepared to sit down and listen for a change to urban 
municipalities, as opposed to preaching to them or whining 
about his government's and his own inabilities to help urban 
municipalities. 
 
Now he says that they are going to sit down and listen to urban 
municipalities about their needs. I can only take that as some 
confirmation that an election is just around the corner, because 
the history of this particular administration, going back to the 
last election, is one of saying: we haven't got any money for 
you; don't come to us; we're not going to help you; you're the 
folks that are going to have to bear the brunt here. The property 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan are going to have to bear the brunt 
of this government's mismanagement and this government's 
misspending and this government's wrongful priorities. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, to the question 
of capital funding. And I wonder if the minister . . . He said in 
his opening remarks that he's only now getting around to 
discussing with SUMA, and I assume the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM, he's only getting 
around to discussing with them now just how that program is 
going to evolve. 
 
And I assume that means that the minister has no clear idea as 
to how this is going to work. Or does he perhaps have some 
objectives in mind? For example, would he see this as being an 
unconditional, as opposed to a conditional capital program? I 
wonder if the minister might enlighten the people of 
Saskatchewan what he has in mind with respect to the capital 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we've been listening to 
SUMA for a long, long time, and . . . Well they giggle over 
there, but their appreciation of this government is apparent to 
everybody and it's certainly apparent to the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
It's apparent to everybody but the NDP who put up a very 
hollow argument. And this must be very, very difficult for my 
critic tonight to try to make something out of nothing. I think 
that he would be far better off to ask some  

meaningful questions to indicate that he recognizes, as SUMA 
does, certain problems that this government has, and under the 
circumstances we've done very well. 
 
To say that we're finally getting along to the consultative 
process is another . . . You know, I got a word that I'd like to 
put on it, but it's a hollow statement. I mean, the budget was 
presented in this Assembly some 10 or 12 days ago, and when 
you knock out the time that the SUMA executive isn't available 
and the time that they do their thing . . . The meeting is set up. I 
said in my opening remarks that we're going to be meeting this 
week, and we indicated to them that we were prepared to meet 
as soon as possible. So if that's as soon as they can meet, it's not 
their fault, it's not this government's fault; it was the soonest 
that we could meet. Everybody's happy with it; everybody but 
you, and you're not even involved in it. 
 
So why you bring up that kind of a false, hollow argument is 
well beyond me. And as far as what's in it with the capital, 
we're sitting down with SUMA to discuss that very thing, and to 
see what they would like to do, how they would like that money 
spent: whether it should be unconditional; whether they want it 
conditional; how they want to handle the smaller municipalities; 
the larger municipalities. My gosh, there's $100 million over six 
years to be negotiated. We don't choose to say, bang, there you 
are, take it or leave it, the way the NDP might. No. We are 
going to sit down with them and say, where do we go from 
here? Here's what we have; how do we go about doing this? 
 
They're waiting for this process to begin. I'm happy to tell 
everybody that it's going to begin this week. We're going to sit 
down, we're going to talk about it, we're going see what we do 
to it and it's going to be to everybody's advantage. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well excuse me, Mr. Minister, and 
would you excuse the public of Saskatchewan, that when they 
look at Urban Affairs expenditures being less this year than 
they were four or five years ago, of not, you know, sharing your 
enthusiasm for the wonderful budget that you have, and for the 
estimates that are before us? Would you excuse us for any 
scepticism that we might have, and for not sharing your 
enthusiasm? Because you will know that less money is 
proposed to be spent this year, even with your wonderful 
budget, than it was four years ago. 
 
And somehow you assume that you're going in the right 
direction. I would take the position that you've got a long way 
to go yet, a very long way to go yet, before property taxpayers 
in Saskatchewan can be satisfied with your performance as a 
minister, and can be satisfied with the performance of your 
government. 
 
Now again, I want to ask you not what SUMA or SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) might have 
to say about a capital grant, but I want to ask you about what 
you have in mind for a capital program. And as an example, do 
you see this being an unconditional program or a conditional 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I just finished indicating 
that we're going to consult. So how can I  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

683 
 

possibly begin to tell you, my critic, what I have in mind when 
the consultation process with SUMA has not yet begun? 
 
(2000) 
 
I indicated, we don't work like the NDP. We don't walk in and 
say here, our mind is made up, this is what you're getting. But 
rather, we sit down and consult with them. And that process is 
going to just take on an excellent meaning, the way it really 
does. 
 
And when the member opposite starts comparing total dollars, 
again he's trying to fool the public. The taxpayers of this 
province are not stupid, and it's unfortunate that the member 
from Regina Victoria might feel that they are. But when you 
take out the property improvement grant, and add in the cost of 
the home program where we worked together, with the people 
of the province . . . I mean let's compare the truth with the truth. 
You can't say, on one hand, that it's lower dollars, and not 
recognize the fact that you've got something like the home 
improvement program in place, which supersedes the property 
improvement grant. I mean, you just can't do that and expect the 
people to believe that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well you can say whatever you want 
about one program superseding another. And you will say that; 
no one else in Canada will say that. 
 
But now you say that you don't have any predetermined . . . 
You say that you don't have any predetermined ideas about 
what this capital grant, or what this capital grants program is 
going to do or what its objectives are going to be, and that you 
don't know whether it's going to be conditional or 
unconditional. And all of this is going to wait for the discussion 
with SUMA, and I suppose SARM. 
 
Can you then tell me, what did you mean by water and sewer 
projects will have priority on the money granted? Isn't that a 
conditional grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that it's fair to say 
that when I . . . If you want me to give you that opinion again 
right now, yes, priority will certainly be on water and sewer. 
 
We have heard an awful lot of discussion about infrastructure, 
not only from this government but from SUMA, and indeed the 
FCM (Federation of Canadian Municipalities). So wouldn't it 
make eminent sense that if somehow we could encourage the 
municipalities to spend the bulk of this money on that form of 
infrastructure, that it would make an awful lot of sense. 
 
So that would be the priority that I would have. But although it's 
my priority, it doesn't particularly go to say that SUMA may 
have that same priority, but somehow I have a feeling that they 
might just put a priority on that. I'm willing to discuss and sit 
down with SUMA to see where they're going to go. That's how 
this government prefers to operate. My gosh! All the people of 
. . . All the taxpayers of this province would figure that that 
makes eminent sense. 
 
We believe in autonomy. They're elected at the local  

level. And as a result of our respect for that autonomy, why 
wouldn't we sit down and talk with them and see what they 
would like us to do with that money? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well what did you mean, then, that you 
say on the one hand you're going to consult them? On the other 
hand, you're saying the water and sewer projects will have 
priority on money granted under the new program. Are you now 
saying that municipalities won't qualify if they have needs other 
than for water and sewer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I simply indicated that in 
our consultation, programs relating to water and sewer, in my 
mind, would have a priority, and I would hope that they would 
put a high priority on that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, what you see as a 
priority may not necessarily be a priority for a local 
government. You will know that local municipalities will have 
their own ideas about what needs to take place, and they will 
have their own judgements about what is necessary. And I'm 
wondering if you could be more specific about water and sewer 
being a priority. 
 
I guess what I . . . Suppose a municipality has, on its own, in the 
last number of years chosen to upgrade water and sewer and has 
made that a matter of priority because of necessity or whatever 
else, but finds that water and sewer projects are not a matter of 
necessity or a priority this year because of the work that they've 
done in the last couple of years, but decide that sidewalks, 
roads, any number of other capital projects are more important 
this year. Are you now saying, are you now saying, Mr. 
Minister, that they're not going to get the money, that there's no 
priority for them getting that money? What are you saying to 
municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my critic is finally 
getting it through his noodle. My priority and the local 
government priority being different is exactly right — exactly. 
And that's what I've been saying all along. And their priority 
could very well differ from mine, and that's exactly why we're 
going to sit down and have consultations; that's exactly why 
we're going to sit down and have negotiations. I don't propose 
to shove anything down their throats like the NDP might do. So 
the only other alternative that we've got is to sit down and talk, 
and that's exactly what we're famous for doing and that's what 
we're going to do. They know the money is going to be there 
and it will work itself out, and I'm not going to place my 
priority into their priority. Let them figure it out for themself. 
You're absolutely right. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just wanted to 
correct you again in terms of your history and your own 
rewriting of history and just simply point out that the first 
unconditional grants for capital and for revenue sharing were 
instituted in this province by a New Democratic Party 
government. And I don't want to hold up that government prior 
to 1982 as being a paragon of how all governments should 
operate, but I would ask you to respect history and respect the 
truth and recognize that and not try and give the impression that 
prior to your being the minister that there is no such thing as 
unconditional grants. I think that the New Democratic  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

684 
 

Party government that day and certainly I for one, now, without 
any reference to the past, would take the position that 
unconditional grants are necessary; that there is strong 
arguments in favour of unconditional grants; that the type of 
capital needs vary among local governments; that local officials 
are in the best position to make judgements about what type of 
capital facilities are most needed in their respective 
communities; that capital grants which are paid for only certain 
types of projects reflect an assumption that provincial 
authorities are better able to make those judgements than local 
people. 
 
I'm also concerned that conditional grants can create an 
artificial priority for certain projects and that this may not be in 
the public interest. And I just might point out in that connection 
that the $33 million for the recreation and cultural funding, 
those capital grants, although welcome, you might have been 
better off to roll those all into one capital program and to allow 
municipalities to make their own choices about whether they 
needed to put more money into roads or into sewer one year as 
opposed to recreational facilities. And I also want to point out 
that unconditional grants are compatible with encouraging local 
decision making. 
 
And I certainly recognize that there is room for conditional 
grants, especially where unique requirements exist, such as 
some communities may have need for money for bridges. But it 
doesn't make any sense to give money to a lot of communities 
for bridges when they have no bridges. And certainly there is a 
need for some conditional grants but I want to encourage you to 
look towards unconditional grants. And I want some assurance 
in that way then that when you talk about the new program 
benefitting smaller centres more, just what you meant by that, 
and how that fits in with what Alderman Ted Cholod, or 
Councillor Ted Cholod, the president of SUMA. I want to ask 
you: was that his advice to you that these grants be geared for 
smaller communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, Mr. Chairman, it's fair to say that 
we've probably been getting all sorts of advice from all kinds of 
people over the last couple of years while we found it necessary 
to curtail the activities of our capital grant program. 
 
But now that we have the capital grant dollars available to the 
communities, although I can appreciate the views of the 
member, I'm looking forward to hearing SUMA's views, 
because it will be they that will be spending the dollars. And 
once we sit down with SUMA and negotiate whatever they 
believe that they would like to see, and after we have finished 
our consultations, I can't honestly tonight tell you where we're 
going to end up on this situation of capital grants. 
 
I can tell you that we're going to end up in the area of $133 
million over the next six years — when you combine our 
budget and that of culture and recreation, $133 million given 
back to the property taxpayers of this province. And I think that 
that's a significant contribution. 
 
We will sit down with SUMA and we will consult with exactly 
what we're going to do with the capital program. And at this 
point in time, I can honestly tell you that  

there's nothing there yet until we sit down and see how they 
want to spend it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well why didn't you just say that then 
when the budget came down, that you don't have any ideas or 
you don't have any priorities yourself as opposed to saying that 
— and I quote you, sir — that you said that, "a lot of the 
programs will be geared to our smaller communities." What did 
you mean by that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know what the 
member's trying to get at. I have indicated a priority of mine. 
Don't say that I haven't; I have. Clearly this evening I have 
repeated that priority: sewer and water. And when I repeat that 
priority and publicly stand here and say that that is a priority as 
far as the minister is concerned, I believe that I'm simply 
reflecting SUMA's position. That's all I have heard from 
SUMA, from FCM, from various other municipalities — sewer 
and water, sewer and water, sewer and water, sewer and water. 
The taxpayers of this province for the last two years have heard 
nothing but sewer and water, sewer and water, sewer and water. 
So obviously if that's what I've been hearing, that's my priority. 
If that's a reflection indeed of what SUMA has been saying, 
then that will be their priority. And through the consultative 
process we will arrive at something that everybody will be 
happy with. 
 
And I can't see why you're sitting here with doom and gloom, 
knocking a $100 million capital program, or trying to knock it, 
when SUMA is delighted with it and the taxpayers of this 
province are obviously very pleased that our government has 
$100 million to put into capital projects in this province. Why 
would you sit there and be against it? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I haven't said that 
I'm against anything, and you'll excuse the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan for being something less than enthusiastic about 
expenditures this year being less than they were four or five 
years ago in this very important part of government. You'll 
excuse them and myself if our enthusiasm for what you're 
proposing this year is a little bit more contained than your own 
enthusiasm. 
 
I know that it's important for you to stand up on your soap-box 
and to beat your breast and to proclaim to the whole world what 
a wonderful job that it is that you're doing, and how wonderful 
you are for the people of Saskatchewan, even if the . . . What 
you say sometimes doesn't mirror what is actually taking place 
out there, as is so often the case with your government, where 
you spend extravagant amounts of money on advertising what it 
is that you say it is that you're doing, as opposed to actually 
doing something constructive for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But again I can appreciate what your priorities are, Mr. 
Minister, but I just want to say to you that you don't run a local 
government; you just simply run the Department of Urban 
Affairs. And why would you take the position that water and 
sewer is a priority of yours, even if it might be a priority for 
some other local municipalities or local governments? What 
happens to those municipalities for whom water and sewer is 
not a priority? Are they still going to get help under your 
project? Would you answer  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

685 
 

the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you know the member opposite, Mr. 
Chairman, is getting carried away again, and he says the 
expenditures are less than they were four years ago. That's not 
right. It's simply not right and the people aren't going to believe 
that. You know this year's budget shows a $30 million increase 
in Urban Affairs. They knew that there is a new $100 million 
capital program. 
 
(2015) 
 
You want to take that property improvement grant, something 
you know . . . backing your way into the future again. Go 
ahead. I mean, I'll put up the home improvement program any 
time against the property improvement grant, and we'll win on 
that one, and you know that. You know that as you talk to your 
constituents that they're delighted with the home improvement 
program, and there hasn't been a program like that in 
government for a long, long time as popular as the home 
program is and means an awful lot more than the property 
improvement grant. So don't try to fool the people of this 
province by saying that the expenditures in Urban Affairs are 
less. They're not. You have to compare one with the other, and 
you have to be honest and truthful about it. 
 
And I'm not saying that I'm wonderful, and I'm not standing 
here beating my chest. What I am saying is that this government 
has indeed listened to SUMA, as we always do, and we have 
put priorities on their requests, and we have recognized that 
they have a capital problem and that's why we put $133 million 
into the next six years for capital spending. And I can't repeat 
that enough. And SUMA even recognizes that. 
 
Now what you want to do is sit here with me tonight and 
negotiate. I'm not going to negotiate with you. I'll listen to your 
viewpoint, and I'll carry your viewpoint back to SUMA, but I'm 
not going to negotiate with you. I'm going to negotiate and 
consult with SUMA, and we'll see where we get to. And you'll 
never convince me, nor the taxpayers of this province, that 
water and sewer is not a priority of the majority of the 
communities in this province. And if there are any communities 
out there that have indeed fixed up all of their water and sewer 
infrastructure and will have to look at some other program, that 
will be recognized by SUMA and will be brought up in the 
consultative process to which I've always said that I'm going to 
be negotiating and discussing with them. 
 
But to give you a commitment tonight, I can't do that. I'll tell 
you as soon as we're done consulting with SUMA what it is, 
because I want to please them. And if SUMA and the 
government agree on that, I would like to hear you say that you 
would be pleased with that, rather than knock the $133 million, 
as you're doing tonight. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, Mr. Minister, you could 
have saved yourself a lot of trouble, if you'd choose your words 
more carefully. The next time you're asked for your opinion on 
something in the budget that instead of running off at the 
mouth, that you try to describe things accurately. 
 

And if your priority for funding and capital is the priority of 
local governments, why don't you just simply say that, instead 
of saying, well I want to put in water and sewer, and causing a 
lot of concern on the part of urban municipalities? You're going 
. . . Well you know, like, water and sewer is not our priority in 
our community this year, but the minister says here in the paper 
that his priority is water and sewer. Why don't you be straight 
with these communities, and why don't you just choose your 
words a little bit more carefully before you run off at the mouth 
the next time? 
 
I wonder, Mr. minister, if you might explain this comment that's 
also creating some concern and is causing some municipalities 
to ask questions. This comment of yours that, and I quote you: 
 

A lot of the program will be geared towards or to our 
smaller communities. The larger cities always have special 
projects, and they seem to come to the government for 
these major projects. And what we're looking at now is a 
matter of fairness. 
 

So you're saying here . . . Anyone who reads this would say that 
the program is going to be geared to smaller communities; that 
larger cities — and you haven't defined that — need not expect 
any assistance from this program, or if there is any assistance, 
that it will only be minor. 
 
Now that's the conclusion I would draw from reading your 
comments, and that's the conclusion that I'm sure that some 
other people are drawing. I wonder if you can clear that one up 
for us now, just how this program is going to work for smaller 
communities and for larger communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — First of all, I don't want to get off of that 
sewer and water. And I think that I'll refer to SUMA's press 
release, which I didn't write by the way — SUMA did. And if 
you would pay some attention to it, then perhaps your 
questioning tonight would be a little bit different. 
 

SUMA had taken the position that capital funding needs 
were a top priority, and this budget demonstrates that the 
provincial government recognizes these needs. 
 

That's a quote from the president of SUMA. And then, he goes 
on to say: 
 

We welcome the expressed intention to give a high priority 
to water and sewer projects, because our research indicates 
that over 200 of our members have experienced problems 
just with maintaining sewage lagoon facilities. And water 
supply or water quality problems during the last several 
years have left many urban municipalities with a severe 
thirst for further provincial assistance. 
 

Well you wonder where I get my priorities from. I get my 
priorities from SUMA. Where else should I get them from? 
They're the ones that are going to be spending these capital 
dollars. So I hope that you recognize that we will be negotiating 
with SUMA. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

686 
 

And as far then as it relates to the capital funding and the 
negotiations and the consultations, those will occur. And after 
they are done is when we will have the details of the program to 
announce. And with regard to the major cities and the degree of 
fairness, I have spoken with them, and I have consulted with 
them to some degree already, and I have told them that no 
longer can the major cities expect to come along to any 
government and say, look at, it's fine for us to participate in this 
and this and this, but we need an extra $25 million, for instance, 
for rail relocation. And it doesn't count. We'll just give it to you. 
 
We need an extra $4 million for an art gallery. We need an extra 
$15 million for an arena. We need an extra and an extra and an 
extra. I believe that in fairness to all the people of this province, 
all of these extras have to come into play in one fashion or 
another. Now just how we're going to arrive at that, I'm not in a 
position to tell you tonight because those consultations with 
SUMA haven't occurred. But I can tell you that over the years, 
at the SUMA conferences, they have indicated just that, that all 
communities have little special priorities that they put on 
various projects. And why is it that perhaps local small 
communities can't come in and ask or demand that they get 
special considerations, but yet it seems that the major cities 
can? 
 
Well we're going to have to put all that into fairness to all of the 
taxpayers of this province, and we're going to have to come to 
some agreement. SUMA, representing all but one major city — 
and hopefully that major city will see their way clear to join 
SUMA ranks again — will then be speaking for the 
municipalities so that we can sit down and have some 
meaningful consultations that will be representative of 100 per 
cent of the communities and we can get to where we're going on 
this kind of a consultative process. 
 
Again, I repeat that we're not about to just shove it down 
anybody's throat. We want to talk to them and see where we get 
to. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I just want to ask you: you're 
leaving the impression somehow that larger municipalities have 
access to extraordinary assistance from your government and 
therefore they shouldn't expect to get very much help from this 
capital program. Is that . . . Am I interpreting your remarks 
correctly, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It's not only our government that shows, or 
has shown special preference to some of the cities. Indeed, the 
NDP government showed the same preference to major cities. 
And I . . . Well I can name some if you wanted me to name 
some — special considerations for whatever reason. 
 
And as I mentioned at the outset of my remarks in this regard, I 
said that governments have faced this problem before for 
special requests and it seems that it never has been included in 
any part of any formula. The question is one of fairness. Even 
SUMA recognizes that, and they want to get fairness into the 
whole structure. 
 
So I'm leaving the impression clearly, clearly leaving the  

impression that I am going to sit down and consult with SUMA. 
And all of these things are going to be considered, and I think 
that they should be because SUMA believes that it should be. 
So if you're telling me that I'm doing it wrong, then why don't 
you go and tell SUMA that they're doing it wrong? I mean, who 
else are we going to consult with? The taxpayer, the local 
property owner is very concerned about these consultations, and 
they're very concerned with a matter of fairness to see that the 
money is distributed as equally as possible, particularly now 
where the sharing of dollars is very important, and where it 
should be fair. And that's what we're trying to get to, is some 
degree of fairness. And we will get there, because you get there 
by consultation, which is what I'm prepared to do, which is 
what will start occurring later in this week. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Then I'm just curious, Mr. Minister. 
This fairness of yours will not cut both ways. Is this a new 
policy of yours that's going to cut across the piece for 
municipalities, is it something that is only to be applied in the 
case of the capital program, or is it something that then will also 
prevail in other areas of provincial government assistance to 
municipalities? 
 
For example, you will know that cities such as Saskatoon, 
Regina, Moose Jaw, P.A., will incur their own expenditures for 
planning, but that smaller communities don't have any planning 
departments and don't incur the kind of expenditures that larger 
communities might for planning. 
 
Or assessment. Smaller communities will pay a small amount of 
money to the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) but Saskatoon and Regina are expected to keep a large 
staff of assessors on hand to do basically provincial assessment 
work, and that they incur a major expenditure in that way, 
which is not shared by other municipalities. 
 
Or public health expenditures, where most municipalities are 
assessed, I think, in the neighbourhood of 50 cents per capita to 
defray public health costs throughout Saskatchewan, whereas 
the costs in Regina and Saskatoon are what? Seven dollars per 
capita for the same level of services. 
 
Or the announcement by George Hill of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation that he was going to defray or cut in half the 
power bills for recreation centres in smaller communities, and I 
suppose excluding cities and larger communities. 
 
Is this something that you're going to be taking into account? 
Does this policy of favouring some as opposed to others, is this 
something that's going to be carried on across the piece now, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, it's typical that the NDP would have 
it backwards, Mr. Chairman. It's not a matter of favouring 
some; it's not a matter of favouring any at all. It's a matter of 
bringing fairness to the situation in exactly the same way that 
we have consulted, and will continue to consult with SUMA 
regarding revenue sharing and, for instance, the safety net, the 
safety net. That's not arbitrarily put in by the government, but 
the safety net on revenue sharing is carefully discussed with 
SUMA;  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

687 
 

options are discussed, were looked at, see where they want to 
get to on the safety net provisions that affect the communities, 
and we arrive at decisions that SUMA is pleased with. 
 
So on the same basis, we're going to get to the same thing with 
capital funding. It's a direct link between SUMA and the 
government, the municipalities and the government. And I'm 
simply saying that I am going to use the consultative process to 
the nth degree in this because it's desperate to them that we do 
that. 
 
Now if some other department chooses to use SUMA, or 
SARM, or their particular interest group to consult — as they 
do — then so be it. I'm only talking here about the process that I 
will be using regarding how we're going to spend $100 million 
— $100 million that you seem to sneeze at. SUMA doesn't; 
SUMA recognizes that it's a lot of money. They want to become 
involved in the process of how it's going to be spent and we're 
fully prepared to get involved with them very deeply to see, 
indeed, how that will be spent. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, just again, Mr. Minister, I 
encourage you not to get carried away by your own rhetoric as 
you so often seem to be in talking about the capital grant of 
$100 million. I'm sure that it's something that's welcomed by 
municipalities, but again, put it in some context of the history of 
urban funding in Saskatchewan and go back four years or five 
years. This is not some major improvement, or dramatic 
improvement in funding for urban municipalities. It certainly is 
an improvement of the abysmal situation that municipalities 
found themselves in in the last couple of years, thanks to the 
activities of your government. It certainly is some improvement 
on that, but it's no improvement over the situation four or five 
years ago. In fact, again, I would submit to you that urban 
affairs funding is less this year than it was four or five years 
ago. You somehow have the impression that because you put 
money into housing that somehow this is money for urban 
affairs and this is somehow an improvement in Saskatchewan. 
Well, that's your opinion, that's your interpretation, but it's not 
one that's widely shared by people. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another area — and let's see if 
you can be a little more objective and a little bit less rhetorical 
in your responses in this area of urban affairs — and that is to 
turn to the matter of store hours. I want to suggest to you, sir, 
that you're getting exactly what you wanted; that you wanted 
unrestricted shopping hours in Saskatchewan, and that's what 
you're getting, and if you haven't achieved 100 per cent of that 
yet, that you'll get it ultimately; that it was your government's 
policy to have Sunday shopping in Saskatchewan, that that's 
what you wanted and that's what you're going to get, and that's 
what's happening in some cases. 
 
I want to refer you to a article in the Prince Albert Herald, 
dated March 25, and the article is entitled "Blank (meaning the 
Premier) excited about foreign investment." I don't want to go 
into why the Premier's excited about things in Japan and Hong 
Kong, and about how they're really getting into North American 
fast foods like  

hamburgers and fried chicken, and how that's going to benefit 
us here. But I want . . . This was coverage of a speech that he 
made to the Prince Albert chamber of commerce. 
 
And I want to turn to, I guess, a peripheral matter, where the 
Premier is reported, is reported as saying . . . And I'll just read 
directly from the article here, if I might. And it says here in his 
opening remarks: 
 

The Premier praised city council for opening up store 
hours and commended the business community for 
supporting council. 
 

You will know that since that time, that Prince Albert council 
has taken a position that it doesn't want unrestricted store hours 
and that it wants closing on Sundays. But the important thing in 
this quote is that the Premier was taking the position that city 
council should be praised for opening up store hours. That tells 
me that the Premier supports Sunday opening, and by 
implication, that the government and you, sir, support Sunday 
opening. 
 
And if you wanted Sunday opening . . . If you wanted Sunday 
opening last year, I would submit that you didn't have the guts 
to deal with it yourselves; that you simply lacked the guts to 
pass the laws to make Sunday opening a reality in this province; 
that you lacked the guts to do so; that your Premier, that your 
Premier lacked the guts — lacked the guts to stand up and say, I 
support Sunday opening; I want the stores to be open in 
Saskatchewan on Sunday. And that you, as the Minister of 
Urban Affairs, lacked the guts to stand up and say, I want 
Sunday opening in all of the communities in Saskatchewan; that 
you lacked the guts to do so. 
 
Because the situation in Saskatchewan now, the situation in 
Saskatchewan now is for most of the communities that are 
implicated, and this primarily concerns the larger communities, 
that if they don't want, if they don't want Sunday opening, that 
they are under attack — under attack — in the courts. And the 
trend very much seems to be one of losing in the courts and 
moving towards Sunday opening. 
 
Mr. Minister, you knew that last year, that this was going to 
happen, that individual municipalities were going to be under 
attack and that the battle or the fight to retain Sunday, or one 
common pause day, was going to be a difficult one; that 
communities were going to lose to those interests that wanted 
Sunday opening. You knew that. I want to ask you now: why 
didn't you simply pass a law last year saying there was going to 
be Sunday opening in Saskatchewan? Because if that's what you 
wanted, this is what's going to happen, and this is what is 
beginning to happen in Saskatchewan now. Why didn't you 
simply pass a law and say, we wanted Sunday opening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, you've finally asked a 
question that makes sense, and I'm going to respond to that. 
 
But first, I still want to clear up the inaccuracy about the budget 
and your statement that Urban Affairs spending is reduced. And 
don't try to fool the people. If you want to  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

688 
 

compare the blue book values, I suppose it's fair to say that, 
because at one time, for instance, in the Department of Urban 
Affairs we found the senior heritage funding of $30 million . . . 
That doesn't appear in Urban Affairs any more but rather in 
another department. So that financing is still there; that 
financing is still in place. 
 
So let's get back to comparing the truth. And where I freely 
admitted that the property improvement grant was no longer, 
you can't say that we have denied access to funding to the 
property taxpayers. We haven't. We have implemented another 
program to take its place, a program that's much better, that's 
more effective, that stimulates our economy in the home 
improvement program. So you'll never be able to sell the 
argument that our budget is less funding. 
 
And you're absolutely right on the question of store hours. If we 
wanted a policy of wide-open shopping, we wouldn't have 
respected the autonomy of local government, and wouldn't have 
given them the option to regulate store hours if they so choose 
to do. 
 
Those municipalities . . . And most major cities who have 
chosen to regulate store hours can do so because we haven't 
imposed anything on them. And if they choose to regulate, 
that's their business. We respect local autonomy even if the 
Premier might differ. He didn't indicate that we were then going 
to withdraw and say, fine, it's wide open and you have no 
choice. We respect their local autonomy, and if at the local level 
they choose to regulate then let them do so. 
 
What we clearly said at the time was that we cannot find a piece 
of legislation that will control effectively the issue of Sunday 
shopping. And the proof is in the pudding now. Because if the 
city of Regina or if the city of Prince Albert can't even write a 
by-law that would affect their local municipality then how on 
earth was our government supposed to devise a piece of 
legislation that would apply equally to the whole province, that 
would cover my little home town of Cedoux equally with the 
city of Regina, when the city of Regina can't even control it 
within their own municipality, if they choose to control it? My 
firm belief and my argument was that the market-place would 
dictate that and save a lot of court battles. And it still will if 
they allow the free market-place to do that. Some communities 
are allowing that. We'll see if indeed they have a problem 
compared to those that choose to try to regulate and try to bring 
some fairness into it. We will see if the people in those 
communities are satisfied to deal with the issue on the way that 
they choose because there is a matter of plebiscite that still 
relates to the freedom of the local choice at the municipal level. 
 
So to say the people out there are not condemning this 
government for what we have done, but rather they sit back 
now and they say that was good, that was good. If the local 
community wants to regulate, choose to regulate at the local 
level, then so be it. Let them regulate. And we didn't impose 
anything on anybody. And again you've got your whole 
argument backwards. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, saying to 
municipalities that you can regulate for yourselves now in what 
you're going to do in terms of Sunday opening, that  

that somehow is an effective policy is proving to be not quite 
that. You know, I might as well give my car keys to my 
three-year-old son and say, drive yourself to day care. I know 
that he can't do that, and I would submit to you that the reality 
in Saskatchewan today is that where municipalities take the 
position that they don't want Sunday opening, that they are 
having great difficulties in achieving that, and that the courts 
are overturning them. 
 
And for you to say that municipalities have the freedom to 
regulate for themselves, or that the market-place is going to 
regulate — I think that's what I heard you say, that the 
market-place is going to regulate the question of Sunday store 
hours — begs the question of what your principles are, what 
your priorities are, and what it is that you and your Premier 
happen to believe insofar as Sunday opening is concerned. And 
if you really believe, if you really believe, Mr. Minister, if you 
really believe that Sunday opening is the way to go, then why 
don't you simply say that in the legislative way and save 
municipalities a lot of confusion, a lot of indecision, substantial 
court costs, and, I would say by definition, also provide some 
clear direction and leadership for the business community in 
Saskatchewan, many of whom are uncertain at this time as to 
what the future holds for them when it comes to shopping hours 
— they simply don't know. 
 
They do know that they're embroiled in a situation that will 
likely, ultimately be resolved in favour of unregulated store 
hours. And again I say to you, if that's what you want, why 
don't you simply take the power that you have, pass a law, and 
say this is the way it's going to be, and in the process save 
communities and people in those communities a great deal of 
confusion and legal cost, because I would submit to you again 
that's what you wanted. That's what the Premier of 
Saskatchewan wanted. He wanted unregulated store hours. His 
comments to the Prince Albert chamber of commerce in late 
March suggests that the Premier wants unregulated shopping 
hours in Saskatchewan, that the Premier wants the stores to be 
open on Sundays. And I would suggest to you that your actions 
as a government demonstrate that. 
 
The other thing that your actions demonstrate is that you have a 
lack of courage to stand by your own convictions and to say to 
the people of Saskatchewan: this is what we want; this is the 
law; this is how things are going to work. Again I would submit 
to you that your Premier and you demonstrated a clear lack of 
guts in the issue, that you wouldn't provide the political 
leadership, and that you're leaving it up to municipalities to 
accomplish what you were afraid to do through legislation, 
because your suggestion that municipalities have the choice to 
regulate is simply hollow. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Minister, you will know that by-laws are under attack in 
Saskatoon. They're under attack in Regina. They're under attack 
everywhere that they're being put forward, and if they're not 
under attack now they certainly will be. And for those 
communities where it's quiet, they're simply waiting to see what 
happens in other communities whose actions may affect them. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

689 
 

I would just refer you to an article in the Star-Phoenix of March 
11 where it says that: 
 

Unlike most . . . (Saskatchewan) cities, the store-hours 
issue is, for now, peaceful in Melfort. 
 
But that could change if Prince Albert . . . less than an 
hour's drive away, goes ahead and passes a bylaw allowing 
stores to open anytime during the week . . . 
 
“That's causing us some concern,” Mayor Carol Carson 
said in an interview. “Everything is peaceful now, as far as 
our merchants are concerned, but we may get dragged into 
(the Sunday shopping debate) if (Prince Albert) goes 
ahead. 
 

And this article goes on to talk about Moose Jaw, and says here 
that: 
 

Moose Jaw city council is also in a wait-and-see mode . . . 
Not only does his council have to wait and see what 
happens in Regina before passing their own store-hours 
regulations, but he has watched while more and more local 
stores are opening Sundays in order to compete among 
themselves. 
 

And the he in that instance is Mayor Stan Montgomery of 
Moose Jaw. 
 

Weyburn is also waiting to see what Regina is going to do, 
Mayor Ron Barber said. 
 
We are already being hurt some by the Superstore in 
Regina staying open Sundays. 
 
Yorkton, which is fighting for its own store-hours bylaw in 
court, is in the (unfortunate) position of being far enough 
away from competing markets that what other cities do 
won't have a great effect, Mayor Ed Magus said. 
 
. . . Melville is watching Yorkton, its deputy mayor, Tony 
Wihlidal said. 
 
“Until we see what Regina and Yorkton do, we aren't 
taking a stand . . . 
 
“If (opening Sundays) is the way all the other communities 
are going to do, we will have to go along,” (Melfort's) 
Mayor Carson concluded. “I just don't know who will be 
the winner in the end.” 
 

Mr. Minister, you were warned, warned loud and clear last year 
when you implemented the legislation which left it up to 
municipalities to fight the superstores and major corporate 
interests in the court. You were warned that if you went ahead 
and did that, that there would be a severe domino effect on the 
part of Saskatchewan communities, and that as one community 
went, others were sure to go, which, incidentally, was one of the 
reasons that Saskatchewan has had provincial legislation in 
these cases, because it recognized that there were provincial  

interests at play; that it wasn't simply a matter for the people in 
Regina to decide what the people in Weyburn might have to do 
— recognizing that businesses want to be able to compete fairly 
— and that it's not fair competition for one municipality to have 
the stores open on a Sunday but the next municipality to be 
closed. 
 
You knew that, Mr. Minister. You were warned about that. Yet 
you ignored — you ignored — the representations of small 
businesses throughout the province; you ignored the 
representations of working men and women through their 
unions in the province; you ignored the advice that we gave you 
from this side of the House; and I would venture to say you 
probably ignored the advice of some of your own members and 
ploughed ahead to give municipalities this hollow power of 
being able to regulate for themselves — being able to regulate 
for themselves — whether or not stores would be open on 
Sundays. 
 
Mr. Minister, the situation in Saskatchewan is a confused one, 
but the bottom line on that is that store hours are gradually 
tending towards Sunday opening. That is what you wanted. I 
want to ask you now — are you happy, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I hope that the officials of 
SUMA have just listened to my critic. What he has spoken is 
utterly amazing. I'm going to issue what I think is a quote, and 
Hansard will show this tomorrow, but I believe that he said, 
"take the power and pass a law." That's what he said. He, my 
critic suggesting in this Assembly that the government usurp the 
powers of local autonomy. I just can't believe what that member 
said, and SUMA will be very, very interested in that. 
 
It's not a matter of lacking courage at all. It's a matter of having 
a high degree of respect for SUMA and for local government. 
And he said it himself when Melfort, indeed, was concerned 
with what Prince Albert was going to do. And thank God for 
local autonomy and Prince Albert doing what they did, and now 
Melfort being pleased, whereas they wouldn't have had that 
opportunity. 
 
And for that member to compare local municipal government 
ability to govern to that of his three-year-old son driving a car. 
Is that all the respect you have for local government? That they 
can only govern at the local level to the same degree of ability 
that a three-year-old boy can drive a car; surely, you must have 
more respect than that — by-laws under attack. 
 
The municipalities know that when they issue their by-laws that 
they are responsible. You know that as my critic that 
municipalities are responsible for the by-laws that they issue. 
And we have always said that if our provincial legislation is 
found wanting we will defend our provincial legislation. Clearly 
we have taken a leadership role and respect . . . maybe the 
member isn't aware of this, and I'll bring it to your attention — 
a brief to cabinet by SUMA in 1981 to the NDP government of 
the day. They submitted a brief to cabinet on behalf of SUMA, 
October 17, l981, which stated on page 6: 
 

The matter of establishment of business hours in our own 
communities should be a responsibility  

  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

690 
 

of the local authority, and we believe our councils are 
prepared to accept that responsibility. 
 

Now you can't have it both ways. And if SUMA resolution — 
by resolution to cabinet — want that, why wouldn't we respect 
that? 
 
The matter of what the Premier said in Prince Albert, and I have 
an editorial here from the Prince Albert Daily Herald about the 
same time, at the end of February. You said that the Premier 
made his comments to the chamber of commerce in March. 
This is at the end of February — February 27. And I'll quote the 
last paragraph: 
 

Society will not return . . . (this is written, Mr. Chairman, 
by the editorial of the Prince Albert Herald). Society will 
not return to the way it was last year, let alone 10 or 20 
years ago. City council cannot win by trying to set a 
detailed all-encompassing by-law. There will be 
exceptions, and arguments for exceptions. The most logical 
way appears to be to have store hours regulations which 
are as unrestrictive as provincial government regulations 
allow, thus giving the business community the opportunity 
to set its own store hours. This puts the onus on the people 
who are most directly affected by the issues. There appears 
to be little to fear and less to lose by letting businesses 
decide what hours they are to open. 
 

It wasn't just our Premier saying it; editorials are saying it. If the 
business community don't want to open, there's nobody forcing 
them to open. 
 
If the people, Mr. Chairman, don't want to shop, they don't have 
to shop. And to say that it's going to affect the people going to 
church, unfortunately only 15 per cent of the population attends 
church regularly. You can't use that as an excuse. And there's all 
kinds of arguments along that line. 
 
The domino effect — and I've described this several times to 
my colleagues in the retail business sector from where I came. 
The retail business sector is the last little sector out there that 
had any degree of regulation left. So provincially we removed 
that and said locally, if you want to do that, we respect your 
autonomy; go ahead and regulate. 
 
There is no domino effect in Alberta, who has similar 
legislation and has had for seven or eight years; there is no 
domino effect in B.C., where they have similar legislation. And 
the Yorkton versus Melville versus Ituna, or the P.A. versus 
Melfort versus Tisdale, or the Regina versus Weyburn versus 
Yellow Grass or whatever, the domino effect. 
 
That domino effect is in place Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, 
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday has nothing to do with 
it — not a thing. And if the business community could open and 
wanted to open, let them. Why regulate? But if in a 
municipality you want to regulate, we respect your autonomy, 
we respect your citizens. We will allow you that right to 
regulate because that's what you asked for in 1981. But be 
aware of some of  

the problems that come with the responsibility. 
 
But in any event, if you choose to regulate by by-law and your 
by-law is found wanting, you can change your by-law like that, 
you know that. Provincial legislation, if it's found wanting, you 
can't change that rapidly. And while the arguments are going on 
in court and the discussions are going on in court, and all the 
rest of it, you have an unlevel playing field that nobody can 
regulate, that nobody can live with, that you never do know 
who's open, when, or why. At least if a community wants to 
establish their patterns, one way or the other . . . and I believe 
firmly, as I've said before when the argument was on, 
Saskatchewan will return to its traditions and to its values if you 
allow that to happen. But if you want to regulate, we respect 
your power, we respect your autonomy, go ahead and regulate. 
That's what they asked for in 1981, and that's what this 
government delivered. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — It's ironic, Mr. Chairman, that people of 
Saskatchewan would have thought at one time that the values 
that were important and dear to them would be the values that 
would be espoused, practised by their government. But that 
doesn't seem to be the case. 
 
This is a government that has turned its back on our society, on 
some of the values that people hold dear. It's turned its back on 
the small business community in Saskatchewan, a community 
that has been clear in it's opposition to the actions of the 
government insofar as opening up Sunday shopping throughout 
Saskatchewan. This is a segment of our society, and especially 
family-owned businesses, that have been hurt by the 
government and feel betrayed by the government. This is a 
segment of society that supported that government strongly in 
1982 because it believed that government to represent its 
values. They now feel betrayed because that government has 
not stood up for them; that government has turned its back on 
them. 
 
This is a government that refuses to recognize that there is a 
fabric in this society of which part was a common pause day, 
more particularly Sunday as being a common day of rest. And 
whether 15 per cent actively attend church, or whether it's 75 
per cent that attend church, wasn't the important thing. The fact 
is that here was a common day of rest, a common day of pause, 
which came from our roots and our traditions that people 
believed in, and you said that that's not the kind of values that 
we have; we don't understand that fabric; we don't want to be 
part of that. 
 
To you — to you — the only things that matter, the only values 
that matter are the commercial values. The almighty dollar is 
more important to you than any almighty God. It's the almighty 
dollar, sir, that I say to you is the thing that you hold most 
dearly and causes you to turn your back on Saskatchewan 
people when they don't share your vision of Saskatchewan, they 
don't share your love for commercial values. 
 
(2100) 
 
And it's ironic — it is ironic, Mr. Chairman — that we would 
have a Premier that so strongly espouses family values, so 
strongly espouses family values that he would  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

691 
 

take the one common pause day, the one common day of rest, 
and turn it into another day where the family can sort of jointly 
observe commercial values. 
 
Well I think the people of Saskatchewan expected more. I just 
simply want to ask you now for the record, Mr. Minister: given 
the confusion that exists in our communities; given the fact that 
wherever there seem to be by-laws; that these by-laws are under 
attack — will you be providing any assistance at all, that is to 
say, in the way of model by-laws which may have a greater 
degree or a greater chance of working; or legal assistance; or 
provide help with legal costs for municipalities that do not want 
Sunday openings? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, before my sanctimonious 
critic wipes that tear from his eye, I would like to point out a 
resolution that came from Regina city council when that 
member sat on the council, that very member that stands in his 
place and criticizes our actions. What a hypocritical situation 
he's caught in. 
 
Here's the resolution passed by that member when he was on 
Regina city council: 
 

That the city council of Regina request the Minister of 
Urban Affairs to amend section 167 of The Urban 
Municipality Act, so that municipalities may regulate the 
hours of business, both as to when shops may open and 
close. 
 

Now you, sir, were a part of that resolution, and you stand in 
this Assembly with that tear in your eye giving me the 
hog-wash dribble that you just gave me. Well we won't buy it, 
and neither will the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now the commercial value that you're 
espousing that this government is bringing up . . . Do you mean 
the commercial value like bingos on Sunday, like sports on 
Sunday, that kind of activity? 
 
I'll give you my little typical scenario as I've delivered before 
into some audiences, and maybe tonight there'll be some other 
people that might be interested in this thing. 
 
As I mentioned at the outset, Mr. Chairman, the matter of retail 
shopping hours is about the last small section that had any 
degree of provincial regulation attached to it. And rather than 
use our power, take our power and set a law, take it away from 
the municipalities the way the NDP proposes that we do — to 
heck with the municipalities — just do what you want; you're 
the God almighty powerful government; just take it away and 
do that. No, we don't believe in that. Sorry. We believe in their 
local autonomy. 
 
And I share this story again this evening about a typical family 
with a Sunday off, who decide to enjoy the day. They jump in 
their automobile and leave their home. The first thing they do is 
stop for gas. Well the gas station's open; it's the typical family's 
day off. So after they get their car filled, they drive along the 
highway and go to a  

provincial park. Well that's open because it's the family's day 
off. People are working there. They go to the local concession 
stand and they'll have a hot dog and some popcorn, whatever is 
served. And they're all working there, but that's fine because 
this is my typical family day off. Now they'll go for a swim in 
the pool. Well everybody's working around the pool; they have 
to; it's this typical family day off. 
 
They'll then check into their cabin at this provincial park. Well 
the maids and everybody, that's working, but that's fine because 
this is the typical family day off. Now they'll sit down and 
watch television. Well the TV stations, they're all working, but 
that's fine, this is my typical family day off. They tune in the 
football game on a Sunday. Well they're all working there, but 
that's fine, because it's my typical day off, and I guess the 
28,000 people at the game, they've got a typical day off. 
 
One of the football players, who also happens to be working 
that day, gets injured, ambulance goes out there. Well they're 
working because it's my day off. Now they take him to the 
hospital, and the hospital is fully staffed. Well that's fine, 
because it's my family's typical day off. How far do you want to 
carry this story? How far? 
 
So now what I am saying is: why regulate people's lives? Why 
regulate people's lives when you can leave it up to the discretion 
of local government? If they believe that that is best for their 
local community, then fine. We're not going to take their 
powers away. Let them have their powers and let them use their 
powers at the local level where they know what the local 
preference is. 
 
Respecting the by-laws, you should know better than that. We 
as government can't write up a by-law. Now we help them with 
their suggestions, and we can come up with some kind of a — 
perhaps a model by-law that they know that when they establish 
their by-law at the local level, they must have checked out by 
their own local lawyers or whoever advises them on their legal 
aspect, or the government would find itself responsible for 
every single, solitary by-law in this province. 
 
Then if that's what you're saying and if that's the NDP 
philosophy, I'm sorry, we don't deal that way. We believe in 
local autonomy. They should indeed have their own by-laws. 
They should have them checked out by their own legal 
protection. They should ensure that they will withstand the test. 
 
And as we have said before, and as I've said tonight, and as I 
repeat again now: if our provincial legislation is found wanting, 
you bet we'll step in and protect the provincial legislation. 
That's our job, and we will be there if they need it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, first, I want to say that if 
you have information that pertains to me, why don't you table it 
with this legislature so that all can take a look at it. 
 
Secondly, again I want to submit to you, sir, that your Premier, 
that your Premier wanted Sunday opening in Saskatchewan, 
that your cabinet and you wanted Sunday opening in 
Saskatchewan. What you wanted is what you're going to get. 
You didn't have the guts to stand up  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

692 
 

and say that. You're hiding behind some ruse of, we'll let the 
individual municipalities determine that, even if the powers and 
the ability of municipalities to deal with that question is far 
more limited than the powers that a provincial government 
might have. 
 
That is the reality, sir. You lacked the guts. I want to ask you: 
does your cowardice know no bounds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — You can insult me all you like. The fact is 
there. We respect local autonomy. I've read you the resolutions 
that have come forward over the years, one from SUMA, one 
from Regina. Another one that I haven't read, I guess, is Moose 
Jaw, 1986, that a motion passed by council 1986: 
 

That the province of Saskatchewan be urged to introduce 
legislation to transfer the responsibility of establishing 
store hours to local municipalities. 
 

I mean, they were asking for this stuff. So for you to say 
cowardice . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What year was that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Nineteen eighty-six was the year. April 1, 
1986 was when Moose Jaw city council passed that resolution. 
So it's all there. So when these requests come in . . . Moose Jaw 
requested one, city of Regina requested one. I read the city of 
Regina one in — city of Regina, September 14, 1981. I believe 
you were serving on council at the time. 
 
So that resolution was submitted to the government. And I 
might add that that was given to the NDP government of the 
day, at the time, so that, you know, to stand here and to 
contradict that, you've got a false argument going. And to say 
that it's cowardice, I mean, you can insult me all you like. 
 
All I'm doing is reading into the record the fact . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I'm reading . . . Mr. Chairman, the member will 
have every opportunity to argue with me in a minute. I can see 
that I've got his dander up a little bit. And I didn't mean . . . I 
didn't mean to upset the member from Regina Victoria, but 
obviously when I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You'll get your 
chance. Just let me explain. People are watching. You're 
behaving not very well. I mean, just let me give my response. 
They know I've got you in a box. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You were attempting to mislead people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I'm not misleading people at all, I've got 
you in a box. And the resolution . . . the resolution was passed, 
and that's it. So what can I tell you? And, Mr. Chairman, where 
they are asking for that autonomy, this government respects that 
autonomy and we delivered it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister didn't 
have any guts last year and he doesn't have any guts now. If he's 
got something pertaining to me, table it. He refuses to do so; the 
minister has no guts, he lacks respect, and especially in the eyes 
of the public of Saskatchewan. He has no more credibility, and 
on this  

issue he and the Premier have no credibility at all. 
 
Again, the Premier made it clear, he made it clear in his remarks 
to the Prince Albert chamber of commerce that he wanted 
Sunday shopping, that he favours Sunday shopping, that he 
prefers family not to observe traditional values but prefers them 
to observe, even more so, commercial values. That's what the 
Premier wants; that's what he's got, but they didn't have the guts 
to stand up and say so. 
 
Now the minister hauls out resolutions from 1981, but neglects 
or won't table that particular resolution with the Legislative 
Assembly. And I would simply say to the minister: if you have 
something with my name on it, table it with the Legislative 
Assembly so that everyone can see what it is that he's talking 
about. If he's going to stand in his place and insinuate things 
and try to mislead people about my activities, then that minister 
has no respect at all in this Legislative Assembly and none in 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to turn to another subject, the matter of the ward system. 
And I want to refresh the minister on something that he said last 
year. When he talked about . . . that an at-large system or, 
alternatively, his proposal for a hybrid system, that is half of the 
councillors elected at large and half elected in wards in our 
major cities, would find wide-spread acceptance — would find 
wide-spread acceptance. And I want to quote to the minister his 
comments from Hansard, May 31, 1988, and I want to quote 
the minister where, in response to questions from the member 
for Regina North West, he says, and I quote him from Hansard: 
 

Go back and talk to your people in Regina North West 
later on in this week and over the weekend, as I have done, 
and see what they anticipate with this. And you will find 
that they will accept this, and you will find that the NDP 
will back off of this, and that this will not be debated too 
much once the Bill is introduced. And they will recognize 
the fairness of this system, and this system will pass, and it 
will be accepted. 
 

Those are your words, Mr. Minister. Those are not my words, 
those are your words. Hansard, May 31, 1988, page 1730. 
 
Now in light of the fact that in one city — talking about 
widespread acceptance — in light of the fact that when a 
question was put to the voters in Regina, and the question 
being: are you in favour of the city of Regina being divided into 
10 wards as opposed to five wards — which is your idea — or 
at-large? When in response to that question, 74 per cent, or 
47,657 said yes, we want the city to be divided into 10 wards, 
as opposed to some 26 per cent that said no. And I assume that 
they preferred your alternative. 
 
But in light of the fact that 74 per cent said that they prefer 10 
wards, as opposed to your goofy idea of five wards and the 
other half of council elected at-large — and that is opposed to 
an at-large system — shouldn't you offer your resignation? Or 
is it common for PC cabinet ministers to be that out of touch in 
Saskatchewan? Could you answer  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

693 
 

that. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well we had an interesting debate on this 
whole subject of the ward system a year ago and, as always, the 
NDP is living in the past. I guess the two main questions that I 
got out of that was, did it pass? Well certainly it passed. So it 
must have been accepted because that's how the election 
occurred was at large. We gave the cities the option of a hybrid; 
they turned it down; they decided to go at large; the elections 
were at large - 
_ that's history. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I just ask you, Mr. Minister: did 
any of the cities in Saskatchewan go with your particular goofy 
proposal of electing half at large and half through a ward 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, no, none of the cities that 
were afforded the choice of going either/or went for the hybrid, 
they all went for the at large. So, you know, what can I say. I 
guess I must have convinced them about the wisdom of that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, in light of the lack 
of any uptake on your goofy proposal, do you still see your 
goofy proposal as having some merit for the cities of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I assume that they're going to be staying at 
large. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Could I then ask you, Mr. Minister — 
and framing this in the context of estimates — do you think that 
any of your departmental activities in the coming year might be 
directed towards rewriting the Urban Affairs legislation so as to 
delete that particular goofy proposal that no one seems to be too 
interested in, and perhaps replacing it with an alternative for 
municipalities if they so wish to have all of their election done 
through the ward system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I really can't say that I am thrilled with the 
member's choice of words, but we'll let the people that are 
listening to his choice of words determine whether he is 
showing any respect for anything at all, at this point in time. 
 
But I can tell you that no, our government, our government has 
no intention of changing that part. We will watch with interest 
to see if indeed the at-large system will provide the efficiencies 
to local government that we are hoping that it will, and, you 
know, we can only assume that it will do that. Again the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount is holding in his chair 
something that he's not entitled to hold, I suppose. 
 
But I would point out that the ballot — and I suppose my critic 
will probably display it next, although I would point out that I 
don't believe exhibits are in order. But for your information, and 
my critic should be aware of it, the choosing of the ballot and 
the way it's going to be determined and printed and the size of 
it, is done at the local level. So you can display it if you like. 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, you talked about 
respect, and where I come from you've got to earn respect. And 
if you're not getting any respect, Mr. Minister, in the House 
tonight, it is because you didn't really earn it, did you? You 
didn't really earn it. 
 
I mean, here you come with your own goofy idea about how 
people in our larger cities should elect, should elect their 
councillors. You had your own goofy idea about how they 
should do that. No one went with your goofy idea. No one liked 
your goofy idea. The people in at least one case strongly, 
strongly said, we don't want any part of your idea. And now you 
talk about respect. 
 
Respect, Mr. Minister, would be saying to those municipalities, 
I made a mistake; I was wrong; I'm prepared to amend the 
legislation so as to give you the choice of what it is that you 
want to do. That would be respect. That would be respect, Mr. 
Minister. Maybe then you'd get some respect. But again, you've 
got to earn respect, and you haven't earned it in as far as the 
people in our larger cities are concerned. 
 
How could they possibly respect you? You're the minister that's 
responsible for a ballot — and I have the ballot here, or a copy 
of the ballot, from Saskatoon. This ballot nearly goes across 
two desks in this Legislative Assembly. And I'm not sure, I'm 
not sure how many names are on this list, but someone said to 
me that there are 70 names on this list. So the people of 
Saskatoon had to go and choose from a list of 70 names; 70 
names they had to choose from in order to get their council. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Members aren't to use displays in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I'm prepared to table this 
with the Legislative Assembly if you'll allow me to read from it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member can certainly read from it, but 
can't hold it up to the camera. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, my eyesight's pretty good with 
these glasses, Mr. Chairman, but it's not that good, so I've just 
got to hold it up a little bit in order to read what's on here. But I 
think the point has been made, the point has been made, Mr. 
Chairman, that the choice that was presented to the voters in our 
larger cities was a confusing one; that the options that were 
available to our councils were simply not acceptable; that the 
idea that was being put forward most strongly, most strongly by 
the minister himself, is simply one of the goofiest ideas that 
anybody had ever heard. And now the minister has the nerve to 
stand in this House and say, well how come I don't get any 
respect? 
 
Well here he is, the Rodney Dangerfield of Saskatchewan 
politics — he don't get no respect. Well again, Mr. Chairman, in 
my books you've got to earn respect. You've got to work hard to 
get respect. And if you don't work hard at it, and if you're not in 
touch with what people want or are saying or are wanting to do, 
then it should not be surprising that you don't get any respect. 
 
I wanted to turn to another quote of yours from this debate  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

694 
 

that took place last year, Mr. Minister, on the ward system. And 
you denied that there was any political motive behind what you 
were doing; that you were motivated by what you call the 
taxpayer; that you denied that your PC government had any 
political motive for what it was doing; and that the people of 
Saskatchewan knew that, that they knew that if you were 
politically motivated they would tell you. 
 
In fact you responded, and I quote from Hansard; I quote you 
directly. You said, in response to something that the member 
from Regina North was asking you about, you said: 
 

So when your member from Regina North stands up and 
says that we're doing this for political gain . . . you know 
the electors are intelligent, they're sophisticated people that 
pay taxes. You know, if there would be some big political 
motive behind this, if that's what you're suggesting, then 
obviously a Tory that would be attempting to run on city 
council wouldn't have a chance. 
 

Is that what happened to Gordon Dirks, Mr. Minister, he didn't 
have a chance because there was a political motive behind what 
you were doing? Can you answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Sure I can answer that. He didn't run as an 
alderman in a ward; he ran as the mayor. So you know, let's get 
the thing straightened out here. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, he talks about respect. Well let me 
tell you about respect. Mr. Chairman, over the years I've stood 
in my chair here and taken all kinds of abuse and ridicule from 
the members opposite about my size. Now that's fine. You 
know, the fact that I'm a short person, that's what the good Lord 
blessed me with, but the part that counts is from the ears up. I 
think that I'm a lot taller that a lot of the members opposite are 
from the ears up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — But you know, Mr. Chairman, recently in 
this very Assembly there was a remark made about one of the 
members of the opposition. And they took exception to it and 
called a point of order because they were injured as a result of 
this thing. And our member had to apologize. Well I'm bigger 
than that. You people can ridicule my size all you like and I'll 
put up with it, because the more ridicule that you get that way 
to me, or give to me that way, the more respect that I get from 
the people out in the real world. And the fact that I'm short 
doesn't bother me one bit. 
 
But your leader . . . Why don't you pay attention to what your 
leader says? Your leader, in the original argument, way back in 
the ’70s, indicated that the ward system had no politics in it and 
he hoped that he kept out of it. And let's read the rest of 
Hansard, where I quoted your leader, the member from 
Riversdale, with that exact same thing. And politics had nothing 
to do with it. And I quoted, I believe it was the member from 
Westmount, when we said that it was the responsibility of the 
government to provide local government with what they believe 
to be the best democratic government and the best form of  

operation that we could give to a municipal government. We 
happen to believe that that's the at-large system. 
 
When you get into the length of the ballot, and you are trying to 
discredit me, why don't you go and discredit the council of the 
city of Saskatoon? We changed the regulation, and clearly the 
length of the ballot was determined by the officials, or the 
Saskatoon city council. So if you want to call anybody foolish 
or foolhardy over that, then you know, direct that at the city of 
Saskatoon council. They're the ones that came up with the 
length of that ballot. 
 
The other interesting thing, in a democratic situation, sure there 
were 25 more people in Saskatoon decided to run in the 
election, and that's good. What's wrong with that? What's wrong 
with encouraging more activity? So they ended up with a total 
of 70 candidates, and the city of Saskatoon decided to go into a 
lengthy ballot. 
 
But let's talk for a moment about Prince Albert where they went 
with the at-large system — and don't throw up your hands in 
such a sanctimonious thing — the city of Prince Albert, where 
there was a decrease of seven candidates in the same at-large 
type of an election. 
 
And let's talk now about imposition, and let's get to the crux of 
the matter. You brought up the plebiscite. In 1970 there was a 
plebiscite in the city of Regina that was turned down by the 
people. This is in advance of the imposition of the NDP. In 
1970 the city of Regina said no, we don't want the ward system. 
In 1973 the NDP government said, we don't care if you want it 
or not; you're getting it, period. And they put that in, but that 
was fair. Then Saskatoon, in 1976, three years afterwards, still 
didn't support the ward system and had a plebiscite, and did the 
NDP government do anything about it? Not a thing; they left 
the ward system in, going against the wishes of both of those 
cities. 
 
Now at the time that the plebiscite was held here in 1976, it was 
at the time that the election at-large was going on. How on earth 
could you have changed it in the middle of the election the 
same day that people were voting? Come on, get with it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, there you go living 
back in the ’70s again. I just might say, Mr. Minister, that 
whatever the NDP government did in this province, they 
answered to the public for that in 1982, and the NDP lost, 
probably in no part due to your persuasiveness with the voters 
telling them that a PC government doesn't believe in that kind 
of direction from the provincial government and that a PC 
government would have different standards. 
 
Now I want to ask you, in relation to your standards, Mr. 
Minister, in terms of what you believe is important, not in 
something that the NDP might have done back in the 1970s, 
and something that an NDP government answered to the public 
for in 1982, I want to ask you: what are your standards in this 
case? Are they something that you believe in in terms of local 
choice, in terms of local decision making, or is your point of 
departure, is your reference point what the NDP did prior to 
1982, in the 1970s? By which, by which measure do you judge  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

695 
 

yourselves? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I will be measured by the 
people of this province when my time comes, and I will go to 
the polls when the Premier calls the next election. And if you 
want to make the ward system an issue, so be it. And if you 
want to make store hours an issue, so be it. 
 
And don't worry about the re-election of this government, and I 
pointed it out earlier, but the Leader of the Opposition . . . And I 
tell you, sir, don't worry about the re-election of this side. 
You've got a lot of credibility to worry about on your side and 
the first thing that you're going to have do is pull your caucus 
together. And you can't go, as you did before, publicly saying 
that you have this unity in your caucus. You better get your 
caucus together and get some unity if you ever hope to form 
government, because the way you're going right now . . . I don't 
know, 1982 could be back again, and you might be down to 
four or five; you might be down to four or five over there. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you said that you 
shouldn't be measured in terms of what the NDP might have 
done in the '70s and that you shouldn't be measured in any other 
way. I would simply suggest to you that on this particular issue 
that you don't measure up at all; that the people of Regina spoke 
very clearly about their preference in this matter; that that 
feeling was also strong in the city of Saskatoon, and it was also 
strong in the city of Prince Albert, and ran contrary to measures 
that people in Moose Jaw were undertaking in order to get a 
ward system established. 
 
I guess the only question I would have on this one — I 
recognize your own intransigence in this matter, that your 
interest and the interest of your government was simply to ram 
your own goofy ideas down the throats of councils in 
Saskatchewan and ram your own goofy ideas down the throats 
of property taxpayers in our larger cities, just ram it down their 
throats without any regard for what they might like. 
 
I want to ask you . . . You're so caught up in measuring up to 
what the NDP did, you're so caught up in measuring up to what 
the NDP did in the 1970s — because every time we ask you 
about something, you refer back to what the Leader of the 
Opposition might have been saying many years ago — and 
caught up in in what the actions of an NDP might have been 
many years ago. Let me just ask you one question in this vein: 
will you do what the NDP did then, and that is at least give 
municipalities the power, give them the power to hold a 
plebiscite within three years of this particular election in 1988 
and put the question to their voters in terms of what their 
preference is — do they still want to go with the at-large 
system, do they want to go with a ward system? 
 
Because you will know, sir, you will know that one of the 
provisions of the legislation in 1970 that you say was forced 
down the throats of municipalities, that there was a provision 
for municipalities to ask the taxpayers: do you want to retain 
this system now after three years of  

reflection? That was one of the options that was available to 
urban municipalities. 
 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, are you going to give that 
opportunity to the people in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
Prince Albert — to, in a couple of years time, ask the voters at 
that time if they want to have the at-large system; if they want 
to go with the hybrid proposal that you've been promoting; or if 
they want to return to a ward system exclusively — to ask them 
in two years time whether . . . to give them that opportunity, an 
opportunity that was at least afforded to municipalities in the 
mid-70s. Are you going to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well the binding referendum wasn't three 
years, it was four years after two elections, so let's clarify that. 
 
And I think that I have publicly said before, and I say again, 
that certainly if they want to have a referendum again at some 
point in the future for us to look at, we'd be prepared to look at 
that. 
 
As far as changing the legislation prior to the next set of 
municipal elections, no, we don't intend on doing that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well then, people of Regina, people of 
Regina and Saskatoon and P.A. and Moose Jaw are probably 
asking themselves, why is this minister so stubborn? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, supposedly in politics you 
can never make mistakes. But I tell you, Mr. Minister, that if 
you've made a mistake — and you did in this case — if you 
make a mistake, and you own up and you be square with the 
people of these cities, square with them and say, well you 
know, obviously I was wrong, you didn't want my goofy idea, 
you didn't want my proposal, you want to retain the ward 
system — and that's what the vote in the fall said — I want to 
say that I made a mistake, and I'm going to provide an 
opportunity for you to return to the ward system if that's what 
you want, if that's your priority, and you can do that. My guess 
is that you would earn a lot of respect out there, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That the people of the cities and of 
Saskatchewan would say, well at least there's one minister 
who's strong and honest, willing to stand up and admit a 
mistake, willing to say that he was wrong, and willing to 
address the situation. Just for once, Mr. Minister, will you admit 
that you have made a real big mistake in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don't believe that I've made a mistake, 
Mr. Chairman, and I've said it earlier tonight, and I'll repeat it 
again right now. The voters of Regina South will have every 
opportunity to deal with me when the next election is called and 
if . . . I understand that your member from Regina Lakeview 
could be my next competitor; I welcome the challenge, and if 
she wants to make the ward system the issue of the day for 
Regina South, I'd be pleased to make that the issue. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

696 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you can't stand up 
and admit your mistakes, then certainly I don't think you leave 
us any choice than to point out to the people in the cities and to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and I guess in the next election, 
point out to the people of Regina South that you made a major 
mistake; that you wanted something; that you forced something 
down their throats that they you didn't want. 
 
We'll have to point this out to them. And I would say that in the 
case of Regina South, that we'll have to point out a number of 
other mistakes that you've made as a government, while we're 
on mistakes. We will have to point out to them that the dismal 
economy in the city of Regina is in large part due to the actions 
of your government and due to you as a member of that cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That we will have to point out to the 
people of Regina South, the people of Regina and the people of 
Saskatchewan that unemployment rates are unacceptably high 
because of the actions of your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That we will have to point out to the 
people of Regina South and the people of Saskatchewan that 
they're paying through the nose as never before for their taxes 
because of your actions and the actions of your government. 
 
Yes, sir, we'll certainly be telling the people of Regina South 
and the people of Saskatchewan about your mistakes, Mr. 
Minister; not just your mistake in the ward system, something 
that people generally perceive to be a mistake — in fact, 74 per 
cent of the people of Regina said that it was a mistake. Many 
others say that your ideas, your particular ideas are just 
downright goofy in terms of what you're trying to promote. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to leave the question of the ward system. 
It's clear that in the ward system that you will not be moved by 
reason; that you will not be swayed by logic; that you will not 
listen to the reasonable suggestions of the opposition; that you 
will not admit your mistakes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Now we have the comments of the member from Regina 
Wascana. 
 
And I just want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I stand by my 
remarks of some weeks ago where I suggested to the Premier 
that the very best thing that he could be doing in terms of urban 
affairs these days was to fire the present member from Regina 
South and to replace him, given the limited opportunities that he 
has for replacement, to replace him with the member from 
Regina Wascana because . . . And it's not saying much, it's not 
saying much, but the member from Regina Wascana has twice 
as much on the ball as the member from Regina South. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And that the Premier would be  

doing himself a big favour and would be doing his government 
a big favour by getting rid of the current member from Regina 
South, because it's obvious that the current member from 
Regina South is too caught up, is too caught up in the situation 
in the city of Regina, is too caught up in the fights inside the 
city of Regina to be able to stand back and look objectively at 
the situation and say things like, you know, the decision that we 
made with respect to the ward system really wasn't a good one. 
 
Well a new minister would have some elbow room and would 
have some leeway to make changes, changes that obviously you 
can't make because you're too caught up in what it is that you've 
done in the past and you can't admit any mistakes. And 
certainly someone like the member from Regina Wascana who, 
you know, I think it's generally conceded is a co-operative 
person, has at least twice as much on the ball as you do, would 
have some leeway to correct the mistakes that you've made. 
 
I want to turn to the question on the fuel tax, Mr. Chairman. I 
want to turn to the question on the fuel tax and point out that 
prior to 1982, when there was a gas on fuel in Saskatchewan, 
that there were certain exemptions. Farmers, I believe, had an 
exemption prior to 1982. 
 
One of the other exemptions that existed prior to 1982 was for 
urban transit systems. And it might be said that transit systems 
had an advantage over those who drove individual vehicles. 
After 1982, when your government did away with the fuel tax, 
obviously there was no advantage for the transit system, nor 
was there any advantage for the individual motorist who drove 
their own car. 
 
But now you've brought back the fuel tax, something that you 
said you'd never do. But then, I guess, that goes to show you 
can't believe you guys. You can't believe that government. But 
anyway, now that you've brought back the gas tax, you've also 
brought back a system of rebates, rebates which go to individual 
motorists but do not extend, do not extend to urban transit 
systems. Now it seems to me that there is an advantage for the 
individual motorist and a disadvantage, relatively, for urban 
transit systems. 
 
And what we seem to have done is to come 180 degrees, where 
government policy one time said, we support, encourage urban 
transit and are prepared to give it some advantages vis-a-vis the 
individual motorists. You are now saying, we think that it's 
more important for people to drive their cars, less important for 
them to take transit; that our priority is not transit; that we really 
do not place any strong value on transit. Am I reading you 
correctly, Mr. Minister, that the budget and the estimates reflect 
something that we saw last year, that urban transit simply has 
no priority as far as your government is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the matter 
of municipal transit assistance does have priority. In this year's 
budget we have paid over $1.8 million for municipal transit 
assistance, and this transit assistance is operating assistance to 
the transit systems in some communities. And so I guess it all 
boils down again to a matter of fairness because this $1.8 
million goes to Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, 
Yorkton,  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

697 
 

Swift Current, North Battleford, Battleford, and Creighton, and 
stops there. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now we haven't tinkered with this; we've left this in place, so 
that to say that we don't give municipalities any transit 
assistance is not right — we do. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Chairman, I've been trying to get my 
hands on a report that was given to the city of Regina, but never 
made public, regarding the transit system and the inefficiency 
of that operation. And perhaps if the gas tax gets high enough, 
we might find some efficiencies starting to be looked at by the 
various transit systems as far as it relates to their expenditures 
on fuel. 
 
There is a rebate in place, as we all know, that applies to 
individuals, and individuals only. And our Minister of Finance 
has been very clear on that so that we as individuals get a rebate 
on the gas tax and don't pay a gas tax as an individual citizen. 
We as government knowingly has drawn the line there and 
everybody clearly understands that. And if you don't draw the 
line somewhere, then where do you draw the line? So that as a 
result, the fuel tax is there; municipalities are aware of it; there 
is $1.8 million in the budget to help them offset the expenditure 
of the fuel tax. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, you've certainly drawn a line, Mr. 
Minister, and I'm trying to follow you down the line, but I'm 
having some problems here. 
 
I know that you're still providing assistance for transit. I know 
that, because that's in the budget. What I was trying to point out 
to you is that your government doesn't seem to have any priority 
in so far as urban transit is concerned, that you see no value 
whatsoever, or little value — or don't place as high a priority on 
urban transit as other governments might have done some other 
day; that you don't believe that there's any real place for transit. 
 
I just want to ask you, Mr. Minister: like, don't you think that 
transit has a role to play; that when it comes to our environment 
and conserving energy and all those kinds of things, that there's 
some role for transit here and especially in our cities? Do you 
believe that, Mr. Minister, or do you believe that that's not 
important? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I'm sorry; I missed the question. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well what I asked you: environmental 
considerations have . . . play any part or any role for you in 
determining to what extent you should priorize transit? You 
know, recognizing that transit is an energy-efficient way to 
transport people around. 
 
I think, in the case of Regina alone, some nine million trips are 
made on the transit each year, and it's probably a comparable or 
a higher number in Saskatoon. This means that a lot of people 
are getting on a vehicle with other people, as opposed to driving 
in their own car, therefore less energy is expended. I mean, 
that's one of the theories behind why governments promote 
transit usage and why governments tend to subsidize transit in 
our larger  

centres. Do you continue to put a high priority on that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — If you are referring to the Regina Transit 
System, I think that all I could do, Mr. Chairman, is point out to 
the people of Regina, who, like me, who . . . Like tonight on my 
way home I will pass three buses all going down a street, 
regularly empty — not a passenger. So I would like and 
encourage the city of Regina to make their transit system report 
public, about the efficiencies of it. I know that that report exists; 
I know it was discussed in their committee, but they will not 
make that report public. 
 
Now the people of Regina see these buses running around 
empty, knowing full well that it's subsidized by all the taxpayers 
of this city. When there is a report, what are they hiding? Why 
won't they make that report public? And I suppose once we get 
that report, rightly or wrongly, that would be very interesting 
for us to have a look at. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, for every bus that's being 
driven around with simply a driver in it, there's got to be at least 
20, 25, 30, maybe 100 vehicles driving around with just one 
driver in it. So, like . . . I guess what I'm getting at is that one of 
the reasons that you have urban transit is because it becomes 
. . . it's one way that society has of conserving some energy. It's 
also, in some ways, a cost savings for communities because, I 
mean, if you took those 9 million trips and translated it into 
additional vehicles, you'd have to upgrade the road capacity, 
and there goes your urban assistance and, you know, all those 
things. 
 
So you . . . I mean, government would have to provide grants to 
. . . because let's face it, motorists are subsidized. Communities 
and governments pay for roads and people drive on it and those 
things are subsidized. So you've got to pick it up somewhere, 
and it's felt that this is a more efficient way, and it's certainly a 
more energy-efficient way to transport people. Do you no 
longer believe this, or have you just got some axe to grind again 
with the city of Regina? Is that what you're getting at? You got 
an axe to grind again with the city of Regina council, Mr. 
Minister? Is that your problem in urban assistance and urban 
transit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think I was very clear at the beginning of 
these estimates tonight that I am the Minister of Urban Affairs 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well you certainly are, and I think 
you're also the minister that's responsible for axes to grind with 
Regina city council, judging from your remarks. But, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Minister, I would encourage you to start being 
realistic about urban transit. I would encourage you to put your 
political axes to grind aside, and this is not just a matter that 
pertains to the city of Regina, with whom you have an axe to 
grind, but also pertains, for example, to Saskatoon, a city that's 
widely recognized for having an efficient, workable transit 
system. 
 
And they clearly concede, they clearly concede that things like 
increasing the fuel tax, which in the case of Saskatoon probably 
comes to, this year, an additional $200,000, as it does for 
Regina; that these factors plus your freezing of funding for 
urban transit system simply  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

 

698 
 

means that it becomes far more difficult for transit systems to 
do what they're intended to, and that is to transport large 
numbers of people at a reasonable cost, and to provide the kind 
of service configurations that make sense; that that is becoming 
increasingly harder for our transit managers and councils in 
those cities that have transit systems to be able to do that. 
 
And that you need to recognize that there is a role for the 
province to play if it is at all concerned and interested in 
promoting transit usage; that you cannot close your eyes; that 
you cannot simply listen to the yahoo element in your caucus, 
listen to the yahoo element in your caucus and cabinet, who 
may not have transit systems in their own communities, and 
say, well, why should we support transit systems? 
 
But recognize that this is a matter of a public conveyance 
system transporting large numbers of people and especially, in 
this case, transporting the poor, transporting the elderly, 
transporting the students, transporting thousands of people in 
our cities, and that this is a necessary public service that needs 
to be maintained, needs to be given some priority, something 
that your government is simply not doing any more. You're 
refusing to recognize that. You've got some kind of political axe 
to grind with city council. 
 
And again I say to you, can't you transcend your own personal, 
petty, political fights with Regina city council and deal 
objectively with the situation; deal realistically with something 
that is perceived to be a need in Saskatchewan communities? 
And I would simply ask you: can you do that, Mr. Minister? 
Can you be realistic about transit? Just simply put aside your 
own fight with Regina and look at transit systems like 
Saskatoon who are struggling, struggling in the face of your 
actions. Can you transcend your own political, petty 
disagreements with Regina city council and square up to the 
problems that urban transit managers are facing in 
Saskatchewan; can you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I don't hear any of my voters in 
Regina saying that I've got petty arguments going with Regina 
city council, and if you feel that I have, I guess it's a figment of 
your imagination and you're entitled to feel that. It's fair to say 
some of my colleagues might have made some comments about 
the city of Regina elected officials, but I haven't. And so I think 
that you're off on an area that you're trying to do something, and 
you're wrong. 
 
Now if you think that $1.8 million is a paltry amount, then I 
guess that's what you're saying — $1.8 million, by and large 
going mainly to the larger cities of Regina and Saskatoon — if 
$1.8 million is nothing, well I guess we've got a disagreement; 
$1.8 million is a lot of money, an awful lot of money. The cities 
of Regina and Saskatoon by far are enjoying most of that 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, a question to the minister under vote 24 in 
regards to the northern municipal budget. I noticed that the 
budget was cut from 507,400 to $444,900 and that there is a 
loss of two positions. Could the minister tell me what positions 
those were, and which people those were? 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I understand the question to 
be regarding the Northern Municipal Services and two 
person-years? I've been advised that one was transferred to 
Municipal Advisory Services here in Regina, because that was a 
position that had served its purpose and its function had been 
done with, and the other one was transferred to Parks and 
Renewable Resources in the North. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Hudson Cowley was transferred to Regina and 
Jonas Bird was transferred to Parks in La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, Jonas Bird has spent many, many 
years of service in the municipal department. He was the only 
Cree-speaking person in the department who was able to 
explain the municipal services issue right at the local level, and 
also to get feedback from people in regards to all the municipal 
issues that were going on at the community level. 
 
When I was first speaking here at the legislature, Mr. Minister, 
one of the times I raised the issue . . .  
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
When I did that, the first minister who spoke against me that 
very next day was yourself, Mr. Minister. You complained 
about me, saying something about your seat, or whatever. And 
how could you know what I was talking about if I spoke in 
Cree? 
 
(2200) 
 
I thought at that time that you were very concerned that I even 
spoke Cree in the legislature. Now we see, as a minister, once 
you get into being a minister in regards to the North, a 
Cree-speaking person who has spent a tremendous amount of 
time in servicing the people in the North, and explaining to 
them exactly what was going on in the municipal services, is a 
guy that gets knocked off by yourself as a minister. What do 
you say about that, minister? Do you feel that a person in the 
capacity of the North, especially when you recognize that Cree 
is a main language in the North, that you should have a person 
with Cree language capacity in that situation? And do you feel 
that what you did was a correct one, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise, 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 
 
 


