


















































May 24, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 24, 1989 
 

1319 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Acting Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7), I have examined the 
following petitions and have found them to be in order: 
 

Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 
urge the provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 

 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As chairperson of the 
Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills, I present the 
seventh report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Residential Services Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — I wish to report Bill No. 4, An Act to amend 
The Residential Services Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No 4 
now be read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Line Fence Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 
Line Fence Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move the said Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, as chairperson of the 
Non-controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 10, 
An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 14 — An Act respecting Consequential 
Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment 
of The Municipal Board Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, as chairperson of the 
Non-controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 14, 
An Act respecting Consequential Amendments to certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Municipal Board Act, as 
being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The 
Queen’s Bench Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second 
reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 
said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with considerable pleasure that I introduce today 50 students 
from grade 2 and 3 classes at the Holy Rosary School. They’re 
going to be with us today for question period, and then I look 
forward to meeting with them 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1320 
 

afterwards and talking to them. 
 
I was informed, Mr. Speaker, by the staff of your office, that 
they would be accompanied by Laurel Hollick. It’s apparent 
that, as one would expect, such a large group has at least two 
additional adults with them. I don’t know the names. I know, 
however, members will want to give all of them a warm 
welcome, and I’ll meet them afterwards. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 31 grade 12 students from Albert E. Peacock 
Collegiate in Moose Jaw who are visiting with us today. They 
are accompanied by their instructors, Gary Loutzenhiser and 
Marv Dyck. They’ve been on a tour of the building, and 
following question period I’ll be meeting with them for pictures 
and refreshments and a visit. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of the 
Assembly, to join with me in showing welcome to these 
students, as well as wishing them every success with the 
challenges that life has to offer following their graduation at the 
end of next month. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you, 37 students from the Wadena 
Elementary School in Wadena, Saskatchewan who are seated in 
the west gallery. Their bus driver Eugene Horback; teachers 
Mair MacDonald, Reg Glennie; chaperons Margaret Wright, 
Gloria Anderson, Sue Nordick, Brenda Pruse, and Harvey 
Bowers, who is the director of education, are with them today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m especially glad to have them here to witness this mood of 
co-operation in the House, the first time we’ve seen it for some 
time. So you’ve witnessed history in the making. I’ll be joining 
you at 3 o’clock for pictures and refreshments. Please join me 
in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Call for Resignation of Minister of Justice 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is directed to the Premier. The Premier will 
know that yesterday afternoon the Provincial Auditor tabled 
what he described as a special auditor’s report, which in effect 
exposes the attacks of the members of your government, and 
especially that of the Minister of Justice pertaining to the 
Provincial Auditor, as being what they are, namely totally 
baseless; that these are scurrilous attacks which attack the 
character of the person and attack the integrity of the office of 
the auditor in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this. Since you have 

this report and you have read it and you know what the facts are 
in the report, my question to you, sir, is this: have you taken the 
leadership required of a premier and the leader of the province 
of Saskatchewan, demanded and obtained the resignation of 
your Minister of Justice for this unprecedented and scurrilous 
attack on the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have not asked for the 
resignation of the minister, and I don’t intend to. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, I did not hear the 
answer of Premier. I assume that the answer is no. Mr. Premier, 
needless to say, those of us on this side of the House — new 
question, Mr. Speaker — this side of the House are very 
disappointed by that answer by the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I dare say that a lot of people outside of this 
House, too, who are looking for the Premier to defend the 
integrity of his government and to defend the integrity of 
someone like the Provincial Auditor, to come out with a simple, 
flat no. 
 
My question to you, sir, is: why have you decided not to do the 
right thing, and that is to demand and obtain the resignation of 
your Minister of Justice? Why have you refused to do that? Is it 
because you endorse his allegations? Are you culpable or are 
you simply gullible in this situation? Which is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said that I would not be 
asking for the resignation of the hon. member. He has raised 
some points of concern in the legislature, and by looking at the 
auditor’s report and his statement that he released yesterday, all 
of those points, Mr. Speaker, were raised by the auditor and 
now laid before the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and, Mr. Speaker, as the minister says, it is pertinent to the 
whole question of what we’ve been debating here. And I have 
support, full support of the minister in asking those questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. And I can certainly understand why the Minister of 
Justice applauds that answer by the Premier, but I must frankly 
say I’m confused why all the back-benchers would applaud that 
answer by the Premier. Because in effect what the Premier is 
saying is that he too now joins with the Minister of Justice in 
the suggestions and the allegations of direct impropriety that his 
Minister of Justice has made. 
 
I want to ask the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan: is 
that your position today, that you support the allegation of 
impropriety made by the Minister of Justice with respect to the 
actions of the Provincial Auditor; and if so, will you please 
specifically identify what aspects of the report or any other 
shred of evidence would give justification to you endorsing and 
following in the footsteps of your Minister of Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1321 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks for 
my resignation, and as I indicated last night in this Assembly, 
the statements that I made on Friday was to the effect that I 
believed that the way that this proposed package was put 
together was improper. And I still believe it is improper, Mr. 
Speaker, to somehow link the auditor’s report and a softening 
auditor’s report with a particular thing that is personal to the 
Provincial Auditor, being that is his retirement package. 
 
I believe that is improper, it is improper conduct, and I stand by 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Premier, 
with the greatest of respect, you’re not going to duck this 
question. You’re not going to duck this question because the 
Minister of Justice continues to insinuate, if not outright allege, 
wrongdoing on the part of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
You have an obligation, sir, as Premier, to either endorse that 
allegation of wrongdoing in this House and outside this House, 
or dismiss the minister who makes such a serious allegation. 
What’s your position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the question 
of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. The Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition says that I should not have said that by the auditor 
proposing to tie the outcome of his report to four questions, one 
being the issue of the two types of auditors getting along; 
number two being the question of whether his estimates were 
considered in the Board of Internal Economy; number three 
being that his suggestion that Fred Wendel be the next 
provincial auditor; and that his retirement package of $112,000 
all tied together. 
 
Now I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, suppose we had’ve said, 
okay, fine, we’ll just take and accept that. It’s kept confidential, 
and it comes out. Suppose that had happened. What would the 
hon. member have then said? What the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition would have then said is, you’re trying to cook the 
books; you’re trying to buy off the auditor. And he would then 
go on to say, have you no shame? 
 
If we had done that . . . we didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. We 
didn’t do that because it wasn’t the proper thing to do to accept 
that, Mr. Speaker — to get a good report by giving A, B, C, and 
D. We didn’t do that, because it was improper. It would have 
been improper, and that’s exactly what I said, it was improper. 
Our lawyers said that to him. The lawyer said that to him. It’s 
improper to link that. I believe it is improper to link that, and I 
think the people should believe it’s improper to link those two 
things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, you’ve 
been here through question period since 

the situation was arisen, and you’ve heard all of the answers of 
the Minister of Justice. And each answer that he gives in each 
question period varies from the answer that he gave before. He 
has more positions on this than the Kama-sutra has with respect 
to this issue. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to you, Mr. Premier, that the 
position of the Minister of Justice as articulated today is not the 
same position as he’s articulated the last few days. If this is 
improper, my question to you, Mr. Premier, is: why in the world 
did your government instruct your lawyer to raise these issues 
of Mr. Lutz? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lutz’s report of 
yesterday, if you are to read it, clearly says that Mr. Lutz 
advised the Department of Finance in the fall of 1988 of his 
intention that he was going to retire in 1989. Now the Minister 
of Finance, the Department of Finance, and the Provincial 
Auditor are aware, by the statements of the Provincial Auditor, 
that he intended to resign 1989 or retire in 1989 because he was 
coming 65 years of age. So it hardly should be surprising (a) to 
the Provincial Auditor, or to the government that this individual 
intended to retire. 
 
I’ve got no problem with him retiring, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got no 
problem with him having his compensation that is duly owed to 
him, Mr. Speaker. Where I do have a problem is when you link 
that to a package that says, I will amend my report, and ties 
those together. 
 
He didn’t have to do that, Mr. Speaker. He said he was going to 
retire back last fall. He is entitled to whatever compensation he 
is entitled to, and we have always stood ready and willing and 
prepared to pay him that compensation, but don’t tie it to the 
report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, I implore you to show some leadership 
and to take control of this government of yours, and especially 
the answer of the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Minister of Justice just now said that the 
Provincial Auditor linked his demands to retirement. Those 
were the words he used. That means that the allegation is that 
the Provincial Auditor linked the demands of retirement or 
personal benefit to the nature of the auditor’s report which, in 
the unprecedented history of the province of Saskatchewan, 
shows that this government broke law after law. Now if that 
isn’t an accusation which is more than wrongdoing, I don’t 
know what is. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: do you support that allegation? 
Do you, sir, support that allegation? And if you do, will you and 
the Minister of Justice go outside of this Legislative Assembly 
and repeat it publicly now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think that if you were to 
review the report of yesterday, what Mr. Lutz has said  
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1322 
 

in his report, and you go through it, that he had four conditions, 
Mr. Speaker, four conditions that were going to deal with how 
he would end up reporting in the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
 
Now what he said is, there’s four conditions. The letter from the 
Minister of Finance is issued, enactment of legislative 
amendment, order in council to appoint Mr. Wendel, and a 
special warrant is received dealing with the compensation: 
 

If these things are done or a written undertaking is received 
with regard to the legislative amendment and special 
warrant, I will consider this part of the accountability 
process repaired. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is what he said. 
 
Now what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, to you is this: it is not 
proper to link those elements, and for the very reason I said, Mr. 
Speaker. The members opposite want it both ways. If we had 
gone along with that request, Mr. Speaker, they would have 
been the first to yell, what are you trying to do? Are you trying 
to buy off the auditor? which we were not trying to do, nor was 
he trying to do to us, but that’s what they would have said. That 
you would have said: how dare you, government, select Mr. 
Fred Wendel as the next Provincial Auditor. That’s not your job 
to do. There’s a process to do that. Or if we had accepted, Mr. 
Speaker, that this will be dealt with in the Board of Internal 
Economy, they would have said: how dare you, government; 
the Board of Internal Economy is a committee of members of 
this House. How dare you propose to bind them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what is wrong and improper with the 
process that was followed, Mr. Speaker. What was wrong is the 
linking of these elements together as to what is in my report, 
and that is improper, and that is what I said, and that is what I 
believe, and that is what I stand by, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, your Minister of Justice has totally 
misrepresented — I would say, if the rules permitted me to say 
it, purposefully misrepresented, but I can’t say the auditor’s 
report, special report, since there is absolutely no one who’s 
read it who interprets that report the way he does — no one, 
except the back-benchers of the Progressive Conservative Party 
who can read and won’t read. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Nobody else. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that if there’s impropriety — there is impropriety — 
it’s impropriety in the way a Minister of Justice, not a 
back-bencher, has conducted himself. That Minister of Justice 
is conducting this character assassination because the real 
objective of your government is to cover up the fact that you’ve 
got the most searing indictment Provincial Auditor’s report in 
the history of Saskatchewan. Why don’t you admit it? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Why don’t you admit it, and why don’t you 
get rid of the Minister of Justice, because if you don’t, Mr. 
Premier, this slur on the Minister of Justice in the House comes 
right down to your table as well. You’re a part and parcel of this 
whole operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to read into the 
record, Hansard . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to read into the 
record the Hansard of last Friday. And I’ll read what I said. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if a Provincial Auditor says, I will change my 
report if you do this, if you do this, if I have a proper 
retirement package and if I can determine who my 
successor is going to be, Mr. Speaker, I suggest (this) is 
improper . . . (I suggest this is improper.) 
 

Now listen to what the Leader of the Opposition says: 
 

Your minister has in effect made a serious allegation in 
this legislature pertaining to the Provincial Auditor, the 
allegation(s) being that the Provincial Auditor’s report is 
conditioned upon arrangements being made for the 
Provincial Auditor’s personal situation, in part, and that 
therefore . . . is fraudulent. 
 

I never said it was fraudulent, he did, Mr. Speaker. He said it 
was fraudulent, not me. I said it was improper. The difference 
in the wording, Mr. Speaker, between improper and fraudulent 
is a long ways apart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, when 
your Minister of Justice says, as he said again today, as he did 
on Friday, that in part the Provincial Auditor is trading pension 
benefits for a favourable report which, by the way, was 
initiated, the discussions, by Mr. Kyle on your behalf, his 
retirement, which the entire discussions were negotiated on 
your behalf . . . 
 
When a Minister of Justice makes that allegation and simply 
tries to say that it’s improper, I say to you, sir, that is an 
allegation by the Minister of Justice of gross impropriety to the 
job, if not as against the criminal law of this country, because 
he is seeking personal benefit in order to change the Provincial 
Auditor’s report. That has not been substantiated anywhere. 
That is cause for that minister to resign. It’s cause for you to 
resign, sir, if you continue to support the Minister of Justice. 
 
I ask you again: will you get that Minister of Justice to resign 
and restore the integrity of the Provincial Auditor? That’s the 
least you can do. 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1323 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, reading from the report 
yesterday filed by the Provincial Auditor. Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

On April 17 . . . Mr. Neill (that being the solicitor for the 
Provincial Auditor) met with Mr. Kyle regarding my 
proposals. I was informed Mr. Kyle was concerned with 
the linking of my retirement and the appointment of my 
successor with the other proposals. 
 

That’s what we’ve said. We were concerned about the linkage. 
 

I am informed that Mr. Neill explained, in general, my 
reasons for making the proposals in the form they are set 
out in the report. 
 

Now clearly we made our concerns known that this was not the 
proper thing to do, to link on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, his 
retirement package that he is entitled to have, Mr. Speaker — 
that he advised us that he was going to retire this year — it is 
improper to link that into his report, Mr. Speaker. And the 
members opposite said he didn’t make that linkage. Clearly he 
made that linkage in the proposal. And what I’ve said is, that is 
not a proper course of action to take. And our lawyer expressed 
to his lawyer that that is not a proper course to take, and I would 
think the hon. member should see that that is not a proper 
course to take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I again appeal to the Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan. This is the report that your 
Minister of Justice is relying on in his answers to me of just a 
few moments ago. He says that in this report the lawyer for the 
auditor raises the retirement, and that your lawyer, Mr. Kyle, 
says that he shouldn’t be raising it. 
 
But of course . . . and you nod your head in approval. But of 
course what the Minister of Justice conveniently ignores is that 
in the prior paragraph of the Provincial Auditor’s report he says, 
“The question of my retirement was raised by Mr. Kyle.” 
 
Now if it’s improper for Mr. Lutz, the auditor, to deal with the 
issue raised by Mr. Kyle, why is it proper for Mr. Kyle and for 
the government to raise the retirement issue? Where is the 
equity there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will try one more time. 
Mr. Lutz, pursuant to his report, has indicated, Mr. Speaker, in 
his submission to treasury board in the fall of 1988 that he had 
asked, or advised treasury board of his intention to retire in 
1989. And he had submitted a line item in his proposed budget 
for $112,000. It’s in the report. He was advised by Finance that 
you don’t put line-by-line issues or items in about your 
retirement, but that when he was ready to retire they would 
issue a special warrant to make the payment to him. 

Now the hon. member would somehow suggest that this 
question of retirement comes springing up later on, and clearly 
it didn’t, Mr. Speaker. And clearly the Provincial Auditor has 
the right to retire, and on retirement the Provincial Auditor has 
a right to compensation as set out in the Act. Clear statement of 
fact, Mr. Speaker. And that could have been pursued down this 
line. 
 
The problem I have, Mr. Speaker, is when you link the two of 
them together into a total package report, then you open 
yourself up to the allegation by people like the member 
opposite, somehow that we were trying to buy off the Provincial 
Auditor, which was not the case, Mr. Speaker — which is why 
we raised a concern with him that it’s an improper way to do it; 
it’s an improper way to bridge the two together, to link the two 
together, Mr. Speaker. It is improper. That’s what I said it was, 
improper. And I quite frankly think if you asked Mr. Lutz 
today, in hindsight he would say, I probably wish I hadn’t have 
linked the two. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Premier in 
hindsight, any senior civil servant who works for this 
government and runs the risk of being savaged on a personal 
basis after 30 years of service to this government as your 
Minister of Justice and your government is doing, would always 
look back in hindsight as to what’s happening. And you, sir, are 
complicit about this. 
 
Get what the Minister of Justice says. He says Mr. Lutz has a 
right to deal with the pension issue and it’s his privilege to do it, 
but somehow it’s improper. It’s his right, but it’s improper. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is pure and simple. Isn’t it a 
fact that your character assassination on Mr. Lutz, your 
government’s character assassination and total 
misrepresentation of the facts, your smears which you will not 
repeat outside this House, denying Mr. Lutz benefit of 
protection here and benefit of protection outside; that your 
smears are really intended to do one thing, Mr. Premier, and 
that is to smoke-screen and cover up the fact that this Provincial 
Auditor’s report has exposed a quagmire of waste and 
mismanagement and absolute, total incompetence by the 
government opposite; that this is a government, as The Globe 
and Mail has described, which is shabby and furtive in the 
passing of accounts. Isn’t that the real reason why you’re out 
after this person? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me again respond to 
that. Now we could have said we will accept all four of these 
conditions, and what would have been the impact of accepting 
all four of those conditions? Well we would have had a report 
that said most of our differences have been put aside and all is 
well. We could have done that, and that’s the type of report we 
would have had. 
 
But would it have been proper, Mr. Speaker, to do it? 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1324 
 

That’s the question. Would it have been proper, Mr. Speaker, to 
do those four items? And I suggest, no, it would not. 
 
So when you’re suggesting somehow that this is a most 
damning report, etc., we could have avoided that if we had 
wanted to, but would it have been right? Would it have been 
right for us to say that Fred Wendel will be the next auditor 
general when the rules don’t do that? Would it have been right 
to link the retirement package of the Provincial Auditor to, Mr. 
Speaker, this package? Would that have been right? No, it 
would not have been right, Mr. Speaker, and that is why we did 
not do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, your Minister of Finance has 
suggested throughout this shabby affair that it was Mr. Lutz 
who linked the issues surrounding his retirement with the other 
issues surrounding his report. In fact, Mr. Premier, it was Mr. 
Kyle who first raised that according to Mr. Neill. Mr. Neill says 
that in his letter of March 18. In fact it was Mr. Kyle who again 
raised the subject in the letter of April 18, according to his own 
letter. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is: when Mr. Kyle linked 
these two, was he acting on behalf and with instructions from 
the current Minister of Finance, to whom I believe he reports? 
On whose instructions was Mr. Kyle acting when he made that 
linkage? Was it not the current Minister of Finance from whom 
he takes instructions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Let’s give the Minister of 
Justice the opportunity to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated in answer to the 
hon. member’s question — all right? — the hon. member’s 
question was this, with regards to the Provincial Auditor’s 
resignation, okay? The Provincial Auditor clearly, from his 
report yesterday, indicates that in the fall of 1988 he sent to 
treasury board his proposed budget. In that budget was a line 
item calling for $112,000 additional moneys, and the purpose of 
the $112,000 in additional moneys was for his compensation 
when he was retiring in the year 1989 in this fiscal year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Provincial Auditor advised the 
Minister of Finance and the Department of Finance of his 
intention to retire, the hon. member from Regina Centre now 
somehow comes to the view that there was a devious plot here 
to ask for this guy’s resignation. Why would you ask for a 
resignation of a guy who has told you six, seven months before 
that he intends to retire that year, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s what the hon. member tries to make. The hon. 
member does not make his point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Public Utilities 
Easements Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Public Utilities Easements Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation Reorganization Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation Reorganization Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Statute Law. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m saddened to have to enter 
back into this debate, but in the light of the circumstances 
before us, there is no other option. Mr. Speaker, I believe we 
have an unprecedented situation in the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly, if not an unprecedented situation 
anywhere in Canada and the Canadian commonwealth. 
 
The situation is, in a nutshell, as follows: the provincial 
government has received a Provincial Auditor’s report which is 
probably the most scathing report in the history of this province, 
if not anywhere in Canada. 
 
It alleges, among other things, that the law has been broken. It 
alleges, among other things, total interference by the 
government — or at least not total, but widespread interference 
by the government. It alleges that the accounting procedures in 
the case of many Crowns and agencies are not in accordance 
with the general accounting procedures and practices. It says 
that now only 50 per cent of the government’s work can be 
audited by the Provincial Auditor. At one time it used to be 90 
per cent. And it says he’s got a major problem with the 
appointed auditors, the private, fee-for-service commercial 
enterprises who are doing the auditing for many of the Crown 
corporations and for the department agencies. He in effect 
concludes, the unprecedented nature of the report, that he is no 
longer able to do his job as the Provincial Auditor. Those are 
the facts. 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1325 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is not an issue which is an issue only limiting 
itself to the members of this House or to the people in this 
legislature. This is an issue which affects every voter and every 
taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan. Because the 
Provincial Auditor, I say to the voters and the taxpayers, is your 
watch-dog as to how money is spent. He is your watch-dog as 
to whether or not the passing of accounts has been proper, 
whether it’s been in accordance with the statutory provisions. 
 
And when he says that only 50 per cent of the passing of the 
accounts of this government can be audited properly because 
the remaining 50 per cent has been denied to him wrongfully, 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the Provincial Auditor incapable of his 
doing his job, what is basically being told to the voters of the 
province of Saskatchewan is this: there is nobody, nobody who 
is doing the independent job of auditing every year, as every 
small-business man knows, as anybody knows — any 
commercial organization, any social organization, any 
charitable organization who knows about this — there is 
nobody who can effectively carry out an audit of the year’s 
activities of the government. 
 
Put yourself, Mr. Speaker, in this position. If you were a 
member of a charitable organization — let’s say you’re a 
member of a Kinsmen Club — and every year they’ve got to 
audit to see what the funds are coming into the Kinsmen Club, 
and the Provincial Auditor — scratch the Provincial Auditor — 
an auditor came to that organization and said, members of the 
organization, I am no longer able to do my job; I am no longer 
able to do my job because the Minister of Finance refuses to 
give me access to those books. I am unable to do my job 
because the government, through its other manifestations, its 
other activities, the Kinsmen Club says, I cannot have access to 
those books, I can no longer do my job. In effect, Mr. Speaker, 
what that report says, following my example of the Kinsmen 
Club, is that there can be no longer an audit, or, translating it to 
this legislature, there is no such thing as a Provincial Auditor. 
 
Contemplate what I say: no longer an effective Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker. No wonder The (Toronto) Globe and 
Mail, talking about that report of the Provincial Auditor’s, 
describes the Premier’s government as a shabby, furtive 
government as a result of that circumstance. Those are the 
words used by their newspaper, The (Toronto) Globe and Mail, 
not by me — a shabby and furtive government. 
 
Now what’s the government’s response, Mr. Speaker, under the 
circumstances? Under the circumstances, this is obviously a 
very damning report which would be very difficult for any 
government to answer. But it’s got one of two choices. It could 
say to the Provincial Auditor and to the legislature and to the 
people of the province, it could say this. It could say: look, 
we’ve made errors; we’re going to issue a directive now that the 
information that the auditor requests be made available. 
 
It could say that we are going to take corrective action with 
respect to these various examples that the auditor has shown. It 
could do a number of things which would indicate that the 
auditor’s criticisms, although stinging as 

they may be, they are taking steps to correct and to make 
proper. 
 
They could have done that, but they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 
Instead, what they did is they launched on an attack which is the 
subject of this motion of privilege. We now have two against 
this Minister of Justice — two arising out of the same incidents 
against the government of the day. Instead, what they’ve done 
is they’ve launched a stinging attack alleging impropriety. 
 
(1445) 
 
We don’t know what kind of impropriety it is, whether it’s 
criminal impropriety because the auditor was trading pension 
package for a good deal in the sense of an amended report to 
help out the Premier, whether it’s that kind of impropriety; or 
whether it’s impropriety relating to the breach of the statutory 
obligations of the Act; or whether it’s some sort of other 
generalized impropriety. 
 
We’ve had, over the last four or five days, the Minister of 
Justice taking every one of those interpretations. It wasn’t us 
who made those allegations. It was the Minister of Justice who 
got up on Friday — and by the way today the record will show, 
I am sure, repeats the allegations that that auditor’s report is 
tainted because the conditions which were attached were 
conditions which the Minister of Justice of this province says is 
improper. 
 
They chose the course of action of attacking the Minister of 
Justice. That is the line that they took as opposed to the 
approach which they ought to have taken, and that is, namely, 
to see where this report could be rectified and could be 
amended. 
 
And what does it all hang on, Mr. Speaker? It all hangs on the 
issue of something called the special warrant. And the situation 
is this. In December of 1988 the Provincial Auditor told the 
Premier and his government that he was contemplating 
retirement and he wanted to have in his budgetary provisions at 
that time, in December of 1988, sufficient funds to look after 
the retirement package and the early departure, if that was the 
case. 
 
He was told, according to the package tabled by the auditor, by 
the treasury board people, that a special warrant should not be 
granted right now, that what he should do is he should have that 
special warrant at some later date, at some later date in the 
calendar of the government’s. That is when the issue of 
retirement arose. It did not arise at the time of the filing of this 
damning Provincial Auditor’s report. In fact, that doesn’t come 
until sequentially several months later down the road, in April. 
 
Then in April of 1989, Mr. Kyle, the lawyer for the 
Conservative government opposite, approaches the lawyer for 
the Provincial Auditor again with the question of the retirement 
— not the auditor, but now Mr. Kyle raises this. And I think 
this is an important sequence of events chronologically. 
 
What was it that prompted the government to remain silent 
from December 8, 1988, at the time that the Provincial Auditor 
himself voluntarily, in the absence of 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1326 
 

not this atmosphere of the Provincial Auditor’s report — what 
was it that from December 8 to April 18 kept the government 
silent and everybody silent on this resignation issue and the 
retirement issue? 
 
I tell you what I think took place, Mr. Speaker. What happened 
was that by that time, on April 18 of 1989, the government and 
the Premier opposite had already received a draft copy of the 
auditor’s report, this damning auditor’s report, which report 
says in effect that the government broke the law, the 
government interfered, the government refuses to fund, the 
government has got a mess on its hands, a mess of waste and 
mismanagement and incompetence — millions of dollars 
unaccounted for. They had that report on April 18. 
 
Then all of a sudden, on April 18 or thereabouts, the lawyer for 
the government raises anew, when nobody else raised it, the 
question of Mr. Lutz’s retirement, to which Mr. Lutz then 
engages into the conversation on that issue by virtue of the 
initiative being started by the provincial government. 
 
Now all of this, Mr. Speaker, are the facts of the situation. Mr. 
Lutz did nothing that he is not entitled to receive by statute. 
What the Provincial Auditor sets out by way of retirement and 
severance package is there. He could not negotiate anything 
else; it is a statutory provision. There’s nothing that he could 
gain from this thing — nothing whatsoever. 
 
But on Friday the Minister of Justice suggested . . . no, I don’t 
say suggested, said out and out that it is improper, and indeed it 
would be improper if that’s what the auditor was doing, that 
amongst other things the severance package and the retirement 
package was a condition precedent for changing that damning 
and searing Provincial Auditor’s report. 
 
I say that that’s an impropriety all right if it took place. I say, 
however, it was not an impropriety because it did not take 
place, and the Provincial Auditor’s report is evidence of that 
yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But in any event, Mr. Speaker, in any event, 
even in today’s question period, the Minister of Justice says 
there’s nothing wrong with this talk about the retirement. He 
admits that himself. I think the record will show he says no one 
objects to the fact that the Provincial Auditor is talking about 
retirement. He’s 64 years of age. He wants to leave the office in 
a strengthened position; he wants the loose ends tightened up. 
There’s nothing wrong with that. The Minister of Justice 
himself says there’s nothing wrong with that, and yet he still 
clings to the notion of impropriety. 
 
There’s a gross contradiction of what’s happening here. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the whole history of the government in this case is 
one of confusion and obfuscation. 
 
When the Provincial Auditor’s report was tabled last week, Mr. 
Speaker, the first response of the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance was very simple. That response was, it’s a turf war 
between accountants — remember 

that? — bean counters who were worrying about what beans to 
count and what beans not to count. It was a turf battle. That was 
their first defence. 
 
When that didn’t work, then they trotted out on Friday the 
scurrilous accusation that the auditor somehow was pulling his 
punches with respect to this report or, more accurately, would 
change the report if the conditions that he set out were agreed 
to. Thus they impugned the integrity of the auditor; thus they 
impugned the office of the auditor; thus this special privilege 
motion which you have permitted — rightfully so, Mr. Speaker 
— is being debated before the legislature in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when that defence backfired, as it backfired, then they said 
on Tuesday, oh wait till you get the special package proposal 
coming down from the auditor. Wait till that comes in. The 
suggestions yesterday in question period to me were, and the 
answers that I directed to the Minister of Justice, the answers 
were, oh don’t you worry. Wait till that loaded gun, that 
smoking gun comes out about the Provincial Auditor’s special 
proposal package. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here we have it — Special Report by the 
Provincial Auditor, which details in every step and every 
document shown there. And what does it show? It shows that 
the process of discussion was initiated by the government after 
it had notice of the damning report. The question of retirement 
was initiated by the government after it had the report and the 
damning nature of the report. 
 
Everything that the Provincial Auditor did, had to do with the 
integrity of his position, which was the revelation of the facts, 
the independence of the auditor’s office and his position, and as 
well the proper succession which now is established in 
Saskatchewan, being an internal succession. Everything that he 
says here is proper. 
 
And the Minister of Justice, of all people in this House, should 
know that it’s proper. And if the Minister of Justice stands by 
his provision that it is improper, then it is incumbent upon the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, or the Minister of 
Justice, to do one of two things — either to refer this to the 
appropriate authorities for a complete investigation . . . Maybe 
there’s more factual evidence that should be figured out here 
and that hasn’t been tabled. They’ve got to do that and carry out 
a complete investigation. Or in the alternative, the Premier has 
got to go outside this legislature and repeat those allegations so 
that Mr. Lutz will have his day in court to defend it. 
 
The Premier has got to stop his silence. They’ve either got to do 
that, or in the alternative, Mr. Speaker, what they’ve got to 
understand is that after all of these failed defences, after all of 
these scurrilous attacks, it’s all for naught. The case that they 
have constructed is a case of a house of cards. It’s a spurious 
attack, and what they ought to do is the right thing, which is to 
apologize. And what the Premier ought to do is to get the 
Minister of Justice to resign. That is the only solution at this 
stage of the game. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1327 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the clear facts 
of the situation. We know that to be the case. No other 
reasonable interpretation by anybody, except the back-benchers 
opposite — I hope they’ve read this report — nobody else 
opposite here would give any other interpretation except that, 
from the Provincial Auditor’s report, and yet they still dig in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the justice of the situation? Are we 
going to allow a situation where a servant of this Assembly of 
30 years can be attacked and maligned and comments made in a 
misrepresented way about his activities without any recourse? 
Are we going to settle for that? And, by the way, in the same 
circumstance, both the Premier and the Minister of Justice 
ducking any kinds of statements publicly about what they’ve 
said inside the House, therefore also denying the Provincial 
Auditor a chance to rebut there too. Are we going to acquiesce 
to that kind of a system in the province of Saskatchewan? All of 
which, of course, would not only destroy, finally, the Provincial 
Auditor, but, I think, for some political reasons, would try to get 
the issue off this damning report. Are we going to allow that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well I tell you, sir, that on this side of the House we say that 
that is not only improper, that not only does that break the 
traditions of this Legislative Assembly, I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Premier and the government are not going to 
get away with it — they are not going to get away with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because the simple question that has to be 
asked, Mr. Speaker, is: who will be next? Who will be next of 
your staff and your servants, Mr. Speaker, who will be 
maligned in this same way in the face of these damning and 
searing indictments of this report? And, Mr. Speaker, they are 
damning and they are searing indeed — very, very damning and 
very searing. 
 
Here’s a situation, Mr. Speaker, in the report where the 
Provincial Auditor talks about $2.2 million of dental equipment. 
You recall, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier opposite and the 
government opposite privatized the dental program. Contrary to 
our objections, they privatized it; $2.2 million of dental 
equipment, according to the Provincial Auditor, is given over to 
the property management corporation for the property 
management corporation to give a response, for the property 
management corporation to handle, by way of sale, and to 
account for these funds. That is the situation which takes place. 
 
What does the auditor say under the circumstances? The auditor 
says that he doesn’t know what amount of the equipment was 
auctioned off, and he says, at the same time, he doesn’t know 
where the money has gone, Mr. Speaker. This is the province of 
Saskatchewan in 1989? Does not anybody in the government 
side opposite have concern about what happened to $2.2 
million? In whose pockets are those $2.2 million? Where is it? 
Why is it that the Provincial Auditor can’t account for that? Is 
there nobody on the front benches . . . the Minister of Public 
Participation, is he not interested in asking this question? Is not 
the member from Regina Wascana interested in 

asking this question? 
 
Have you asked in caucus what happened to $2.2 million, Mr. 
Member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says he’s asked the 
question, and he’ll give it to us. That would be interesting. He is 
prepared to give us the answer, Mr. Speaker. He’s prepared to 
give us the answer, but he’s not going to give it to the 
Provincial Auditor, the answer. That’s what he says. 
 
He says that I should accept his words, but I should not accept 
the audited words of the Provincial Auditor in this regard. He 
says that his statements are going to stand up to the scrutiny of 
the light of day, but he will not allow the Provincial Auditor to 
check out and verify those accounts. That’s how damning this 
is. 
 
Do you know what the people of Saskatchewan are saying, Mr. 
Speaker? They’re saying that there’s a government which has 
no captain. It is rudderless. It is trapped in mid-Atlantic ocean. 
It’s in the midst of an economic storm, and it doesn’t know 
which way to go. There’s a captain who’s lost his compass; his 
crew is jumping ship. Nobody here knows which way to go. 
 
Well the members opposite laugh. They laugh at $2.2 million. 
They laugh at a situation where money is collected from aircraft 
that the government doesn’t even own. They laugh at a 
Provincial Auditor’s report that says public property is rented, 
public property is rented from the property management 
corporation and no one knows the contracts or the terms of that 
public property. No wonder the Provincial Auditor says that 
he’s got nowhere else to go but to certify that he can no longer 
do his job. 
 
Where in the world in the Commonwealth nations is this kind of 
a report, laid before the legislature of the province of 
Saskatchewan? And where, Mr. Speaker, is the conscience of 
those people opposite? Where is their sense of decency and 
morality? Where is their sense of propriety? Where is their 
sense of commitment to the Provincial Auditor? 
 
They are so arrogant, Mr. Speaker, they are so arrogant and so 
out of touch with the interests of the province of Saskatchewan 
that one can only conclude that they don’t care what happens to 
the province. They’re not here for a long time any more; they’re 
only here for a good time. That’s their position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan that today, when we got up and 
asked for the Minister of Justice’s resignation, we did so with 
good cause, and we didn’t do it precipitously; we didn’t call for 
it on Tuesday. In fact I suggested on Tuesday in my remarks, 
when I first took part in this debate, I said to the minister and to 
the government, reconsider your comments and maybe you’ll 
reconsider your statements. Do it over the weekend. They 
didn’t. 
 
They came back on Tuesday with the so-called proposal 
package, the special proposal package. They escalated 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1328 
 

the attack. Yesterday, again the Minister of Justice repeated 
these allegations — unfounded and unsupported allegations. 
We had no choice, Mr. Speaker, but to come back today in the 
light of giving the government all of the opportunities and 
options to do what has to be done, to do what’s right; we had no 
choice but to ask the Premier to defend the integrity of his 
government and to get the Minister of Justice to resign. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that when the Premier of this province 
does not want to protect the integrity of his government, then 
there is no integrity left in his entire government or cabinet 
operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a grave issue. It’s a 
twofold issue: one is what they’re doing to the Provincial 
Auditor; the other issue of course is the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. 
 
And I have to ask this question, Mr. Speaker, before I take my 
place in this debate. The question that I have to ask is this: why 
in the world are these people doing this? Why in the world are 
they embarking upon an attack on a civil servant of 30 years or 
so? Why in the world are they weaving a fabric of tissue-thin 
interpretations and misinterpretations out of a report, which 
everybody knows the interpretations are false, why are they 
doing this, Mr. Speaker? What is the motivation for doing this? 
 
I don’t know what the motivation can be except onefold, and 
that is that there must be such a financial mess that they’re 
sitting on. They’re sitting on a pot there which is smelling to 
high heaven; a pot of waste and mismanagement and 
incompetency of deals which can’t be verified by the Provincial 
Auditor; of accounts which aren’t being passed; of information 
which is being denied contrary to the law. They must be only 
doing this, Mr. Speaker, because there is a worse penalty for 
them to pay than the penalty they’re paying for this current 
course of action. And the worst penalty, and the worst penalty 
that they fear, Mr. Speaker, is that if ever that cesspool of waste 
and mismanagement should be revealed to the daylight, the 
cesspool of incompetence and waste and mismanagement, this 
government will never, ever get re-elected — in 100 years 
would be too soon in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we know where the 
incompetence and the waste and mismanagement are located by 
way of the Provincial Auditor’s report. But I want to say as I 
take my chair when I ask this question, why are they doing this? 
because in my judgement this is a people issue. This is not only 
an issue for Roy Romanow or . . . excuse me, for the member 
from Riversdale or the member from Qu’Appelle or the 
member from Lumsden, this is an issue involving all the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the public out there who may be watching this debate: if 
you cannot be sure of where your government is pumping 
money into privatization, what good PC-style privatization? If 
you can’t be sure where the money that 

you are paying through your hard-earned taxpayers’ bucks is 
being spent, if they can’t account for $2.2 million of dental 
equipment to the auditor — I’m not saying to the member from 
Wascana, he’ll buy almost any solution or any answer that they 
give him; I’m talking to the independent auditor — if you can’t 
do that, I say to Mr. and Mrs. Taxpayer, you have lost control of 
this government. 
 
It’s a government on a spending spree of waste and 
incompetence and mismanagement, a government which has 
run amok, a government with no leadership, a government with 
no principles, a government which is prepared to destroy 
institutions and people. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, we on 
this side are not going to agree to that. We on this side oppose 
that. We on this side say this privilege motion must pass and 
must pass unanimously in order to restore the integrity of this 
institution, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to take part in this 
debate on the motion before the House today, and I want to take 
some opportunity to discuss the . . . and differentiate between 
the two motions that are before the House today. 
 
Before doing that, Mr. Speaker, I think it goes without saying 
that I’ve had a fair long experience in this legislature, and of 
many years. And I find that in my years of experience in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, what we see before us now is 
unprecedented. It has never happened before in the 
Saskatchewan legislature, and it’s unlikely that it’s happened in 
any other legislature in Canada. So what we have is a serious, 
very serious situation. I suggest that it’s unprecedented. 
 
What we see at this time is we see government programs in 
disarray. And I need only mention the sell-off of SaskPower 
Corporation, and where that situation sits at this moment — the 
people rejecting it; the government attempting to force it. The 
government, in contradiction with its own control agencies in 
the province of Saskatchewan on that very issue, it’s not to 
mention in contradiction with the people of Saskatchewan and 
in contradiction with this legislature, this government is in 
disarray with their government programs. 
 
The government’s legislative conduct is open to question. And 
in this area, Mr. Speaker, I need only mention the government’s 
attempt to ram a change of the rules through the legislature of 
Saskatchewan. The history of this province, as far as amending 
the rules that govern this Chamber, has been that it has always 
been done in a committee outside of this Chamber by the 
members of this Chamber. It has been done away from the heat 
of battle, away from the verbal slings and arrows of this 
Chamber. And we’ve always come up with a report which has, 
by and large, been accepted by this Assembly, to the best 
interest of this Assembly, and consequently to the interest of the 
people of Saskatchewan. So we see the government’s conduct 
in this Assembly is open to question at this time. 
 
The government’s legislative program — well, Mr. 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1329 
 

Speaker, we need only to look at the order paper. There are two 
Bills that have been passed, up until today, and they both deal 
with interim supply. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I have given members 
some latitude in order to make their points, as members know. 
However, I believe that the hon. member is straying from the 
motion before the House, and that he is getting into a different 
topic. The motion deals with the lack of information, the 
alleged lack of information given to the Provincial Auditor to 
carry out his duties. And I’d like to bring that to the attention of 
the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
your guidance on this. What I’m attempting to show here, Mr. 
Speaker, that this . . . what is happening here with regard to the 
auditor is not some isolated incidents in this government’s array 
of actions in this Chamber or elsewhere. 
 
It’s not an isolated example. What we have is, across the piece 
we have examples which will show that this government is in 
disarray, not only with regard to the Provincial Auditor and the 
auditor’s report but in a variety of other areas. And I’ve only 
made brief passing comment on each of those areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The legislative programs of the government, two Bills passed, 
today a few non-controversial Bills going by this Chamber. 
That area is also in disarray the same as the area of disarray 
between this government and the Provincial Auditor about how 
the money of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan is spent. 
Government management, it’s a question of cover-up. This 
whole auditor’s report can be related back to the cover-up of 
this government. This has been going on for a number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’ll spend some time dealing with that. 
 
As I said, we have two motions dealing with privilege on the 
order paper, and it’s important for the people of Saskatchewan 
that they distinguish between those two motions. The first 
motion which we’re discussing here today, of course, is listed 
under special order of the agenda for today, and it reads: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and 
that this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan 
to make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

As specified, Mr. Speaker, in the laws of this province. So what 
we have here is a discussion of privilege, where it is said that 
the government is interfering with the laws of this province in 
the way it conducts itself. That is important that everyone 
understand that. 
 
Opposed . . . and I don’t intend to spend time dealing with it, 
because I can when I discuss the other motion. But the second 
motion which is before this House, the second motion of 
privilege . . . and this is what makes it unprecedented — two 
motions of privilege on the order 

paper at once, one following the other. 
 
The second one, which was granted on May 23, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . condemns the Minister of Justice for having breached 
the privileges of this legislature by his unacceptable and 
unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial Auditor. 
 

And it goes on, “and call for an apology and resignation of the 
minister.” 
 
It happens, Mr. Speaker . . . and I think all members here 
understand this, but perhaps the public at large do not have a 
full grasp of the situation. The situation is this: that the 
Provincial Auditor and his office are completely entwined with 
the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan. You do 
not discuss one without discussing the other. 
 
And as a consequence, what we have is the auditor’s comments 
on how the province conducts its business affairs, or the 
business affairs of the people of Saskatchewan, being 
questioned by the Provincial Auditor. And where these are 
examined, by and large, not only with the auditor’s report but in 
Public Accounts, where all of the expenditures of the 
government are supposed to be listed in proper form. And the 
auditor has something to say about that as well. 
 
Of course in the beginning, thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your 
ruling which allowed this question of privilege to go forward, 
but I feel that you felt secure, Mr. Speaker, in the knowledge 
that there was precedent galore to support your ruling, 
precedent going back hundreds of years in the parliamentary 
system under which we operate, which indicated quite clearly 
that you were in order in recognizing that there was a case of 
privilege here which should be discussed by this Assembly. 
 
This particular motion which we’re discussing, which I read 
earlier, arose because of statements recorded in the Report of 
the Provincial Auditor ending the period March 31, 1988. 
 
Now on the question period where the matter came up on page 
1246, or prior to that on page 1245 — the beginning of the 
question period on May 19, 1989 — the Leader of the 
Opposition raised questions about the Provincial Auditor’s 
report that I’m discussing now. And the questions were directed 
to the Premier, and the Minister of Justice responded on behalf 
of the government. And it was very shortly after the Minister of 
Justice began responding that he raised the question of public 
accounts in response to the question about the Provincial 
Auditor, and about the whole subject which is before us. The 
Minister of Justice, the member for Kindersley, as reported on 
page 1246, in saying: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the proper forum by which to call witnesses 
is the Public Accounts Committee. The Public Accounts 
Committee, which is now, I might add, open to the media, 
which it wasn’t prior to the 1982, have the right to call 
witnesses to deal with this question. They can call the 

  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1330 
 

Provincial Auditor; they can call anyone else they wish, 
Mr. Speaker. And the members of this side of the House 
are perfectly . . . stand ready, willing to call anyone to that 
Public Accounts Committee to deal with this particular 
auditor’s report. 
 

So it’s clear that the understanding of the Minister of Justice, as 
well, is that the auditor’s report and the Public Accounts 
Committee are intertwined, and one really cannot be discussed 
without discussing the other. 
 
Throughout the Provincial Auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker, there 
are general and specific condemnations of this government’s 
procedures, citing chapter and verse where complete 
information wasn’t provided; citing where correct information 
wasn’t provided; citing where timeliness of information wasn’t 
adhered to as it should be. 
 
(1515) 
 
It is my intention to deal with specific examples later during my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, on this aspect of the question. 
 
I want to deal for a moment, Mr. Speaker, with the 
government’s program relating to this whole area a number of 
years ago, and which relates directly to what they’re doing 
today but is contrary to what they’re doing today. In 1982 the 
government put forward its policies, as political parties do from 
time to time, and they have a brochure out in 1982. It’s called 
“PC Policies for Good Government.” And the subheading that I 
want to refer to specifically, which is on the subject which we 
have before us today, Mr. Speaker, is government management. 
That’s the subject we’re talking about — government 
management and the report thereof. 
 
First of all, under government management they say they want 
to ensure efficient management of Crown corporations and 
provide service at cost to the people. Well that’s not 
immediately relevant to this subject under discussion. They go 
on to say under government management, “Consumers will be 
protected by the Public Utilities Review Commission.” And 
we’re all aware of what’s happened to that. The government has 
done away with it. 
 
The next one is of utmost interest to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I’m sure it was at that time. And it’s even 
more a searing question in the minds of Saskatchewan people at 
this time. It says — the next point in the PC policy in 1982 said, 
Mr. Speaker, “Protect taxpayers’ money by ensuring 
independence of the Provincial Auditor.” Can you imagine that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Today we have a frontal attack on the Provincial Auditor, his 
office. We have lack of information in the Public Accounts, 
incorrect information in Public Accounts, lack of timeliness of 
filing reports by this government. And they say, in 1982, protect 
the taxpayers’ money by ensuring the independence of the 
Provincial Auditor. It’s hard to believe how times have changed 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Open the books on government business. Well that is 

very hollow when we look back at it today, because if anything, 
this government has closed the books on government activities. 
It’s recognized not only by the people in this Chamber but it’s 
recognized by the media across Canada. People have referred to 
articles in The Globe and Mail, and it’s also in Saskatchewan 
papers about this government has in fact closed the books on 
government business. 
 
And another point they raised is to establish freedom of 
information. Well, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t done that either, 
and that was over seven years ago. They have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 points 
under government management, Mr. Speaker. Every one of 
them has been broken by this government. And we see the 
culmination of that today while the discussion of this motion of 
privilege is under way. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the . . . in 1981 the member for 
Kindersley was a member of the rules committee of this 
particular House. And I have a copy of the rules committee 
report in my hand, which was tabled April 21, 1981. Made a 
number of recommendations too varied to go into at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, but I do want to take an opportunity to refer to a 
special submission that the member for Kindersley — the 
member for Kindersley — the Minister of Justice, made to this 
rules committee before they brought in their final report, and in 
fact rose and spoke on it in the House when the final report of 
the committee came in. 
 
The member for Kindersley’s submission to the rules 
committee of that day was entitled “Submission to the 
Committee on Rules and Procedures,” and his name is on it, and 
it’s identified as B-14 — B-14. And he cites what the problem 
is as far as the member for Kindersley saw it. 
 
And I’ll read part of the first paragraph which lays out the 
problem. And this document is available, so that if anyone feels 
that I’m not quoting properly from this document they may 
obtain it. It’s in the records of this House; it’s available to 
anyone. He’s talking about the bureaucracy, the member for 
Kindersley was talking about the bureaucracy of government. 
And you have to keep in mind that he was sitting on this side of 
the House at that time, not on that side. He goes on to say: 
 

The fundamental basis of our system of responsible 
government, i.e., that the legislature will control the public 
purse exists only in theory, and that meaningful reform 
cannot proceed unless a more meaningful information 
system is developed. 
 

This is the line that the Progressive Conservative Party spouted 
in 1982 in their election program, that they would bring forward 
freedom of information, they would support the auditor, and 
they would be free and open with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member for Kindersley goes on — this apostle of freedom 
of information, as I refer to the member from Kindersley — 
proposals for consideration, part way down the first sheet, the 
first page of his submission: 
 

There is a need for meaningful freedom of 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1331 
 

information legislation. Without this, or a similar reform, 
the debate in and the security of parliament will always 
remain ineffective. I believe this can be accomplished 
without sacrificing ministerial responsibility and individual 
privacy. 
 

So the minister was a strong advocate as he was a private 
member at that time on the other side of the House. 
 
This member goes on to suggest something about the Public 
Accounts Committee, relating as well to the Provincial Auditor. 
On the second page of his submission to the committee, entitled 
“Upgrade legislative committee system,” subsection (b) Public 
Accounts Committee: 
 

This committee would remain in much the same form as 
present. However, there should be a close working 
relationship between this committee and the new 
committee of finance and economic affairs. 
 

This is a committee that the member has suggested. 
 

It would be expected that both committees would use the 
staff provided by the legislature and under the jurisdiction 
of the Clerk of the Assembly. 
 

Can you imagine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker! 
 

This committee should be upgraded by the introduction of 
a new Act for the Provincial Auditor (a new Act for the 
Provincial Auditor) dealing with comprehensive auditing. 
 

If this auditor, as suggested by the member for Kindersley when 
he was making a submission to the rules committee, was 
allowed to have comprehensive auditing, his report, I suspect, 
would be several times thicker than it is right now. 
 
So the member for Kindersley suggests that the Provincial 
Auditor should have comprehensive auditing, and also make the 
Provincial Auditor’s report and the Public Accounts 
automatically referred to this particular committee. 
 
And the member goes on to suggest that it should be open to the 
media. Well I intend to deal with that a little bit later on, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
He goes on with some further ideas, but I want to get to the 
comments that the member for Kindersley had in his personal 
submission to the rules committee in 1981, which culminated in 
the 1981 rules committee report. And he says: 
 

The committee on internal economy . . . 
 

This is a committee that now exists, was adopted because of 
this rules’ change, which was brought about not necessarily 
under this government but under the previous government. 
 

The committee on internal economy, this would 

again be borrowed from the Ontario and Ottawa models 
(the member for Kindersley says). Basically the committee 
would replace the budget bureau and treasury board as it 
relates to (and get this, Mr. Deputy Speaker) the Clerk’s 
office, the library, the Legislative Assembly and staff, 
research and travel committees, as well as the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 

So the member from Kindersley, who the other day in this 
House ridiculed the idea that the Provincial Auditor should be 
under the Board of Internal Economy, in his report in 1981 said 
that the Office of the Provincial Auditor should be under the 
Board of Internal Economy. So as it is convenient, the member 
from Kindersley changes his position on a number of issues. 
He’s changed his position on his party’s program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, quite clearly, because they’ve not carried out any of 
the party program that they had for good management, good 
government management. They’ve broken all the promises 
there. The member has switched his position on the Board of 
Internal Economy as it relates to the auditor. 
 
So the question the public has to ask: can you trust them? Can 
you trust them? That’s the question that has to be asked. 
 
So much for the member from Kindersley, personal submission 
to the rules committee in 1981 dealing with the Provincial 
Auditor and the public accounts of Saskatchewan, a position 
which he has now completely reversed himself on, in which he 
attacks the Provincial Auditor, and his back is guarded by the 
Premier of this province. And we have to ask: why is he 
attacking the Provincial Auditor? 
 
How else has this member from Kindersley and this 
government supported the Provincial Auditor in Saskatchewan. 
I have some figures here which show quite clearly what kind of 
support they give to the Provincial Auditor of this province. 
These figures are the figures for the budget of the Provincial 
Auditor in 1982 and in 1988. In 1982, the Provincial Auditor’s 
budget was $3.1 million — $3.1 million. Unless the people of 
Saskatchewan say, well that’s an awful lot of money to give to 
one person, namely, the Provincial Auditor and his staff, but 
you must keep in mind that the provincial budget at that time 
was $2.8 billion. So we have to have a sufficient staff in the 
Provincial Auditor’s office to oversee the accounting of $2.8 
billion. 
 
So the Provincial Auditor’s budget for his staff in ’82 was $3.1 
million. In 1988 it’s $2.8 million. If you take into consideration 
the escalation in the cost of living over that period of time, from 
’82 to ’88, you will find that the Provincial Auditor’s budget 
has actually shrunk significantly beyond what it shows here in 
figures. 
 
During that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 1982 the staff of 
the Provincial Auditor’s office was 72, and by 1986 the staff 
was down to 63. And this, according to this government, 
constitutes support for more information, support for the 
Provincial Auditor, an accounting of public moneys. 
 
The auditor’s budget is cut from 3.1 to $2.8 million. His 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1332 
 

staff, in less than that period of time, is cut from 72 to 63 staff. 
During that same time the provincial budget rose from $2.8 
billion to $3.9 billion. So it’s significantly less staff with 
significantly less budget. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, under the Act which he operates, has an 
obligation to oversee the accounting for these funds, whether 
it’s done by himself directly or whether it’s done by private 
auditors, which he has to satisfy himself that they have done the 
job properly. And that’s what the auditor’s report is about. That 
what the auditor’s report is about — it’s an accounting of how 
the money’s spent. 
 
(1530) 
 
In 1988-89, $3.9 billion, that was the estimated figure. So that 
shows you quite clearly that this government has not backed the 
Provincial Auditor either in philosophy or in finances to carry 
out his responsibility. 
 
Clearly, the public has to ask: can you believe them? Can you 
believe this government, in a variety of fields, but in this case 
the Provincial Auditor, how they deal with the Provincial 
Auditor? 
 
There’s been other changes come about under this government. 
And to show that it’s not just an isolated case with the 
Provincial Auditor where they’ve broken their promise, on their 
election promises they’ve broken them relating to good 
management and good government, and accounting, freedom of 
information — they’ve broken all those. PURC (public utilities 
review commission) — they’ve done away with that. As soon 
as it got in their way, they did away with it. 
 
They’ve broken their promises in many areas. And this leads to 
the crux of the auditor’s report about how the money’s spent. 
On sales tax, they said: we’ll eliminate sales tax. Well people 
will be quite familiar that the sales tax has gone up from 5 per 
cent to 7 per cent. So this is not an isolated example which has 
led to the kind of report that the Provincial Auditor has put in. 
There’s broken promises littered along the way. 
 
Gasoline tax — they said they’d abolish it. Gasoline tax is back 
bigger than ever. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The motion before the 
Assembly . . . I’d like to ask the member from Regina 
Elphinstone to be quiet while the Speaker is on his feet, and I’d 
ask the member for Saskatoon Westmount to keep his remarks 
to the motion before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am making my 
remarks as closely as I can to the subject before us, which is the 
accounting of the expenditure of the public money and the 
disaster that it has shown to be and why we got into that 
disastrous position. 
 
I think it’s necessary that we examine that, because the 
Provincial Auditor is dealing with a report here that runs into 
the billions of dollars. And it’s a question of accounting — it’s 
a question of accounting. And if in fact the government is 
breaking their promises, instituting new taxes at the same time 
going into debt, it’s going to have an effect on the public 
accounts. And I think it’s 

quite clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They said, we’re going to reduce income taxes. Well that’s 
going to affect a budget, and it’s going to affect the auditor’s 
report, eventually. It’s going to affect the financial position of 
the province, and that’s what the Provincial Auditor’s reporting 
on — the financial position of this province and the debt that 
they’ve got into. 
 
Well it’s quite clear, rather than reduce the income tax, they’ve 
increased it with the flat tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So they 
haven’t kept their promise. And this all adds up to the kind of 
report and the kind of cover-up we’re being treated to by this 
particular government in its attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The question has to be asked by the public: can you believe 
them? I think the answer is a resounding no! they cannot be 
believed. And the auditor shows that. 
 
This government, over a period of a few years, eight budgets 
which the Provincial Auditor is accounting for, in part, has gone 
from a surplus of $139 million to an accumulated debt of $4 
billion. This government is in a desperate financial situation. 
And in their view, desperate situations demand desperate 
actions. And we see the attack on the Provincial Auditor and his 
report as being a desperate situation, a desperate attack by this 
government. 
 
Can you expect a government who tells you before the election 
that the deficit’s going to be $389 million, and after the 
election’s out of the way and they’ve won, tell you it’s 1.2 
billion, can you trust them? I ask the same question about their 
attack on the Provincial Auditor. Can you trust the sincerity of 
their attack on the Provincial Auditor? And those questions 
have to be asked by the public. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not talking about petty cash. We’re 
not talking about the petty cash fund. We’re talking about 
billions of dollars, billions of resource funds, of taxpayers’ 
dollars that have to be accounted for by the Provincial Auditor, 
under the legislation which he was created — under that 
legislation. I think it’s clear that the people, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, have a problem here. The taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan have a problem. 
 
I want to take some time to deal with the auditor’s report — I 
have my copy here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — deal with some 
sections of this auditor’s report. On page 1 under introduction, 
the Provincial Auditor has this to say: 
 

Saskatchewan’s parliamentary system of government is 
based on the principle of rule of law. 
 

In other words, if there is a principle of rule of law, then there’s 
a consequence if you break the law. That’s the corollary of it. 
There’s a consequence if you break the law: 
 

Compliance with the law is critical to the entire system. 
 

I don’t think a truer word could ever be spoken in this 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1333 
 

debate than the words that the auditor puts in the introduction to 
his report this year. He says: 
 

Compliance with the law is critical to the entire system. 
Because of the importance of this principle, much of this 
report is about instances where the laws have been 
contravened. 
 

The words of the Provincial Auditor: 
 

The law requires the Provincial Auditor to report where, in 
his opinion, the management of the public money was 
deficient. 
 

And this is what the Provincial Auditor does in an 
ever-increasing, bigger auditor’s report: 
 

Reporting in this manner does not give credit to all of the 
cases where my audits found public money was properly 
managed. 
 

In other words, he said, I’m not going to spend my time telling 
you where the money was properly spent, because that would 
be a waste of my time and your time. He says, I’m going to tell 
you where the problem areas are. And the Provincial Auditor 
most certainly does that in this report. 
 

Thus, this type of reporting may be viewed by any 
government of the day as unfair. 
 

He suggests that the government may think, well, it’s unfair 
because they didn’t say what a good job we’re doing; they just 
pointed out where we’re making mistakes. And I appreciate that 
attitude by the Provincial Auditor, and I appreciated it when I 
was in government, that the Provincial Auditor didn’t waste 
time with flowery paragraphs, saying what a great job the 
government was doing in the areas where it was obvious they 
were doing a good job. But he told you where the problems 
were — he told you where the problems were. 
 

However, this method of reporting highlights deficient 
practices so members can direct their attention to matters that 
need their time. 
 

There’s the rationale for the type of report the Provincial 
Auditor has. 
 

Over the years, it has been my experience that in most 
cases . . . 
 

This shows you that the Provincial Auditor is a reasonable 
person. He’s a reasonable person, although sometimes in 
government we tend to think that he’s a bit unreasonable. But 
by and large, the provincial auditors of Saskatchewan have been 
reasonable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I notice, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member for Weyburn hasn’t seen his veterinarian 
yet, because he sits on his seat and talks. He should know the 
rules of this House say that he has to be on his feet to talk. And 
I suggest that he see his vet, because maybe his vet can help 
him because he’s got a physical problem there. 
 
Now to get back to the auditor’s report, which is serious, as 
opposed to the member for Weyburn, who is not serious, I want 
to say what the auditor says: 

Over the years, it has been my experience that in most 
cases where deficiencies in the management of public 
money were reported, corrective action was taken. 
 

That’s what the Provincial Auditor says. 
 
The Provincial Auditor gives a summary of the current issues of 
importance, which is right at the beginning of the Report of the 
Provincial Auditor on page 4. 
 

Chapter 2 is about the accountability process needing 
repair. The major issues are discussed and reported under 
the following headings: 
 
Provincial Auditor: I cannot effectively carry out my role 
to watch over the public purse for my client, the 
Legislative Assembly. I recommend the process be 
repaired to require that appointed auditors and the 
Provincial Auditor work together on crown corporation 
audits as joint auditors or with some similar arrangement. 
 

So there’s the recommendation of the Provincial Auditor. 
 

Also, there were a number of cases where I could not get 
information that, by law, I was entitled to receive. 
 

Contrast that with the auditor’s statement at the beginning 
where he says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s parliamentary system of government is 
based on the principle of the rule of law. Compliance with 
the law is critical to the entire system. 
 

The auditor observes that: 
 

 . . there were a number of cases where I could not get 
information that, by law, I was entitled to receive. 
 

And this government, this government attacks him for that. This 
government makes a vicious attack on his office, makes a 
vicious attack on him personally, this servant of the Legislative 
Assembly — this long-time servant of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Further information is provided by the Provincial Auditor: 
 

In my view, the Legislative Assembly requires more 
information about crown corporations, crown-controlled 
corporations and mixed corporations. 
 
The public accounts are not complete, (not) correct or (not) 
timely. 
 

The public accounts are where the members of this Assembly 
do a post-examination of the expenditures of the government. 
The Provincial Auditor observes that the public accounts are not 
complete, not correct, and not timely. So the very basis which 
were used to examine the public accounts or the expenditures of 
the government 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1334 
 

after they’ve occurred is not proper, according to the auditor. 
 

There were a number of cases where the tabling of annual 
reports and financial statements did not comply with the 
law. 
 

So what we have here is a report by the Provincial Auditor that 
says that the government broke the law. And the government’s 
reaction to this is to attack the Provincial Auditor, and that is 
something that will create problems for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. An important situation has occurred here, and 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should be aware of it. 
 
I want to go along a little further and read another part of the 
auditor’s report which is pertinent to my remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. He goes on to detail somewhat some of his concerns 
about serving the Assembly: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because he now sees the financial transactions 
of about 50 per cent of the public spending. 
 

Only 50 per cent of the billions of dollars this government 
spends is the auditor able to attest to the accuracy of — only 50 
per cent. 
 
(1545) 
 
He goes on with the second reason: 
 

Because when reliance on an appointed auditor is not 
justified, it is no longer possible to carry out the work not 
done by the appointed auditor. 
 

And he refers to certain chapters in the report. And he says 
finally: 
 

Because I am denied access to information. 
 

The Provincial Auditor says, according to the law under which 
he operates — namely, a law established by this body — the 
law is broken; he is not able to get access to information. The 
government’s response is to attack the Provincial Auditor — a 
vicious attack on the auditor’s office, a vicious personal attack 
on the auditor. That’s the government’s response to the 
auditor’s report. 
 
A number of other areas, the auditor goes on. He states, with 
regard to interference in his duties, on page 10: 
 

If the Provincial Auditor is to be effective, the person held 
accountable must not limit what the Provincial Auditor 
may see and from whom he can receive information 
regarding public money. 
 

I think that’s a fair statement by the Provincial Auditor. 
 

Information must be provided willingly and in a timely 
manner. If the process is to be effective, there has to be 
co-operation. 
 

That’s exactly what we said in the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That’s exactly what we said in the motion. And if 

the people deny that motion in this House, then they’re denying 
the law of this province. And we’ll see where the law-abiders 
and the lawless stand when this issue comes to a conclusion. 
We’ll find out where the law-abiders are and where the lawless 
are. That’ll be important for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. I’m 
sure they’ll have very little difficulty in figuring it out. 
 
He goes on, on page 10: 
 

This need for the Provincial Auditor to have co-operation 
and the right to obtain information is set out in The 
Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

That’s just exactly what I said — it’s set out in the law. But 
these people, these arrogant people across the way, when the 
Provincial Auditor carries out the letter of the law, attack him 
and launch personal attacks on him and attack his office. 
 
And they’re the people who said in 1982 they would enhance 
the position of the Provincial Auditor. It’s ironic. It’s ironic that 
the very person who makes a personal attack on the auditor is 
the person who said in 1981 that we must respect the auditor 
and we would even have comprehensive auditing under the 
Board of Internal Economy. It’s ironic — the very same person 
from Kindersley makes the attack. He’s the one handling the 
knife on the Provincial Auditor. 
 

In my opinion (the Provincial Auditor goes on) . . . 
 

Perhaps I’ll go back and read just another section that I passed 
over, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On page 10, continuing, he refers to 
a section of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act which states: 
 

The Assembly is a court and has all the rights, powers and 
privileges of a court for the purpose of summarily 
inquiring into and punishing: 
 

The second part of that: 
 

assaults upon or interference with officers of the Assembly 
while in the execution of their duties; 
 

And he goes on. The Provincial Auditor goes on: 
 

Where the Executive limits the Provincial Auditor’s ability 
to carry out his duties the accountability process is broken. 
 

That’s what the auditor says. 
 

In my opinion, I have been interfered with in the execution 
of my duties. 
 

The auditor says he’s been interfered with. Who by? By the 
Executive Council, supported by the back-benchers of the PC 
Party. They attack him when he carries out the law. They attack 
him personally and they attack his office. 
 

My administration of The Provincial Auditor Act is 
consistent with literature from the accounting profession. 

  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1335 
 

So the Provincial Auditor’s administration is not unusual; it’s 
consistent with the literature from the accounting profession. 
 

My administration is also consistent with the interpretation 
I provided in my September 30, 1987 special report to the 
Assembly. 
 

It goes on to talk about the Crown Management Board. This is a 
very important area in the auditor’s report. 
 

As reported in my 1987 annual report, on September 17, 
1987, the Minutes of the Board of Directors of the Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan (referred to 
hereinafter as C.I.C.) contained the following: 
 
“The Board confirmed their direction to the CMB (Crown 
Management Board) Management to not release any 
information to the Provincial Auditor pending further 
discussions among the Board Members.” 
 

So the board of a Crown corporation says, do not release 
information to the Provincial Auditor. That’s what they say. 
 

In my opinion, this action by the Executive is an 
interference with an Officer of the Assembly (observes the 
Provincial Auditor). 
 
In addition, on April 12, 1988, my officials were refused 
access to the minutes of the board of directors of C.I.C. 
Therefore, I have not seen any minutes of C.I.C. issued 
since the November 12, 1987, Board meeting. 
 
In June 16, 1988 these actions were discussed by the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
During discussion, a Member was of the opinion that I had 
not followed “proper procedure” to obtain information 
about C.I.C.’s administration of public money. 
 
The Member’s view of this so called “proper procedure” 
was I had a professional and legal responsibility to initially 
route any requests for information through the appointed 
auditor of a corporation. This view was also expressed by 
the Executive. 
 
I believe a “proper procedure” is a procedure which has the 
force of law. The law states the Provincial Auditor has free 
access to the files, documents, and other records of C.I.C. 
 

So the Provincial Auditor cites the law. And for citing the law, 
he’s attacked by people like the member for Weyburn. He 
attacks him. A member of the Executive Council attacks the 
Provincial Auditor, his office, and supports the member for 
Kindersley who has made the hypocritical statements at one 
point in his political career that he supports the auditor where he 
now attacks him with impunity. He attacks the Provincial 
Auditor. 

The law states the Provincial Auditor has free access to the 
files, documents and other records of C.I.C. The law is 
consistent with accounting literature and parliamentary 
accountability on this subject. 
 
It does not seem reasonable to me that by avoiding the 
letter of the law the Executive can determine what I can or 
cannot see, by saying I have not followed a “proper 
procedure” which the Executive alone defines. If the 
Executive can decide what and how I can examine, the 
Assembly does not have a watch-dog over government 
spending. 
 

It’s as simple as that. Is the Provincial Auditor a servant of this 
body, or is he a servant of the Executive Council of this 
government who has got us into a very serious financial 
situation in Saskatchewan, and now in desperation, at every turn 
attacks the Provincial Auditor? 
 
I want to deal with some other sections of this report, which I 
referred to before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this deals with 
Public Accounts, subheading “Timeliness”: 
 

Complete, correct and timely information is necessary for 
the Assembly to question the executive about its actions. 
 

The auditor states: 
 

In my opinion, the Public Accounts are not timely and they 
do not provide correct and complete information to the 
Assembly. 
 
My opinion is based on the following observations set out 
under the headings of Timeliness, Completeness and 
Correctness. 
 
In my opinion, it is essential that the Assembly has 
information on last year’s spending before it is called upon 
to authorize next year’s spending. 
 

It seems to be a reasonable statement by the auditor. I am sorry 
to see the member for Weyburn leaving. He must have tired of 
the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members aren’t to 
make reference to people’s presence or absence. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m afraid you 
interrupted me before I completed my statement. I was saying I 
was sorry to see the member for Weyburn leaving his seat; 
that’s what I was saying before I was interrupted. And the 
member for Weyburn did leave his seat. 
 
Now I want to get back to the report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which I’ve been side-tracked from briefly. 
 

The Public Accounts for the year March 31, 1987, were 
given to the Assembly on May 19, 1988, more than a full 
year after the end of the year (after the end of the fiscal 
year.) 
 
In April, 1988 the Assembly was asked to authorize the 
spending for 1989, without 

  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1336 
 

information on 1988 or 1987 spending. 
 

So you see that the Assembly was asked to approve 
expenditures before they’d received the report on the previous 
two years’ expenditures on how they’d been handled. 
 
The Provincial Auditor goes on, and the Provincial Auditor is 
subject to a vicious attack by the member for Kindersley and 
the members on the Executive Council, supported by the 
Conservative Party and the back-benchers. A vicious attack, 
because the auditor says you should have in your hand the 
auditor’s report before you’re asked to approve another year’s 
expenditures. That’s not a heretical thought by the Provincial 
Auditor. It sounds reasonable, from the Provincial Auditor. 
 

If the Assembly is to hold the Executive accountable it 
needs to repair the process so it receives timely 
information. 
 
The Public Sector Accounting and Auditing Committee of 
the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants has stated: 
 

The auditor quotes them as follows: 
 

“Information should be timely. Financial statements issued 
long after the year end are of historical interest only. The 
useful of information in making decisions and judgements 
diminishes as time elapses.” 
 

The end of the quotation from the Canadian Institute of 
Chartered Accountants on timeliness of information which this 
government has ridden roughshod over. 
 
And when the auditor has the temerity — the auditor, the 
servant of this Assembly, has the temerity to bring that up in his 
report, he is viciously attacked by this government in its 
arrogance; attempting, because they’re in a difficult financial 
situation, to cover their tracks, to cover up — that’s exactly 
what this administration’s doing; it’s quite clear. 
 
Although the executive has given the Assembly part of the 
Public Accounts for 1985, ’86, and ’87, one volume for each 
year is missing. The auditor observes that for the years ’85, ’86, 
and ’87, one volume is missing in each of those years. And he’s 
attacked, he’s attacked by this government because he says that, 
because he’s drawing the law to their attention. 
 
(1600) 
 
What do we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker? A collection of 
law-breakers? A government who specializes in law-breaking? I 
fear that’s exactly what we have here, a government who breaks 
the law. In its April, 1975 report, as amended to the Assembly, 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts recommended: 
 

“Your Committee considered the question of the amount of 
detail now appearing in the Public Accounts text. Your 
Committee recommends that the levels for detail to be 
shown in the Public 

Accounts be as follows: 
 
$20,000 per employee for wages and salaries (the detail 
would be shown) 
 
$10,000 for payments to suppliers and (the detail would be 
shown) 
 
$2,000 per person for travel and that where the aggregate 
of any person exceeds the limits throughout all 
departments, this aggregate amount is to be also shown.” 
 
The Assembly approved the report. 
 

This Assembly approved that report; those members approved 
that report. 
 

The information requested by the Assembly was provided 
in the Public Accounts for each of the years 1976 through 
1984. 
 

So he observes that although it was not provided in one volume 
for ’85, ’86, ’87, that prior to that time, from ’76 to ’84, it was 
provided. So this is not something new that the Provincial 
Auditor is requesting; it’s information that was provided to the 
Assembly before. The Provincial Auditor is observing that it 
has not been provided for those three years in question and the 
members, with impunity, attack the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The next topic the Provincial Auditor raises, which is of 
importance to us here in discussing the auditor’s report, is 
completeness — completeness. 
 

The Assembly and the taxpayers require a complete picture 
of the Province’s finances: what is owned, what is owed, 
where the revenue comes from and how (the) revenue is 
spent. There is a law requiring this information (and he 
cites the law, he cites the law). Section 65 of The 
Department of Finance Act 1983 states: 
 
“65(1) As soon as it is practicable after the close of the 
fiscal year, the minister shall cause to be prepared by the 
comptroller a statement of the public accounts for that 
fiscal year. 
 
(2) The public accounts prepared pursuant to subsection 
(1) are to show clearly and fully: 
 
(a) the revenue and expenditures of the Government of 
Saskatchewan; and 
 
(b) the state of the consolidated fund and of trust and 
special funds managed by the minister; 

 (a) the re          
and are to set forth all matters that are required to explain 
the financial transactions and position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan during and at the close of the fiscal year.” 
 

So the auditor of Saskatchewan, the servant of this Assembly, 
in fact, the servant of all the people of this province cites the 
law. He cites the law in his auditor’s report and he is 
immediately and viciously attacked by 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1337 
 

the Executive Council of this government, who by the very act 
of attacking the Provincial Auditor who cites the law, puts them 
in the position of being the law-breakers, the law-breakers of 
Saskatchewan — this government. 
 
The auditor goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The Public Accounts do not contain financial statements 
that set forth the financial transactions, position, revenues 
and expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan 
during and at the close of the year. 
 
The main financial statements in the Public Accounts 
contain the Consolidated Fund, the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund, and a statement adding these two funds together. 
 
The financial statements contained in the Public Accounts 
account for about 50 per cent of the public spending of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

And he refers back to paragraph 2.06, which I cited earlier, 
regarding the size of the public purse. So about 50 per cent of 
the public spending of the Government of Saskatchewan is 
contained in the financial statements of the public account. 
 

In my opinion (the auditor goes on) in addition to the 
failure to provide timely and complete information in the 
Public Accounts, the information which is provided is not 
correct (is not correct). 
 
My reports on the financial statements for the Consolidated 
Fund for the past three years have described where, in my 
opinion, the statements are not correct. These reports are 
explained in chapter 11 of this report. 
 

The next subheading, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is non-compliance 
with the law. 
 

My officials noted instances where the tabling of annual 
reports and/or financial statements in the Assembly did not 
comply with the law. Appendix IV contains a list of these 
statements and/or annual reports. 
 

Well let’s have a look at Appendix IV, since we’re discussing 
Appendix IV right at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Appendix IV is at the back of the auditor’s 
report. On the first page it lists 41 reports, annual reports not 
tabled in the Legislative Assembly in the manner required by 
law. 
 
On the second page, it lists 23 further reports under that same 
heading. A total of 64 reports that this government — financial 
statements or annual reports not tabled in the Legislative 
Assembly in the manner required by law. What are those 
reports that are not tabled according to the law as noted by the 
Provincial Auditor in this list of 64? 
 
Let me cite but a few, Mr. Deputy Speaker: the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, the 

Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Prescription Drug Plan, 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, Saskatchewan 
Forest Products, Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission, 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board, Saskatchewan Liquor Board 
Superannuation Fund, Saskatchewan Liquor Licensing 
Commission, Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Commission, Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
This is just a partial reading of the list of reports from the 
auditor’s report — financial statements and annual reports not 
tabled in the Legislative Assembly in the manner required by 
the law. And these members across the way with synthetic 
righteous indignation, they attack the Provincial Auditor 
because he had dared to say that you haven’t tabled these 
reports according to the law. 
 
Here’s where we make the law, right here in this Chamber. We 
made the law that applies to the Provincial Auditor. The 
Provincial Auditor says the law has been broken by this 
government in 64 instances, right here. This government’s 
answer is to attack the Provincial Auditor and to smear, attempt 
to smear, the Provincial Auditor. That’s the response of this 
government. That’s the reaction of this desperate government. 
 
I read out Saskatchewan property management, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to take a little time to deal with Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation in the auditor’s statement. But before 
I do that I want to go back to 1987 auditor’s report to show that 
this is a continuing sore, continuing situation which has not 
been remedied by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
In the year ending March 31, 1987, which is the report of the 
auditor before the one that I quoted from earlier, the Provincial 
Auditor refers to the Department of Supply and Services, which 
is the body that preceded the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. 
 
When the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
was created, Mr. Speaker, you will recall that some of us had 
the opportunity to speak to that issue, and we typified the 
Saskatchewan property management creation and the manner in 
which it was handled as a shell game. It was a shell game. We 
were concerned that this government who said they were 
opposed to Crown corporations would then set out to create 
another Crown corporation, the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, which is referred to in both of these 
reports. 
 
We felt — and I think the auditor’s observations will support 
us, at least will certainly not support this government’s position 
— that the purpose of creating another Crown corporation and 
calling it Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, is 
merely a shell game, an opportunity for this government to 
juggle the finances of the province of Saskatchewan, not with 
petty cash but with millions of dollars, hundreds of millions of 
dollars. What does the auditor have to say about this? 
 
Well the auditor in the 1987 report has nine pages — can you 
believe it? — nine pages on the Department of Supply and 
Services, nine pages of comments. And I don’t intend to read 
them all, Mr. Speaker, but I do intend to make 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1338 
 

reference to a number of sections that the auditor observes 
about supply and services. He says on page 110, the report 
ending March 31, 1987: 
 

In my opinion, the Department had neither support nor 
authority to make such a payment and accordingly, this 
payment was not properly vouchered or certified. 
 

I said this is not petty cash. What we’re talking about here, Mr. 
Speaker, is $2.4 million. The auditor says, “. . . was not 
properly vouchered or certified.” It goes on page 112 and says: 
 

In summary, I am concerned that these actions have 
reduced the information available to Members of the 
Legislative Assembly and thereby reduced the ability of 
the Members of the Legislative Assembly to exact a 
comparable degree of accountability on an ongoing basis. 
 
The following information is no longer disclosed: 
 

The auditor goes on: 
 

The Public Accounts no longer disclose the School 
Divisions who received capital grants during the fiscal year 
and the amounts each Board received, and 
 
The Estimates no longer disclose the capital grants for 
School Divisions and accordingly the Members do not 
have the opportunity to specifically appropriate the sum 
necessary for new capital grants. 
 

The Provincial Auditor goes on and makes further references to 
supply and services in the previous report. He states: 
 

The Department did not contain the approval of the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, as required by section 
9(2) cited above, for this expenditure. Also as there was no 
written agreement or other support for this payment, it was 
not possible for my representatives to determine whether 
the payment of $2,377,292.47 represents a proper charge to 
the Department’s appropriation. 
 

(1615) 
 
So we’ve got another figure of $2.3 million that the auditor is 
making reference to in the Supply and Services report ending in 
1987, March. 
 
At the same time in conjunction with this, the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation had come into being as a 
successor to the supply and services department. It’s interesting 
to note what the Provincial Auditor says in a couple of pages 
about the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. It’s 
as follows: 
 

As at the date of this report (that’s March 31, ’87) the 
Legislative Assembly’s audit requirements have not been 
discharged for the year ended March 31, 1987. 

That’s with regard to the property management corporation. 
 

The following events lead up to this non-performance of 
audit and reporting duties: 

 
As the auditor of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation (SPMC), my representatives wrote to the 
Corporation in March, 1987 asking to be advised when the 
financial statements for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) for 1987 and 1986 would be 
available for audit in order that the audit could be 
appropriately planned. 

 
In June, 1987, my resources were reduced to recognize that 
the audit of the Crown corporations would be carried out 
by private sector auditors. 

 
In June, 1987, (again the auditor reports) the Corporation 
responded to my letter that a private sector auditor was to 
be appointed to audit the accounts of SPMC. 

 
On June 29, 1987, I wrote to the Chairman of the Board of 
the Corporation requesting copies of the audit proposals 
from the auditing firms to ensure that all of the audit 
requirements of the Legislative Assembly would be 
discharged. 
 

So here is this Provincial Auditor again attempting to make sure 
that the law of this Assembly, written by the members of this 
Assembly, is upheld. He states, to ensure that all of the audit 
requirements of the Legislative Assembly would be upheld. 
 

The Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan (CIC) 
responded to my request in this regard and after additional 
correspondence advised that I would not be provided with 
copies of these proposals. 
 

So here began a struggle, or continued a struggle, between the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, which the 
auditor has a responsibility to report on, and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

My inability to obtain these proposals was discussed with 
me by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts at a 
public hearing on September 22, 1987, and with CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation) on September 24, 1987. 
 
On November 18, 1987, Deloitte, Haskins & Sells 
(hereinafter referred to as DHS) advised me that they had 
been asked to accept the appointment as auditors of SPMC 
and asked me if there was any professional reason why 
they should not. 
 
On November 23, 1987, (five days later, the auditor) wrote 
to DHS and advised that I knew of no professional reason 
why they should not accept the appointment as the auditors 
for SPMC. I also provided DHS with the Legislative 
Assembly’s audit requirements as set out in The 

  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1339 
 

Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
On December 22, 1987, I wrote to DHS requesting a reply 
to my letter of November 23, 1987, (which they had not 
responded to) and advised that I was prepared to meet with 
them to discuss any anticipated problems with the 
Legislative Assembly’s audit requirements so that at the 
conclusion of their audit I would be in a position to rely on 
their work and reports. 
 

So the Provincial Auditor had accepted the fact that the 
government wanted this new Crown corporation to be audited 
by private auditors and had, in effect, offered to assist them; 
sent them the guide-lines that would be required. And for what 
purpose was the Provincial Auditor doing it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The reason the Provincial Auditor was doing that was for the 
following: 

 
. . . so that at the conclusion of their audit I would be in a 
position to rely on their work and reports. 
 

Now that shows to me, co-operation on behalf of the Provincial 
Auditor. How was his co-operation met in 1987 and 
subsequently? 
 

On February 29, 1988, my representatives wrote to DHS to 
confirm an earlier conversation with DHS in which it was 
indicated that the reports that I requested from DHS on 
November 23, 1987 would be received on or before March 
31, 1988. 
 

The auditor goes on: 
 

In late March, at a meeting with DHS, I was advised that 
DHS was of the opinion that they may be unable to report 
on the management control systems in place at SPMC for 
the year ending March 31, 1987, as they had not been 
appointed auditor until after the year end. 
 

Now not only does the government hand over the business to a 
private auditor, then they put the private auditor in the 
untenable position that they don’t appoint them as auditor until 
the year end, which shows lack of good management on behalf 
of this government, lack of good management on behalf of this 
government. 
 

DHS has not, at the date of this report, provided me with 
the formal reports I requested to discharge the reporting 
responsibilities to the Legislative Assembly. 
 

So the Provincial Auditor, at the writing of this report, was 
unable to discharge his responsibilities to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the members in this Assembly, because he 
hadn’t received the appropriate reports from the private 
auditors. And the paper chain can be traced right back to the 
maladministration of this government opposite. 
 

Further, it is my opinion that it would be unrealistic at this 
late date to conduct my own audit examination of the 
accounts of SPMC 

pursuant to subsection 11.1(3) of The Provincial Auditor 
Act, as it would further delay this annual report. 
 
Accordingly, I await the formal reports from DHS and 
advise the Legislative Assembly of the results of their 
March 31, 1987 audit in my March 31, 1988 annual report. 
 
As a result, the members of the Legislative Assembly do 
not have the necessary information on a timely basis to 
exact the appropriate degree of accountability from the 
executive government for its quality of administration of 
the assets entrusted to SPMC. 
 

That is a damning indictment in 1987 of this government’s 
handling of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. And the story goes on; the story goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If we move now to the Report of the Provincial Auditor ending 
March 31, ’88, which is the most recent report we have, laid on 
our table a few days ago, the section under Saskatchewan 
Property Management shows the following. The auditor begins: 
 

In my 1987 annual report, I reported the Legislative 
Assembly’s audit requirements were not discharged at 
April 30, 1988. 
 
I advised that the appointed auditor for SPMC was of the 
opinion they may be unable to report on the adequacy of 
the control systems in place for the year ended March 31, 
1987 as they had not been appointed auditor until after that 
date. 
 
I have now received the formal reports from the appointed 
auditor. 
 
The appointed auditor was not able to express an opinion 
on the adequacy of SPMC’s control systems to safeguard 
and control public money because he had not been 
appointed until after the year end. 
 
I, therefore, am unable to reply on the appointed auditor 
for the purpose of discharging my responsibility to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

So the auditor reports that the appointed auditor, by the 
government, for Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, did not file the necessary report so that the 
Provincial Auditor could discharge his responsibility to this 
Assembly. And for that he is attacked; he is attacked by this 
government. He’s attacked because he reports that the 
conditions which apply to the Provincial Auditor have been not 
met. The law has not been met. Someone has broken the law; 
someone has broken the law. 
 

The spirit of the law requires me to rely on the work of the 
appointed auditor unless I am not satisfied with the work 
and the report. If I am not satisfied, I must audit and report. 
 

So the Provincial Auditor says that if he’s not satisfied with 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1340 
 

the appointed auditor, then he must audit and report to this 
Assembly. 
 

In this case, it is not possible to conduct my own audit 
procedures for the same reasons the appointed auditor was 
unable to conduct their audit procedures. That is, it is not 
possible to study and evaluate the control systems in effect 
at March 31, 1987 if considerable time has elapsed after 
the year end. 
 

So the auditor reports the conundrum that he cannot examine 
the operations of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation and evaluate them for the period up to March 31, 
’87 because too much time has elapsed. 
 

There is a basic conflict between what law requires and 
what can be done. The appointed auditor did not issue his 
report on the 1987 year until sometime after the year end. 
If the work and report is not adequate, it is not possible for 
me to conduct all the necessary audit procedures. 
 

So the auditor states that it is impossible for him to do that at 
this point. 
 
He observes: 
 

When this situation arises, the Members of the Legislative 
Assembly are not served and accountability suffers. 
 

So this is what the auditor says. 
 

In Chapter 2, I recommend the process be changed so 
(that) the appointed auditor and the Provincial Auditor 
work together on crown corporation audits as joint auditors 
with some similar arrangement. 
 

He goes on to say why he is not able to report on the work of 
the appointed auditor for the following reasons: 
 

— the appointed auditor has, in my opinion, issued an 
inappropriate opinion on SPMC’s 1988 financial 
statements. 
 
— the documentation in the working paper files of the 
appointed auditor was not sufficient to permit me to form 
an opinion on the adequacy of SPMC’s control systems to 
safeguard and control public property. 

 —the appointed auditor has, in my opinion, issued an inappropriate opinion on     
So what the auditor is commenting upon here, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is no adequate control to safeguard and control public 
property as regards the Property Management Corporation. 
 

— the documentation in the working paper files was not 
sufficient to permit me to form an opinion on SPMC’s 
compliance with authorities. 

 —the documentation in the working paper files was not sufficient to permit m           
(1630) 

Further discussion on these items follows. 
 

I will be conducting those audit procedures that can be 
done for 1987 and 1988. 
 

And he refers to certain paragraphs. 
 

When my audit procedures are completed, I will report the 
results in my next annual report (of the auditor). 
 

So you have the situation where the Provincial Auditor is now 
dealing with the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, and once more we are delayed in hearing what is 
happening in the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
We know some of the things that are happening in the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation under the 
minister that’s in charge in this government. I suspect we do not 
know a sufficient amount about what’s going on in property 
management corporation to be able to protect the people of 
Saskatchewan from this government. That’s something we have 
yet to find out. 
 
There is a difference of opinion, which the Provincial Auditor 
cites, on this particular issue: 
 

In my opinion, SPMC’s financial statements contain 
significant departures from the generally accepted 
accounting principles (G.A.A.P.) which I describe later. 
 
The appointed auditor has issued an audit opinion without 
reservations on these financial statements. Therefore, in 
my opinion, the appointed auditor has issued an 
inappropriate report. 
 

The auditor, the appointed auditor, has issued an inappropriate 
report. 
 

Accordingly, I have reported this matter to the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan. I will report its 
ruling when I receive it. 
 

Now this is a little different than the minister from Kindersley, 
who stands up in this Chamber on this particular issue and 
suggests that he’s going to report the auditor to his professional 
organization. I wonder if the member for Kindersley, the 
Minister of Justice, has done that yet, because quite frankly it’s 
in the record of the House that he’s going to report the 
Provincial Auditor to his professional organization. 
 
I wonder if that was just talk from the minister from Kindersley, 
because I think that the professional organization may be very 
interested in looking at the distortion created by the member 
from Kindersley when he read selectively from a letter in this 
Chamber, and then when the letter was tabled in the Chamber 
and members had a chance to study the letter, decided that what 
the member from Kindersley had done is a complete distortion 
of the letter, a complete distortion of the letter. 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1341 
 

So the Provincial Auditor says that he’s going to report this 
issue to The Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Saskatchewan, and I presume that the Provincial Auditor will 
report later, as he states here. 
 

The primary purpose of preparing financial statements for 
SPMC is to enable the Legislative Assembly to hold the 
Executive government accountable for the public money it 
administers through SPMC. 
 

The Provincial Auditor then cites the concept statement number 
1 of the Governmental Standards Accounting Board — the 
Governmental Standards Accounting Board: 
 

“Accountability requires governments to answer to the 
citizenry — to justify the raising of public resources and 
the purposes for which they are used. Governmental 
accountability is based on the belief that the citizenry has a 
“right to know,” a right to receive openly declared facts 
that may lead to public debate by the citizens and their 
elected representatives. Financial reporting plays a major 
role in fulfilling government’s duty to be publicly 
accountable in a democratic society.” 
 

This is an interesting concept that the Provincial Auditor puts 
forward. And when the Provincial Auditor puts forward this 
concept of the government standards accounting board, he is 
attacked by the government. Can you feature that, Mr. Speaker? 
He puts forward these standards, which sound laudable to me, 
about the public’s right to know what their money will be used 
for, and he’s attacked. He’s attacked by the member from 
Weyburn, and the member in charge of the property 
management corporation whose whole operation is in question, 
is in doubt, not only in this report but the previous report. 
 
The whole thing is in doubt, and this government attacks — 
attacks — the Provincial Auditor viciously. It makes a vicious 
personal attack on the Provincial Auditor and attacks the office 
of the Provincial Auditor, all the time reducing the Provincial 
Auditor’s ability to continue to provide the kind of service that 
the law says that the Provincial Auditor must provide to this 
Assembly. 
 
A law that was made right here in this Assembly is now being 
abridged, being abridged by this arrogant government who 
cares not a whit about the Provincial Auditor, but cares about 
the straited financial situation in which it finds itself and which 
it got itself into. That’s what concerns this government, and 
they’ll attack anybody who attempts to probe into that cover-up. 
They’ll attack anyone who attempts to probe into that. 
 
Well the Provincial Auditor goes on to state in his report, which 
this government attacks at every turn: 
 

The financial statements do not disclose the nature and 
significance of the Participation Credit of $42.7 million in 
the Statement of Income and Retained Earnings. In my 
opinion, this is essential information which is required to 
be disclosed by G.A.A.P. (generally accepted accounting 

principles). 
 

SPMC manages the furniture, the fittings and equipment 
previously managed by the Department of Supply and 
Services. 

 
And the minister sits right there that’s in charge of this, this 
fiasco that can’t get its audit reports in. The minister’s right 
here in the Chamber, the minister that’s breaking the law. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member knows 
that presence or absence of members are not referred to, and I 
ask him to refrain from doing so. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I realize I shouldn’t be 
resorting to saying whether the minister is present or not. The 
presence of the minister is not paramount to this discussion 
here. But the person who is responsible is a person who sits 
normally in this Chamber and answers for the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, and that department is in a 
mess. That Crown corporation is in a mess. 
 
Compliance with the authorities. I don’t know how the member 
for . . . the minister in charge of the property management 
corporation would even stick his head above the desk, for other 
reasons, not to mention the running of the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, which I said right from the 
start, was a shell game, a shell game on the people of 
Saskatchewan. And he’s the minister that’s in charge of it, and 
his government. 
 
The next heading is compliance with the authorities, and here’s 
one of the areas where the auditor got attacked again by people 
like the minister in charge of the property management 
corporation. 
 

Section 25 of The Department of Finance Act, 1983 reads: 
 
“All public money other than: . . . 
 
(b) money otherwise specially disposed of by the 
Legislature is to form one consolidated fund to be 
appropriated for the public services of Saskatchewan.” 

                        
So the Provincial Auditor indicates what the Consolidated Fund 
is, and he suggests that the money is supposed to be in the 
Consolidated Fund as a result of transactions of the 
government. 
 

SPMC manages the sale of assets it owns plus assets 
transferred to it from other government agencies. 
 
The Department of Health sent dental equipment costing 
$2.2 million to SPMC to sell. 
 

This is a consequence, Mr. Speaker, of the demise of the dental 
program for children. This is a program that the government in 
its privatization thrust decided to cut, and the minister of the 
property management corporation got the job from the 
Department of Health of selling the assets, selling the assets off 
— dental equipment. 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1342 
 

When the dental equipment is sold the revenue should be 
paid into the consolidated fund as these assets are not 
owned by SPMC (the auditor observes). 
 
I am unable to determine from the files of the appointed 
auditor (this is appointed auditor) the amount of dental 
equipment sold and whether the funds were sent to the 
consolidated fund. 
 

Can you understand now, Mr. Speaker, why the auditor is 
making representations to the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan about the appointed auditor? I 
think we can start to get a grasp on this because the Provincial 
Auditor says, I can’t get the reports to verify that this has been 
handled properly. We’re talking, not peanuts here again, it’s 
$2.2 million in the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. I don’t know where the money is, the auditor says, 
but it’s not accounted for. He can’t ascertain that. And that’s 
why he’s reporting this particular auditor to the professional 
organization. 
 
And I hope the member for Kindersley takes seriously his threat 
to report the auditor of Saskatchewan to his professional 
organization. Because I think if we can get the minister from 
Kindersley to get outside of this Chamber and write a letter to 
that professional organization and put the kind of information in 
that letter that he said in this Chamber where he is protected, 
where he is legally protected from what he says, if he gets out 
and files that report with the professional organization, the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan, then the 
auditor will have redress to the member from Kindersley. He’ll 
have a chance to get at him in a court of law — not here, in a 
court of law. 
 
But I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that member for 
Kindersley will not have the courage to go outside the Chamber 
and repeat what he said in this Chamber about the auditor and 
about public accounts. He will not have the courage of his 
convictions to write a letter to the chartered accountants, the 
professional organization, and report the Provincial Auditor and 
put the evidence in to support his case. The evidence will be 
what the member read from the letter in this Chamber, plus the 
letter, that will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. You’re light isn’t on, so I 
recognize the member from Maple Creek. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the member 
from Westmount is not sticking to the motion of privilege, the 
first one. He keeps referring to the second motion of privilege. I 
think the rules are very clear on motions of privilege, must be 
adhered to, and I would wish you to rule on that. 
 
(1645) 
 
The Speaker: — I have listened carefully to the member’s 
motion, and of course the thrust of her argument is correct, so I 
remind the hon. member that unless he can relate his remarks to 
the motion under discussion he should refrain from them. 
Otherwise, he may continue. But the main thrust of the 
argument is the original motion. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate your guidance on this. It’s a very unusual situation 
we have here. We have two motions of privilege on the order 
paper — two motions of privilege on the order paper. And I 
made some remarks about this earlier in my comments in 
differentiating between the two, especially because I didn’t 
want to be talking about the wrong privilege motion that’s 
before us. And I know that the member for Maple Creek is 
thoroughly acquainted with these motions because she raised 
the point of order, but just to refresh myself, Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to read this motion over. It’s a motion moved by the 
member from Saskatoon South and it says: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and 
that the Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan 
to make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

I think the member from Maple Creek was right, that I was 
straying off the topic, and I’ll try to stay on this topic which is 
the . . . really, is the government attack on the Provincial 
Auditor, the general frontal attack on the Provincial Auditor, as 
opposed to the pin-point attack by the member from Kindersley 
on the person of the Provincial Auditor. So I think I’ll try to 
stick to the rules with regard to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have here, cited time and time again, is the question of 
law-breaking, law-breaking by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. This is not something that is isolated. It’s not 
isolated to the Report of the Provincial Auditor and their attack 
on the Provincial Auditor and the contents thereof. But they’ve 
broken a moral law; they’ve broken moral laws. 
 
In their pledge to bring good management and good 
government to Saskatchewan people — and I referred to it 
earlier in the campaign literature about enhancing the position 
of the auditor, about freedom of information, five or six points 
all relating to good management — all broken, all broken. So 
it’s not unusual for this government to break the law, for this 
party to break the law — the Conservative Party — because 
they’ve done it time and time again right since 1982. 
 
I made reference to that earlier, Mr. Speaker. But again, they’re 
breaking the law. In almost every citation that the Provincial 
Auditor makes, he suggests that they’ve broken the law. And 
the Provincial Auditor cites the law they’ve broken. And I can 
understand why the member for Maple Creek would be 
sensitive about this because her political life is on the line. This 
is the second time the Provincial Auditor’s report has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I think 
the member from Westmount is once again off the topic. My 
political life, the longevity of it, which I’m sure 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1343 
 

is very long, has nothing to do with his motion of privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order, 
and I must say that the point of order is well taken in this case; 
however, I would just like to caution members to the allow the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount to continue. And 
perhaps the debates won’t continue. The debate should stay on 
the topic and not across the aisle between members. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Attempting to 
stay with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I’ve just 
asked the hon. members to allow the debate to proceed without 
debate across the House from one side to the other, and I repeat 
that once more. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The special 
order which is before us, which I referred to just a moment ago, 
the motion was granted on May 19, and the one that the 
member made reference to, which is not in order to discuss, was 
May 23. 
 
Now the one on May 19 is the frontal attack . . . it deals with the 
frontal attack of the government on the Provincial Auditor. And 
I suppose we have to examine who’s carrying the attack. Who’s 
carrying the attack on the Provincial Auditor? Is it the Premier? 
Well not vocally, not vocally, but the Premier has a cat’s-paw, 
has a cat’s-paw who does the dirty work for him. Premier has 
retained his seat during the entire questioning on this matter, 
during the entire, specific questioning on the matter. 
 
And who is handling the attack against the Provincial Auditor 
because of this report? It’s the member for Kindersley. It’s as 
simple as that. He is the person who’s handling the attack on the 
Provincial Auditor on behalf of the Executive Council of 
government. 
 
Now the Premier . . . When the questions started on this issue 
which put this motion of privilege before the House, I watched 
the Premier. When the first question came up he nodded to the 
member from Kindersley; the member from Kindersley rose to 
respond. So clearly the Premier, on his own choice, has selected 
the member for Kindersley to handle the knife in this job, to 
work over the Provincial Auditor with the knife. Yes, he’s 
going to attack him and the manner varies, and I won’t get into 
the debate about the letter because I don’t want to get out of 
order, Mr. Speaker, but the member for Kindersley is clearly 
handling the attack with the connivance of the Premier; yes, 
with the advice and support of the Premier. 
 
Now what is the position of the member for Kindersley? Well, 
he’s first of all encouraged that the Premier has supported him, 
and continues to support him, and continues to have him answer 
the questions. And the final buck stops at the Premier’s desk, 
but for the time being it’s with the member from Kindersley. 
And the member for Kindersley sets himself up as the judge; 
he’s the judge; he’s the jury; he’s the prosecutor; and he wants 
to be the executioner, too — he wants to be the executioner. 

The question that arises, Mr. Speaker: who shall act for the 
defence? Who shall act for the defence? Who shall defend the 
laws of the province of Saskatchewan as they are in the statutes 
of Saskatchewan? Who’s going to defend the law? We’ll see 
later on who the law-breakers are and who the supporters of the 
law are. And that’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 
understand. The truth will be the defence of the auditor. If he 
needs the defence, it’s there. 
 
Now the government has refused to make it convenient for the 
truth to be told. They’ve refused to call the auditor before the 
bar so that we can question him. And if in fact, as the 
government says, this auditor is negligent and is making some 
kind of a deal, you would think that this government would be 
the first one to get him before the bar. And if that were the case, 
we would certainly support them. But there’s no evidence to 
support that. 
 
The cat’s-paw for the Premier, the member from Kindersley, 
the Minister of Justice, is the one who’s carrying out the action 
in the Legislative Chamber. Every day during question period 
the member for Kindersley is on his feet, attacking the auditor, 
attacking his report. We, as the opposition, are merely the 
instruments of the defence. We’re the instruments of the 
defence. The truth is what will out in due course. We will ask 
our questions. We will ask our questions and our voice will be 
heard. That is important. 
 
It’s unfortunate . . . I don’t know whether it’s unfortunate. I 
don’t want to make an observation about that, but it’s 
interesting, let me put it that way. It’s interesting that the 
Premier should choose the member for Kindersley as the person 
to handle the action in the Chamber. This member makes the 
attack on the auditor and his report, the report of the auditor, as 
mentioned in the motion before us, being impeded in carrying 
out his role to watch over the public purse. 
 
This is the person that the member for Kindersley is attacking. I 
suppose it’s because he’s done it before. He’s experienced in 
this. This was not an isolated case. This is not an isolated case 
of attacking officials of this Chamber because they brought in a 
report that the government doesn’t like. 
 
The same member for Kindersley is the member that attacked 
the Ombudsman of this province — attacked the Ombudsman. 
He’s the same member that attacked the Legislative Counsel 
and was forced to apologize in this House. 
 
The person who now fronts the attack for the Premier on the 
Provincial Auditor, who’s attempting to uphold the law, and 
right in there is the member for Kindersley attacking him. He 
attacked on the auditors, generally, before this time — and that 
was reported in this debate — same person who now attacks the 
Provincial Auditor. And he attacks the auditor specifically. 
Why is the member for Kindersley being selected as the person 
who will front the attack for the Premier? 
 
I suppose . . . Why are all those members on their feet? 
 
Where does the auditor stand in the public eye? Well I 
  



 
May 24, 1989 

 

1344 
 

want to cite some evidence in support of the auditor. Mind you, 
we will give the auditor — as long as he’s doing the job which 
the law says he must do — we will give him strong support in 
this Legislative Chamber, you can rest assured on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But outside this Chamber, what does the public say? On 
February 10, 1989 in the Star-Phoenix, this editorial appeared, 
“Lutz taking right road.” It says: 
 

Good for Provincial Auditor Willard Lutz. Demands for 
retractions and apologies from government MLAs are not 
going to make him change his mind about the public’s 
right to know how the money it has invested in certain 
Crown-controlled companies is being managed. 
 

This is the Star-Phoenix, February 10, ’89 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 5 o’clock the House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


