


















































May 30, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 30, 1989 
 

1497 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 3 — Crisis in Health Care (continued) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The resolution that we 
are dealing with today is: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its arbitrary, unilateral, and harmful 
cut-backs and changes to health care services, which it has 
imposed without public consultation, and which are causing 
a crisis in Saskatchewan’s health care system; and further 
condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its failure 
to develop and pursue a long-term strategic plan for the 
positive improvement of Saskatchewan health care services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, before 5 o’clock I’d just nicely broached the subject 
and was just starting to get into it. I am pleased to be back to 
present the main portion of my comments this evening, sir. 
 
We have got a health care system that has now, definitely, a 
two-tier health care system — two-tier, one for the rich, one for 
the poor — two-tier health care system, Mr. Speaker, in that if 
you have money you can hire the additional help that is required 
that hospitals simply don’t have the money to fund. If you are 
one of the working poor or if you are on welfare, you simply do 
not have the funds to hire a private duty nurse. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that we have witnessed now over 
seven years of accelerating staff reductions at our hospitals. We 
are now seeing nurses that have been cut back to the point that 
often there is one nurse for 30 patients, one nurse covering a 
whole ward. 
 
And as I pointed out before 5 o’clock, if so much as one patient 
of those 30 is in any sort of difficulty, the nurse is quite properly 
and rightly with that one individual. That leaves the other 29 
patients sort of at the mercy, because they just cannot get the 
help. No nurse, no human being, can be two places at the same 
time. It is just physically impossible. 
 
I think it’s a real tribute and a real credit to the nursing profession 
in Saskatchewan that they do handle situations as well as they 
can, and as well as they do. They are a real credit to our society. 
I only wish that they didn’t have to struggle on under these 
increasingly difficult circumstances. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, many 
of the nurses also believe that they should not be struggling under 
those conditions. Many of them have joined the thousands of 
people that are fleeing Saskatchewan, fleeing the bankrupt 
policies of the government members opposite. 
 
It’s a real shame, because it leaves our province the poorer. We 
are losing women and some men of very professional stature, but 
young professional people who want a chance to have an impact 
on the world, want a chance to do the best work they possibly 
can, and they’re 

increasingly realizing Saskatchewan under the Conservative 
government is not the place that they can do their best work. 
 
So what’s the record been, Mr. Speaker? We see hospitals with a 
waiting list that seems to grow and grow and grow. We see long, 
long waits for hospital beds. We see surgery that is delayed and 
put off time and again, simply because there is not enough 
spaces. This is the legacy after seven sorry Tory years. 
 
Seven sorry Tory years and we have a waiting list in excess, well 
in excess of 12,000 people between Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
I was talking with a former minister of Health who had been 
minister of Health in the NDP years, the Blakeney years through 
the 1970s. That minister of Health told me that one time the 
waiting list got up . . . It was quite noticeably above 2,000 people, 
noticeably above 2,000 people. The premier of the day called that 
minister of Health in, put him on the carpet, and said, this is 
unacceptable; we will not tolerate that high a waiting list. The 
minister did his best to explain what the problems were. The 
premier, Mr. Blakeney, the premier of that day, said, it is simply 
unacceptable; you have got — and he gave him a limited number 
of months — to get the situation in hand, to get the waiting list 
down below 2,000, or else the then premier of the day would 
simply find a new Health minister. 
 
We have not seen any such action from the current Premier. 
Indeed he seems to see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil. They 
keep talking about world-class health care. Unfortunately 
world-class to them seems to mean, well, let’s be just like the 
Americans, let’s be just like the Americans. What a sad 
commentary when we have been leaders in North America in 
health care. 
 
Socialized medicine, or medicare, started right here in 
Saskatchewan, and we’re very, very proud of it and rightly so. 
The people of Saskatchewan are very proud of it. It is with their 
combined efforts along with the government of the day that had 
the vision to implement it. I’m talking, of course, of the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), the Tommy Douglas 
era. They implemented medicare, and that has truly been my 
party’s greatest gift to Canada — medicare. 
 
And yet the Conservatives opposite would have us think that the 
United States is the model to follow. A model where there is over 
. . . What are the numbers? Forty million? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thirty-six million. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thirty-six million. Thirty-six million Americans 
do not have even the basic health coverage — 36 million 
Americans. Some of them are working but not . . . obviously not 
the working rich, they’re the working poor. But any time you can 
have over 10 per cent of a country’s population not covered with 
even the very basic health care coverage, you’ve got a tragedy. 
 
That is happening at a time when the Americans are   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1498 
 

spending over 50 per cent more per person on health care than 
we are spending here in Saskatchewan — over 50 per cent more, 
and for much less coverage. 
 
We all know the horror stories of friends or relatives that went to 
the United States, got sick, were presented with a hospital bill 
longer than three arms together, and much bigger than that. We 
all know those horror stories; we hear them daily. 
 
But occasionally I hear a story of an American who has come up 
to Canada, wound up getting sick, wound up in the hospital for 
whatever the period of time, were cared for, and were astounded 
when they were presented a bill on discharge at how low it was, 
but were equally astounded that they weren’t presented the bill 
and told, well you have to pay it before you get out. They were 
presented the bill and asked to pay it in good faith. And they are 
very, very much in favour of our health care system, all those 
people who have had to use it. 
 
And now we’re seeing us sliding into the American system, 
simply for a lack of government attention; simply for a lack of a 
long-term strategy to provide the best possible health care for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will be talking a little bit about some of the changes that have 
been made, of course — the dental plan, the children’s dental 
plan and the prescription drug plan, and what has been happening 
with regards to medical training. 
 
I want to explode one myth that government members opposite 
keep talking about, saying, oh we’re spending more money on 
health care now than ever before. Well they’re saying that in an 
attempt — that is failing, but an attempt nevertheless — to justify 
their cut-backs in health care. First they’re trying to argue that 
the health care costs are spiralling somehow out of control, and 
that it now accounts . . . They say it now accounts for a larger 
portion of total government expenditure than at any other time 
previous in Saskatchewan’s history. The second argument 
government members opposite will make is, they try to argue 
that, despite the cut-backs, there’s more money being spent this 
year than there was last year. 
 
Let’s have a look at it. Let’s see what’s really happening. Over 
several years, the PC government has shifted many of its 
programs and its expenditures out of other government 
departments and moved it into the Department of Health. Let me 
give you a few examples, Mr. Speaker. Continuing care 
expenditures used to be funded through Social Services. Now 
those continuing care expenditures are funded through the 
Department of Health. 
 
The minister’s salary used to be funded through Executive 
Council. Now the Minister of Health’s salary is funded through 
the Department of Health. We get no more service; indeed, many 
of us will argue we get much less service out of the current 
Minister of Health, but the Department of Health winds up 
paying what previously was paid by Executive Council or 
reported in a different department. 
 
The routine support services which used to be funded 

through supply and services are now funded through the 
Department of Health. Those and a few other changes, items that 
have been transferred into the Department of Health for 
budgetary purposes, amount to more than $240 million a year — 
$240 million, not of new services or anything like that, simply 
some fancy accounting from the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Creative accounting. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Creative accounting which we have grown so 
accustomed to in these seven sorry Tory years. Creative 
accounting that is nothing more than smoke and mirrors — 
nothing more than smoke and mirrors. 
 
On a simple comparison, Mr. Speaker, from previous 
governments to now, the health care spending is going down 
under this administration; certainly, the care that Saskatchewan 
residents are no longer enjoying has deteriorated in the last seven 
years. We can talk numbers. I can talk about $240 million that 
was transferred into the Department of Health budget, but what 
does that really mean for my constituents, the constituents in 
Regina North, and the other Saskatchewan people? What does it 
really mean? 
 
Those who have had anything to deal . . . anything to do with a 
hospital in recent years know exactly what it is I’m saying. 
They’re seeing fewer nurses; they’re seeing a crisis in the health 
care system. They know what health cut-backs are all about. 
They’re witnessing it every day that they have a family member 
or a friend who is in the hospital, or if they’re in the hospital 
themselves, of course, they witness it very much first hand. So 
the people of Saskatchewan don’t need to hear about the $240 
million transferred, they simply need to have their eyes open, and 
many of them do. They see the deterioration of the health care 
system. 
 
So the cut-backs in our health care system, Mr. Speaker, have 
imposed a great deal of hardship on Saskatchewan families, but 
particularly on those who need medical services and are least able 
to pay for it; because I’ve always believed that the time to present 
someone with a bill for their health care, their hospital bill, their 
doctor bill, is not when they’re sick, not when they’re unable to 
be earning money. The time to present the bill is on an ongoing 
basis. That’s why we have health care insurance funded through 
our taxes. 
 
I am delighted — I know many viewers would be surprised to 
hear anyone say they’re delighted to pay taxes — but I am 
delighted to be in a position to enjoy the good health I do, to be 
able to pay the taxes so that others can have necessary services 
like health care, like the prescription drug plan, like the children’s 
dental plan — and indeed, if I may stray marginally for a few 
seconds, like education and like highways and like our social 
services system. 
 
I’m happy to do my part to fund that through the taxes, and I’ve 
always felt that way, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been blessed with some 
very good health thus far in my life and indeed, I hope that it 
continues. 
 
(1915) 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1499 
 

The cuts to the prescription drug plan are causing very severe 
financial stress, severe stress to thousands of Saskatchewan 
families — I have some numbers that I’ll be sharing with you a 
little bit later — but those families that are now paying the 
up-front cost, now paying 20 per cent of all the cost of 
prescription drugs. They know who they are. They know when 
they go to the drug store and they’re dreading having to purchase 
those prescription drugs because of a lack of money; they know 
they’re the ones I’m talking about that are hurting. 
 
And it’s thousands, literally thousands of families across 
Saskatchewan. There are many, many other thousands of 
families who it doesn’t hurt to spend 50 or 100 or $200 on a 
prescription. 
 
But what of those in our society who truly cannot afford it? We 
have changed from a prescription drug plan that was universally 
accessible to everyone, to one that now favours wealthier people, 
and that’s really a shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really puzzles me when I see an election 
advertisement, “It’s time for a change, a PC government will (and 
of course this was from 1982, one of the things) improve 
medicare.” I ask, have they improved medicare? Indeed medicare 
seems to be on the bob-sled run and I don’t know if we’re 
half-way down, a third of the way down, three-quarters of the 
way down, but we’re certainly on that bob-sled run. Our 
medicare system, as Saskatchewan people understand it, is in a 
crisis. We’re on that bob-sled run down. And I suspect that the 
only thing that’s going to change that is after the next election 
when the member for Riversdale becomes premier, when we get 
a health minister committed to the people of Saskatchewan, 
committed to delivering first-rate health care. 
 
The ad for, “It’s time for a change, a PC government will . . .” 
also promised to extend the drug plan coverage, plan to include 
all prescription drugs. Well isn’t it interesting that the promise 
could be to improve medicare, to include all prescription drugs, 
and what do we see? The formulary has not increased. The 
formulary, as you will know, Mr. Speaker, is the list of all the 
prescription drugs that are covered under the prescription drug 
plan, and not all prescriptions are covered. I’m not going to get 
into a great, lengthy dissertation on that, but not all drugs are 
covered. Many, many, many are — indeed I think most drugs are 
— but all prescription drugs are not covered. 
 
And on top of that we now have got this policy that forces people 
to pay 20 per cent up front. Indeed they pay 100 per cent up front 
until they’ve reached their deductible — 100 per cent of the cost 
of prescription drugs until they’ve reached their deductible. 
That’s this great improvement from the wizards opposite. 
 
I wonder how it is, Mr. Speaker, that for 11 straight years, 11 
years of a socialist government, we had balanced budgets; the 
prescription drug plan was introduced, it had a nominal 
dispensing fee; health care was there. We had all kinds of things 
going for us. Unemployment never, never reached the crisis 
proportion it’s at today. But 11 straight balanced budgets, 11 
years of very good health care coverage, indeed, health care 
coverage that was 

being extended all the time . . . And now we’ve had seven sorry 
Tory years of health cuts. We’ve seen two years, for example, 
we’ve seen two years of the children’s dental program chopped 
off, two years of coverage chopped off — the years when the 
children are age 15 and 16, lopped off. 
 
Previously the dental plan was expanding, not contracting, but 
expanding because we had a government that was committed to 
managing Saskatchewan’s affairs in an honest, straightforward, 
forthright manner; a government not interested in simply lining 
its own pockets or the friends of members, but a government 
committed, truly committed in the finest sense of the word to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And it’s a real tribute to Al Blakeney 
that we had so many strides forward during those years. 
 
Indeed I look forward, I look forward to the coming decade, the 
1990s and beyond the year 2000; and it will be most interesting 
to hear someone stand up in this House in the year 2020, and say, 
what a tribute to the member for Riversdale that Saskatchewan is 
again a good province to live in — again a province where health 
care is accessible for all; a province again where, hopefully, 
things like a dental program will be expanded; hopefully, a 
province where we will have more than 400 people working in a 
children’s dental program. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that we could expand that to include 
seniors, and ultimately the whole population. There are countries 
in this world that provide dental care for everyone. I sincerely 
hope we can move in that direction, but first we have to get . . . 
Well first we have to form the government; then we have to get 
the financial affairs in order; and then take it one step at a time. I 
very much look forward to that. 
 
I’ve been talking about the children’s plan privatization program 
that resulted in 400 dental plan workers being fired. It also, Mr. 
Speaker, eliminated 578 school clinics in 338 Saskatchewan 
communities, and those cut-backs to that plan have very much 
hurt rural Saskatchewan. I would submit more so than urban 
Saskatchewan, although I confess it was much handier knowing 
that when my children went to school they would get their teeth 
looked after there. Now we have to take our children to the 
dentist. It means some time off work. It’s either my wife has to 
make the trip or I have to make the trip. And we have both had 
our turns at it, and I am sure we will continue to do it until we 
can again create a good children’s dental program. 
 
When I was growing up, Mr. Speaker, we were some 65 miles, 
or stated another way, nearly 110 kilometres from the nearest 
dentist, and it always shocked me that my class-mates, many of 
them did not receive dental care — many did not. We went every 
year faithfully. We made the 65-mile, one-way trek — the whole 
family piled into the car, I and my four other brothers and mother 
and father, and we had our teeth looked after. But we were the 
fortunate ones, and I guess that’s why the children’s dental 
program was set up to be a school-based program, so that all 
children could enjoy the benefits of good teeth. 
 
These cuts, as you know, do not promote good, good   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1500 
 

teeth. The government talked about all the dentists who were 
going to open offices throughout rural Saskatchewan, all the 
dentists’ offices that were going to be opened. I believe in 
Gravelbourg the story is that the dentist is probably still in school. 
But the question the people in Gravelbourg are asking: is that 
dentist in medical school, high school, grade school, or 
kindergarten? They have been waiting indeed a very, very long 
time, and it doesn’t look like there is going to be a dentist arriving 
there. 
 
And that story can be repeated in many, many communities 
throughout the province; communities that government members 
would have had us believe were just weeks — not months, but 
weeks — away from having a dentist set up shop in their 
community. And of course it’s not happening. It is not 
happening. 
 
The underfunding, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m going to turn now to the 
hospital underfunding. The underfunding and understaffing have 
caused a crisis. I’ve talked about the waiting list. It’s climbed to 
over 11,000 people in Saskatoon. Some of those, Mr. Speaker, 
are cancer speakers. Despite the fact that we have a waiting list 
in excess of 11,000 people in Saskatoon, the government 
continues to close beds in the summer-time, continues to close 
beds. It clearly does not demonstrate a great deal of commitment, 
Mr. Speaker, to the health care system. 
 
Indeed, I look forward to the member for Weyburn entering this 
debate. I sincerely hope that he will allow me to continue my 
debate, and then you can take your rightful place when I am 
finished, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has been kind 
of carrying on his own separate debate simultaneously, and I’d 
like to ask him to allow the member who has the floor to continue 
his debate. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that 
ruling. The PC betrayal, Mr. Speaker, outlines how the priorities 
have gotten all fouled up. In tough economic times it’s especially 
important that the government has its right priorities. When 
you’re dealing with limited resources, or limited amounts of cash 
flow, it is imperative that a government make the wisest choices 
possible. 
 
The government in Regina has clearly become very remote, out 
of touch; indeed, I can’t image a government more out of touch 
with reality. Government members would have us believe that 
every farmer in Saskatchewan, the most burning issue in their 
mind is whether the bell-ringing rule will be changed or not. Well 
I don’t think that any, any, even any Tory was elected to 
government to deal with the bell-ringing motion, and yet day 
after day they keep bringing that up. They’re not listening. I can’t 
believe that any farmer thinks that’s the number one priority. 
 
Day 45 came before we saw the very first Bill dealing with 
agriculture introduced in this legislature. And every day the 
government sets the agenda. They bring forward the list of 
agenda, list of items to be discussed that day; every day that 
happens. Despite that it took them 45 days to get to the first 
agriculture Bill, the first Bill dealing with 

farmers, the first Bill dealing with that important crisis area of 
our Saskatchewan. And every day from here on in, the 
government are the ones who bring forward the agenda. We 
should be debating agriculture; we should be debating health care 
— not the rules. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, chose to spend over a billion 
dollars on a political boondoggle in the Premier’s riding, the 
Rafferty dam project, broke the law in the process — couldn’t 
even follow their own laws, but chose to spend a billion dollars 
on a plan that was illegal, and yet ignore health care; make 
cut-backs to children’s dental program; they make cut-backs in 
the prescription drug plan. 
 
They have underfunded hospitals to the point that hospitals are 
now setting up lotteries, if you can imagine, lotteries asking, 
begging people for money. They’re sending beg letters, Mr. 
Speaker, to people who have been in the hospital, saying, we 
hope you appreciated the service we were able to provide; if you 
just divvy up a little bit more cash, we might be able to provide 
even better service in the future. Beg letters, Mr. Speaker, done 
in the poorest of taste possible. Hospitals should be funded 
through taxes and paid for as we have the ability to pay, not paid 
for through beg letters. 
 
And then in the latest budget, we see the wizard of Finance now 
taxing those very lotteries that the hospitals are using so that they 
can fund themselves — taxing the lotteries. 
 
It’s a government totally gone astray. It’s a government spending 
$34,000 a day on empty office space and continuing to do that; 
spending more than $20 million a year on advertising. Indeed, I 
think that has risen drastically this spring. I’m not sure whether 
it’s safe to say it has doubled, but certainly we are being 
bombarded with government ads day after day after day. 
 
It’s a government whose priorities are clearly out of touch with 
the people of Saskatchewan, clearly out of touch with the needs. 
It’s a government that has betrayed Saskatchewan’s health care 
with the wrong priorities and the wrong choices, and that’s a sad 
and dismal betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I promised I would have some money regarding . . . 
or some figures regarding . . . I don’t have any money but I have 
some figures regarding money for the prescription drug plan. 
Families are spending an additional $144 per year, on average, 
for the average family of four, just because of the changes in the 
prescription drug plan. One hundred and forty-four dollars for 
that one change, from a simple dispensing fee to a 
straightforward, you pay the full amount until the deductible is 
paid and after that you pay 20 per cent of the prescription drug 
cost. But it amounts to $144 for the average family of four in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve talked about young people and old people and what the 
changes mean. Picture an elderly person; picture some of the 
government members in not very many years, on fixed incomes. 
Maybe that’s a bad example because   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1501 
 

their incomes will be fixed but much higher than many others. 
But picture retired people on fixed incomes having to purchase 
their prescription drugs, going through . . . perhaps it’s heart 
problems, and heart medication is very, very expensive. But if it 
isn’t a heart problem, it could be any number of other ailments 
— high blood pressure, kidney disease, could be anything. And 
out of a very fixed income they’re expected to pay increasing 
amounts for their prescription drugs. We say that’s not fair, Mr. 
Speaker, and we would like to be able to change that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was talking about governments forcing hospitals 
to go begging, forcing governments to go start up lotteries, start 
begging for money, charity, pleading with ex-patients for money. 
This government no longer helps hospitals with equipment and 
staffing costs when it contributes to the capital costs to fund new 
hospital construction. Those other things are left for the hospitals 
to fund on their own, and that’s why we have the charities. 
 
But a building, a shell, isn’t much value if you can’t even put a 
bed in it, if you can’t put a night table, if you can’t put a wash 
room in it, that hospital bed is . . . or hospital building is virtually 
useless. What good was the new wing of the Pasqua Hospital 
right here in Regina when it sat empty for months while the 
hospital was trying to scrounge up the money, just enough money 
to furnish it? And they were also at the same time trying to hire 
nurses, nurses who by and large are fleeing the province. And so 
the building sat empty for quite a number of months. And at the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre it is the charitable donations that 
are furnishing and equipping the children’s therapy area. 
 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, know that the disabled in 
our province deserve better than that. They deserve much better 
than that, but the needs of the handicapped are ignored. The 
needs of the people are being ignored. The special assistance they 
need to live their full life, their full, independent lives, isn’t 
nearly as important to this government as is the $9 million 
birthday party or the $40 million worth of Highways equipment 
that was sold for a song. It isn’t nearly as important as a quarter 
of a billion dollar gift to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. 
They got the entire pulp mill, and they got vast timber reserves 
throughout northern Saskatchewan — vast, vast, thousands upon 
thousands of acres of timberland, prime timberland given to 
them, while hospitals have to go begging for simple things like 
hospital beds, simple equipment for the hospitals. They have to 
beg, literally ask, plead, beg with generous people to provide it. 
 
But you know, I think that the people of Saskatchewan at one 
time were incensed. I think they were truly very bitter, very bitter 
towards government members and this government and its 
actions, but I think that that has to some extent disappeared. And 
I say this because I truly think that now the decisions have all 
been made. People are just simply waiting for the opportunity to 
pass the judgement. They’re simply waiting for the Premier to 
call the next election; the judgement will be passed. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have given up trying to get 

through to this callous and uncaring government, this 
government that for some weeks now we have just been lurching 
from one crisis to another here in the Legislative Assembly. The 
people of Saskatchewan see it. The people of Saskatchewan 
know that it is not right. They know it shouldn’t take a 
government that controls the agenda 45 days to introduce the first 
Bill dealing with agriculture — agriculture, the one part of our 
province that the Conservative Party would have us believe they 
have locked up, they control, they understand. 
 
Farmers are seeing through it in increasing numbers. If 
government members don’t believe me, I urge you: ask your 
Premier, call an election. I’d be happy to go, be happy to have 
those farmers decide the fate of the government and decide who 
the next government is going to be. I’d be delighted to have that 
happen. But the anger has largely turned to just a decision having 
being made, just waiting out the time now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to be seconding this motion 
because it’s such an important area. And I think that what the 
government is doing . . . I was thinking about it over the supper 
hour and was doing a little bit of reading earlier in the day and 
was reading some articles out of newspapers. And, you know, 
health care has been conspicuous by its absence for some time 
now. And I think it’s a plot, perhaps, from government members. 
 
The first year, from October 1986 to the next fall, health care 
predominated this legislature. There wasn’t a day went by when 
there wasn’t several people giving major addresses regarding the 
state of our health care system. In those days, government 
members opposite would at least try and defend their actions. 
That’s disappeared. But I think that the realization struck home, 
that they are just in Never Never Land with regards to the people 
of Saskatchewan’s trust in that government to deal with health 
care. 
 
So we haven’t been dealing with health care. Instead we’ve been 
dealing with motions of privilege — two of them dealing with a 
cabinet minister who made some very serious allegations about 
a servant of this Legislative Assembly, made them in here where 
he has immunity but refused to repeat the comments outside 
where he could be subject to prosecution through the judicial 
system. 
 
So we are lurching from crisis to crisis. We’ve had Rafferty; 
we’ve had the Provincial Auditor affair; we’ve had the Northern 
Lights game farm; we’ve had any number of crises here in this 
provincial legislature in recent weeks, and it all keeps us away 
from talking about health care. That, Mr. Speaker, is part of why 
private members’ day is so important. It is our genuine 
opportunity to control the agenda, to talk about the issues that are 
important to us and to the people whom we represent. We think 
it’s important to all of the people of Saskatchewan. Indeed, I 
don’t think anybody would deny that health care is that 
fundamentally important. 
 
So we’ve seen health care deteriorating, we’ve seen hospitals 
promised in quite a . . . It’s actually a fairly short list, but in a 
number of communities throughout Saskatchewan. We’ve seen 
promises made in 1985 for hospital construction, and they’re still 
waiting — they’re   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1502 
 

still waiting, those people are waiting. I suspect they’re going to 
be waiting . . . Those hospitals will be again reannounced in the 
months leading up to the next provincial election. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of like the town that I grew 
up in. In 1964, Ross Thatcher’s Liberals paved the highway. 
They were actually within 10 miles of my home town, and the 
paving crew was parked at the side of the road the day before the 
election, and they sat there. Then the election day came around, 
Ross Thatcher and his Liberals were re-elected. The next day that 
paving crew disappeared — gone. 
 
Then in 1971, again came the Liberal promises; again came the 
promises of highway construction. This time they brought the 
crew in, started paving, it stopped about half of that 10 miles to 
Beechy. It stopped and it was just too late; it did not matter. 
 
The people of my community overwhelmingly passed the 
verdict. They said, you fooled us once, shame on you; fool us 
twice, shame on me — and you’re not going to fool me twice. 
 
That’s what, I submit, is going to happen in those communities 
where the hospital construction has been promised. The people 
of those communities will be saying to their local MLAs, fool me 
once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me. In other words, 
they’re not going to give you that second chance to fool them 
again. 
 
I wonder if the Minister of Health or any of the government 
members asked the families and the friends of the sick or elderly 
people in this province if they wanted those arbitrary unilateral 
changes made to our health care system. I wonder if they asked 
those people. 
 
I somehow can’t believe that there was any serious consultation 
made with people before the children’s dental plan was so 
drastically changed. Nobody would be in favour of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I can’t believe, judging from the response we got when we fought 
the prescription drug plan, I can’t believe that any government 
member seriously asked anyone whether they wanted those 
changes in the prescription drug plan. Certainly the people of 
Saskatchewan would not have wished for over $2 million worth 
of dental equipment to be auctioned off — auctioned off, 
virtually given away, because, as you can appreciate, there would 
not be the demand for over 500 dental suites in Saskatchewan all 
at once. Indeed I don’t think there would be demand for 500 
dental suites in all of North America in one given month. So 
naturally they would take a beating when they tried to sell this 
excellent equipment that was being used to provide the best 
possible dental care for our children. 
 
The people are fed up with it. I know I’m fed up. I’m fed up. I’m 
speaking now solely as a parent. I’m fed up that my 14-year-old 
son is going to end . . . Next month with his birthday, his 
coverage under the children’s dental program expires. At one 
time he would have had two more full years of coverage — two 
more complete years. Of course it upsets me. It’s a tax increase. 
Next year when 

I take my son, my then 15-year-old son to the dentist, whatever 
the bill is doesn’t matter, whatever that bill is it is simply an 
additional tax to me — nothing more, nothing less. If the bill is 
$50, it is simply an additional tax burden to me because under 
the previous plan that would have been covered completely. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, one area that I have not touched on tonight yet is 
the government’s squeeze on the medical association or the 
financial squeeze on the University of Saskatchewan, which has 
resulted in the closure of the medical school satellite in Regina. 
The member for Regina South might be well advised to pay a 
little attention to this portion, because it’s your government’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. What is the member’s point of 
order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think that although it’s probably . . . 
you’re probably going to have to rule that it is a dispute between 
two members, for everybody that happens to be watching up in 
the gallery, I am paying attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I’m delighted to hear that. It is your government’s 
financial squeeze on the University of Saskatchewan that has 
resulted in the closure of the medical school satellite right here in 
Regina — right here. Thirty-three medical teaching positions 
have been cut; 33 of them gone. Options for our medical students 
are now more limited than they were before. Access to the needed 
medical specialists denied to the people of southern 
Saskatchewan — that is the result. Specialists’ costs, that is the 
cost per specialist, is spiralling as some of the physicians who 
formerly were teaching have now entered the private practice. 
Some have indeed left this city of ours, creating even more of a 
crisis for some of those specialties. The waiting list to get in to 
see some of those specialists is really growing. Any competent 
government would have expanded the medical school in Regina. 
It would not have allowed for its destruction. 
 
We had all of that happening right here. At the same time when 
the waiting list is expanding, we are running out of specialists to 
deal with the problems. You try and get in to see an 
ophthalmologist; the waiting list is getting fairly extensive. You 
try and get some types of eye surgery done in Saskatchewan — 
waiting list’s very, very long. 
 
If you are elderly, there is indeed some talk, open talk, of limiting 
hip replacement surgery — limiting it in terms of not necessarily 
providing the best possible hip that technology can provide, but 
providing a hip that, for instance, if you’re 80 years old and your 
life expectancy is 87, well then they’ll look for a hip that’ll last 
you seven years instead of a hip that would last 20 years. But 
what do they do for those people that fool us, that don’t simply 
die when they’re expected to — those great pioneers of our 
province that go on and on? And there’s a great many of them 
out there, very many people, whom I’m very   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1503 
 

proud of. Are we going to deny those people necessary surgery 
so that they can be mobile, so that they can get around, so that 
they can visit, so they can have a good quality of life? I wonder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I close I want to deal with a topic of 
substance abuse, because I think it fits very much in with our 
condemnation of the government for its failure to develop and 
pursue a long-term strategic plan for the positive improvement of 
the Saskatchewan health care system. What we have here is a 
SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) 
research report. And I just want to take a couple of parts of it, 
because I think they’re very true. The rest of it is too, but it tends 
to be statistical and thus a little boring. But it says, the social 
context of substance abuse, and I quote: 
 

— substance abuse is frequently linked with other 
problems such as poverty, unemployment, and cultural 
estrangement. 
 

It goes on and says: 
 

— the alcohol and drug related offence rate in northern 
Saskatchewan was five times greater than in central and 
six times greater than in the south of the province. 
 
— the high offence rate in the north is closely tied to the 
social and economic conditions which prevail in the 
region and across much of northern Canada. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the economic policies of the government opposite 
tie very much into some of these other health problems. People 
will revert to alcohol and to substance abuse — I’m referring of 
course to illicit drugs — much quicker when they’ve given up 
hope; when there is just no hope for them, no chance of a job, no 
chance of a reasonable future. When you’ve given up, you’ll try 
anything, some of it in desperation — maybe a quick hit will let 
me forget my problems for a little while. I know it doesn’t work. 
Most of us reasonable people know that it doesn’t work. It’s a 
one-way ticket and it’s not going in the right direction. 
 
But what we need is some jobs. We need some economic 
direction. We need to have more than just lip service about 
bringing the young people home. We need the economic 
prosperity for the people of Saskatchewan. We need increases in 
the minimum wage. We’ve had one paltry 25-cent increase in 
Saskatchewan’s minimum wage in the last seven years. In the 
previous 11 years, it had gone from $1 to $4.25, or a $3.25 
increase in 11 years versus a 25 cent increase in the . . . over 
seven years. 
 
Small wonder that many people that are burdened with 
low-paying, minimum wage jobs or near minimum wage jobs 
have given up. They’re saying, I’ll never own a house. I’ll never 
own a nice, a truly . . . I shouldn’t say, nice car, but the car of 
their dreams. Perhaps it’s a two-seater sports car or a brand-new 
car; or even just a brand-new car. Many of us can’t afford simply 
a brand-new car, much less the Lamborghini of our dreams. 
 

But for people on or at minimum wage — and I should say on or 
near minimum wage, Mr. Speaker — for those people many of 
the dreams that even I have, they don’t even have to dream about 
them because it is so far removed. That’s why we see 
Saskatchewan having such a high rate of alcohol-related offences 
and indeed such a high rate of illicit drug offences. It’s because 
of the despair. 
 
I very much look forward to us being able to turn that around. I 
look forward, Mr. Speaker, to the next election, and I look 
forward especially to after that when we can get the tired crew 
that is in place now and seeming . . . well, visibly adrift, clearly 
rudderless, clearly going in no direction, have no economic 
policy, have failed in health care, have failed in every measure 
by any measure you care to make. 
 
We have a government that is deserving of nothing other than an 
early retirement, and I look forward to the next election so that 
that can happen. The member for Riversdale can become the 
premier and get a handle on our health care system and get a 
handle on the unemployment; can indeed put Saskatchewan 
together; get the three engines of growth going, the three sectors 
that are critical to our province: the private sector, the 
co-operative sector, and the Crown corporations, all three of 
those working together so we can fund again a universally 
accessible, first-class health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be seconding this motion. I look 
forward to hearing members opposite enter this debate. The 
motion condemning the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
arbitrary, unilateral, and harmful cut-backs and changes to health 
care services are critical to us, and indeed I look forward to 
hearing members opposite and their comments. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and let me 
assure you that I take a great deal of pleasure in entering this 
debate this evening. We have witnessed the last few speakers 
from the opposition speaking to this motion and giving, I think, 
which most viewers and members in this House would assess as 
being a somewhat lack-lustre and tepid performance on members 
opposite. And it gives me a great deal of pleasure to take a few 
moments in the next 30 minutes or so to set the record straight on 
some of the observations that have been made and also to instil 
an element of rationality to the proceedings. 
 
But before I get involved in my speech, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate the opposition actually for wanting to speak about a 
health issue again. I want to congratulate them from coming 
down to earth, from quitting the bell-ringing and all the other 
subsidiary motions that we have been taking this time of the 
House up for over the last while, so that we can get into matters 
that the people of Saskatchewan certainly are concerned with and 
about, instead of dealing with those matters that are only for 
short-term political expediency, as far as the opposition is 
concerned. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am certainly very happy and pleased to oblige 
the members by getting involved in this debate today, because I 
believe it’s the 46th day today of this   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1504 
 

session. And if we check the records, we will find perhaps twice 
— I stand to be corrected on it; I suspect it’s not much more than 
two times — that matters of health have been brought to the 
attention of this Assembly by the critic of Health on the other 
side. And both times, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that 
her credibility suffered as a result of the topics that she chose to 
bring up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why I am so pleased to participate in this 
debate tonight is because, without a doubt, health care happens 
to be one of this government’s fortes. I believe that this is a strong 
point that the people of Saskatchewan will see as far as this 
government is concerned . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I 
knew that was going to bring a reaction from the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, so I chose my words carefully in making 
that statement. 
 
I would like to bolster my argument by pointing out to the people 
of Saskatchewan that the last time citizens of this province of 
Saskatchewan had an opportunity to voice their opinions was in 
the by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And I suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan, that the central 
theme in that by-election was health and health care issues. And 
I suggest to you as well that it was the Leader of the Opposition’s 
credibility at stake as opposed to our government’s commitment. 
And when those two alternatives were brought to the fore, to the 
people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg where they had to assess the 
opposition leader’s credibility with this government’s record on 
health, it was no contest. And that is why I’m so glad now to have 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg sitting on this side of 
the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s been said many times 
before, but I think it also bears repeating, that this government 
has an unmatched positive record when it comes to health care 
— unmatched, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I have finished my few brief remarks this evening, 
when I have exposed the charade of the members opposite, I 
think that all listeners will agree that the truth had to be told. And 
at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 
make an amendment to that motion, which will be seconded by 
the member from Nipawin, and it will read thus: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 
Commend the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
innovative changes to health care services, for its integrity 
for consulting with the people about those changes, and for 
its development of a long-term strategic plan for the positive 
improvement of Saskatchewan health care services. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — That, Mr. Speaker, is what we are discussing 
this evening. And I want to begin by picking up 

a point that both the critic for Health and the member from 
Regina North tried to make, that we are not spending money on 
health. And I want to contradict them on that issue. 
 
(2000) 
 
We have spent more money than any other administration in the 
history of Saskatchewan. We are the first to break the 
billion-dollar barrier. We have, in 1987, spent $1.1 billion; the 
following year we spent more. This year we’re going to be 
spending $131 million more on health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan than we spent last year. That I say is commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — It doesn’t matter how footloose and fancy-free 
the members opposite want to play with facts and figures. The 
fact remains: $1.4 billion — $1,400 for every man, woman, and 
child in this province to support them in our health care, the best 
health care system in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and probably, 
indeed, North America. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, there 
may be only one province in all of Canada, the wealthiest 
province in Canada, that would spend any more than we do in 
this province of Saskatchewan, under this government by our 
Premier. And I’m proud to be part of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the facts, yet the NDP still try to deceive 
the public into believing that we have made cut-backs into the 
area of health care. We have heard the vain attempts this evening 
and earlier on this afternoon by the previous speakers to try to 
convince the people of Saskatchewan about that. 
 
The fact remains, we have increased, since 1981 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Since 1981, member of Regina Centre, we have 
increased that health spending by 91 per cent. That is almost 
double what you were prepared to do under health care — almost 
double. I don’t know if the members opposite don’t know that a 
91 per cent increase means that we went and spent more for 
health care, not less. 
 
We spent more, Mr. Speaker, on new programs, new programs 
as the Everyone Wins program. And members opposite like to 
criticize the Everyone Wins program. They call it an advertising 
gimmick. That’s what they say. They say it’s an advertising 
gimmick, that it has no value. The Health critic earlier this 
afternoon said it was unnecessary; we shouldn’t be doing it; we 
shouldn’t be spending this money and trying to develop a 
healthier life-style for the people of this province. 
 
And I say, we disagree with that. But, Mr. Speaker, Everyone 
Wins is a program designed with the welfare of the people of 
Saskatchewan in mind. If we can prevent illness, then why are 
we not going to try to prevent it? I ask you that. Why are we not 
going to try our utmost to try to prevent illness, rather than trying 
to correct it afterwards? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two reasons why Everyone Wins is so 
important. And firstly, there’s the obvious reason, and the 
obvious reason is that no one likes to be sick — no one   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1505 
 

likes to be sick. And Everyone Wins is an educational program 
aimed at reducing the risk of certain illnesses. If it’s possible to 
reduce the risk of certain types of illnesses, then why shouldn’t 
we do it? It makes eminent sense. Why shouldn’t we try to 
eliminate them? We all know that there are enough illnesses out 
there already that we cannot control, that we have no control 
over, so why not try to prevent the ones that are preventable? I 
suggest to you, and I suggest to the members opposite, that that 
only makes eminent sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is where Everyone Wins comes into play. Now 
short of forcing a life-style upon people, the only way to reduce 
the risk of these preventable illnesses is to educate them. 
 
We can’t legislate morality. No government can try to legislate 
life-styles. As much as members opposite would like to feel that 
government can be a benevolent dictator, members on this side 
do not believe that that is the case. Well I suggest to you that 
people, citizens of this province, cannot improve their life-styles 
if they don’t know how to do it. We have to make them cognizant 
of it. 
 
First of all we have to make them cognizant of the necessity of 
doing it and then we have to point out certain methods, and ideas, 
and the ways by which they can accomplish that objective, and, 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we are doing. And that’s the 
second reason why Everyone Wins is so important. Oftentimes 
people engage in activities not knowing that those particular 
activities are going to be injurious to them, that they’re not going 
to be good for their health. 
 
Look, for example, what Participaction has done for physical 
fitness. These days more people than not belong to some kind of 
fitness centre. And I believe, strongly, that in part at least, this is 
due to the strong program like Participaction. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with that, heart disease is the 
number one killer in Canada — heart disease is number one killer 
in Canada and we can do a lot about that. And when I speak about 
heart diseases, and so on, I think I am no different than most of 
the viewers in the proceedings tonight, and most of the members 
in this Legislative Assembly, that heart disease has affected all 
of us — if not directly, then certainly through our families, 
through our friends. 
 
Even a short time ago, as about four months ago, one of the 
people very dear to me — as a matter of fact it happens to be my 
brother — suffered a disastrous heart situation. He wound up 
having a quadruple heart bypass. 
 
Now we’re thankful that modern medicine and modern 
technology has made it possible for doctors to treat this 
development once it has occurred, but how much much better it 
would be, Mr. Speaker, if through a program like Everyone Wins 
we can get the people of this province to recognize and to realize 
some of the dangers inherent within our life-styles, so that if we 
make a few adaptations and changes in our life-style that perhaps 
we could avoid that kind of a situation or certainly delay it down 
the road as far as possible to reduce that morbidity rate, which is 
so expensive for any health care system to try to maintain. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, Everyone Wins promotes such things as 
stopping smoking, encouraging exercising, eating properly, 
avoiding accidents, reducing stress, and stopping the spread of 
communicable diseases. And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, of 
those, smoking, diet, stress, and exercise are directly related to 
heart disease. And I believe very strongly that it is ludicrous for 
members of the opposition to try to pass motions like this when 
they are fully aware of the positive results that can be obtained 
with programs such as this which this government has instituted. 
 
The thing that makes this even more onerous to me is the fact that 
they’re aware of the good that it’s doing. They are aware of the 
positive impacts that programs such as this can have, and in spite 
of that, I believe that they are quite prepared to poke fun, to 
ridicule, and to try to be as negative as they can about programs 
like that, just for political expediency. And I don’t think that this 
is something that the people of Saskatchewan really take too 
kindly to. 
 
They’re always crying foul, for example, on advertising. Well 
they’re wrong. I think they are wrong. How can they justify 
calling Everyone Wins an advertising gimmick when its aim is 
to promote healthy life-styles, healthy living, and to reduce the 
effect and the risk of preventable illness? Your motions that you 
have made state that the government is to be condemned for this 
initiative. 
 
Now I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that health care consumers, 
the public out there, and health care providers, disagree with you. 
They don’t think you’re right. We don’t think you’re right. And 
I think the people of Saskatchewan don’t think that you are right. 
I think they are supporting us in this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I think the people of Saskatchewan think that 
you are wrong, and I’m going to illustrate that. I’m going to 
illustrate that by just picking out a few of the letters that we have 
received, that I have received as caucus chairman for the 
government caucus on health. I’m going to share some of this 
with you, Mr. Speaker, if I might. These are letters that we have 
received in response to a program for the Everyone Wins. 
 
This one is from a provincial delegate from Saskatchewan 
Cerebral Palsy Association — not government, third party; not a 
solicited response, but a volunteered response to a program that 
has had a positive effect as far as the Cerebral Palsy Association 
of Saskatchewan is concerned. And I would like to read that letter 
to you: 
 

Thank you for your letter on health care in Saskatchewan. 
First of all, I would like to commend you on an excellent 
program, Everyone Wins. This program is well put together 
and everyone in Saskatchewan will win if we all make an 
effort. 
 

Another one from George Thomas, executive director, 
Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Cancer Society, and he 
writes: 
 

  



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1506 
 

I have reviewed this material in detail and highly commend 
you for taking this initiative. This health care package will 
provide the residents of Saskatchewan with very valuable 
information on the prevention of illness and accidents and 
should prove to be a very useful health reference. 
 

Further, from the executive director of the Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association, and I quote again: 
 

It is important for organizations such as ours to demonstrate 
leadership in focusing and prevention of illnesses and 
accidents, and we applaud our government’s move in this 
area, and we will work to support this initiative. 
 

And to members opposite, I say, this is not the government 
speaking. These are the professionals out there in the health 
world saying, you’re right on; you’re doing what this province 
needs. And to further illustrate, I would like to take a moment to 
take out a section from the Leader-Post, and I apologize, Mr. 
Speaker, because I have not been able to find the exact date. I 
would just indicate to you that it’s entitled, “Everyone Wins 
campaign still controversial” — our side, the public’s side, and 
then of course the opposition’s side as well. And it does have the 
picture of the Minister of Health on that as the epitome, I would 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, of a robust, healthy individual 
epitomizing what a healthy life-style can certainly do for you. 
And in part it states, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to quote: 
 

The Everyone Wins program has received support from a 
number of health professions and volunteer organizations. 
 
George Thomas, the executive director of the Saskatchewan 
division of the Canadian Cancer Society describes the 
Everyone Wins program as “an exciting program.” 
 
It is helping society get information to the public about 
healthy diets and lifestyle changes which can reduce the risk 
of getting cancer. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on: 
 

“We support this wholeheartedly,” he said. “Our people 
think this is the greatest thing since sliced bread.” 
 

Another unsolicited support for a program of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — There’s another element of support here from 
a Diane Waterer, and I quote again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Diane Waterer, the executive director of the Saskatchewan 
Heart Foundation, describes Everyone Wins as “a step on 
the right path, definitely.” 
 
“We share these same goals,” Waterer said, 

adding that there’s a good case to be made that the 
government should be doing even more (even more) in the 
area of health promotion. 
 
That sentiment was in evidence earlier this month, when the 
annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 
Association was held in Saskatoon. 
 
In one of her final interviews as president of the SRNA, 
Barbara Ellemers said the association supports the general 
thrust of the Everyone Wins program. 
 

(2015) 
 
There’s more of this, Mr. Speaker, but I believe I have made my 
point to you and to the people and certainly I hope that I have 
made the point to the members of the opposition, that the sum of 
$2.4 million . . . I think I’m right when I use the figure $2.4 
million, which is the projected cost of the Everyone Wins 
program. 
 
Well we get letters of endorsement such as this from the health 
professionals out in the field. I think we’re right on, and I think 
the people think that we’re right on. And I hope somewhere along 
the line you can find it in your hearts to also accept the fact that 
maybe, just maybe, this time you have been crying wolf 
unaccountably, and that you will change your minds and adapt 
and support a program which is obviously doing so much. And I 
appreciate that round of applause from members opposite. 
 
And I think the point has been well made so we’ll go on to 
another issue, Mr. Speaker, that I want to address, and that is the 
Saskatchewan Commission for Directions on Health Care. The 
Saskatchewan Commission for Directions on Health Care is 
another initiative taken by this government, and it’s another 
initiative, like the Everyone Wins program, that members of the 
NDP opposite have been criticizing, that they have been 
protesting loudly about. 
 
Now your motion, your motion that you have just made 
condemns this government for public consultation. Yet your 
condemnation has struck a little bit deeper than that because you 
have questioned the commission, you have questioned the 
integrity of the commission. And I think that is something that 
you will want to have, I’m sure, some second thoughts about, 
because, Mr. Speaker, this commission, this commission is 
giving the people of Saskatchewan, for the first ever, the 
opportunity to participate in their own health care system. 
 
Now not the Health critic . . . Did you notice this, Mr. Speaker? 
Not the Health critic nor the member from Regina North, the two 
members from the opposition who have spoken thus far on this 
debate, neither one of them even brought to the attention of all 
listeners the fact that such a thing as the health commission 
exists. They did not even acknowledge the existence of the health 
commission, the health commission that is giving the people of 
this province a chance to develop the health care system that they 
themselves will use. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1507 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have followed that health commission around to 
many, many of their meetings in my responsibility as caucus 
chairman, government caucus chairman on health. I’ve listened 
to many of them, and I must concede also that the Health critic 
from the opposition has been at some of those meetings as well. 
But I think she would also, had she acknowledged this 
commission, she would also have noticed and acknowledged the 
fact that what we’re hearing in the health commission, above all, 
is that the people, the presenters of briefs to that commission, are 
saying, thank goodness, thank goodness that we are being 
recognized; that we are finally being asked for some input, that 
we’re having the opportunity presented to us by this government 
so that we can come here, that we can help guide, that we can 
help give direction, that we can raise some of our concerns and 
make some of our suggestions, so that people, the government 
together with the people of this province, can regulate and can 
guide and give sense and direction to the future in which we want 
to go as we continue to build upon our strengths and our health 
care system. 
 
Although everybody recognizes that we have one of the strongest 
health care systems in the world, that doesn’t mean that we can’t 
improve it. It doesn’t mean that there are not some areas of 
weakness within that. And I think that we would be willing to 
concede that. 
 
But together we must build, and we’re giving the people of 
Saskatchewan that opportunity to participate. And I think that is 
exactly what they are grateful for. If we are here to serve the 
people, does it not follow that the people should have a say in the 
programs and the initiatives that we introduce? 
 
And to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker — thank you for joining the 
Chair — that this is a purely logical way of thinking. We are not 
here to initiate programs for our own benefit. We are here to 
initiate programs for the people that we represent, and let there 
never be any doubt about that. That is what motivates us; that is 
what is making us try to improve ever more for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest to you that, 
yes, that is what democracy is all about — finding out what the 
will of the people is. But I concede, and I think members opposite 
would concede that sometimes that is a very, very difficult thing 
to do with all the rhetoric and so on floating around, with all the 
different lobby groups. 
 
But we must cut through all that, find out what the will of people 
is, and then proceed to carry out exactly that will. In fact, part of 
this resolution no. 3 that I am debating here today condemns us; 
it condemns us for imposing programs without public 
consultation. And members opposite spoke on that this afternoon 
and also tonight. 
 
And perhaps a few of their concerns were well taken — perhaps 
they were. I think we have to be . . . perhaps concede that. But by 
the same token, I’d like to ask this question: are the members 
opposite purposely trying to confuse not only us but the people 
of Saskatchewan as well? Are they trying to confuse us? And I 
think if they are, it’s probably working, because I have no idea 
what they want, and I’m not sure that they know what they want. 
 

They condemn us for not using public consultation, and then 
when we utilize it, they condemn us for that. I suggest to you: 
make up your minds. What do you want? You can’t have it both 
ways. You can’t just be dictated to by political expediency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made some changes to the health care 
system and we admit that, but those changes have been in 
response to changing health care needs. This is not a static 
society; it is a society that is always changing; it is a dynamic 
society. And I suggest to you that it takes constant change and 
monitoring by any government, by any conscientious 
government, to stay in step and, in fact, not in step, but also 
perhaps a step ahead of those necessary changes so that changes 
are made in time to correspond to changing health care needs. 
And just as the world around us changes, so must our health care 
needs change as well. 
 
But we must then therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, learn to adapt. 
We must not be like the ostrich, we must not be like the dinosaur. 
We must be able to adapt to change, we must learn how to be 
innovative. And the member from Regina Lakeview, the Health 
critic for the opposition, dismissed the computer health card that 
this government has initiated. She dismissed it, and I think her 
words were something to the effect, “unnecessary,” as if this 
health card, with a tremendous potential, with the update, most 
modern technology possible being fed into it . . . And the 
potential of this health card and what it can do for our health care 
system, for the citizens of this province, is just limited by our 
own imaginations. We can get into the fourth dimension on that. 
 
We do have members coming from other provinces in Canada to 
ask us: how did you do it? What are you doing? What are some 
of the ways in which we can adapt it to our system? We had the 
member from Regina Wascana being invited over to California, 
to a health care institute there, and they were besieging him with 
questions and comments. How are you doing it, and what are you 
doing it? Can we learn from you? We want to do the same thing. 
We’re recognized as being leaders in the health care system 
because we’re not afraid to be innovative, and we’re not afraid to 
adapt as changing conditions dictate that we adapt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mere fact that the average person’s life 
expectancy is longer than it used to be is taxing the health care 
system more today than it used to be taxed. We have a reduced 
morbidity. I believe that that is absolutely essential, that we 
reduce the morbidity as much as possible, and morbidity can only 
be reduced if we have programs in place to do exactly that. 
 
Morbidity simply is that period of time when you are incarcerated 
for health needs, for health wants. It’s that period of time when 
you finally become so sick that you can no longer care for 
yourself; that you either have to come into a heavy-care or 
perhaps even an acute-care facility to be taken care of — 
extremely expensive, high cost facilities. And the objective of 
this government is to reduce that morbidity time to as short a 
period of time as possible, perhaps in crude terms, put you into 
the hospital for as short a period of time as possible before you 
die. We want you to be out there living a healthy and as nearly a   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1508 
 

normal life as possible, and we can do that with some of the 
programs that this government has established. 
 
We have programs, for example, that we have reinstituted, one 
of them is the building . . . constructing again of nursing homes. 
We did away with the moratorium that the NDP instigated and 
we are building nursing homes. We also have the innovative 
housing project which we have been pursuing for the last two 
years, a little bit over two years now, a very, very well received 
program, particularly by seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And I know that because . . . I don’t know if 
my wife is watching tonight — probably not — but we were in 
Rosthern, in her home town of Rosthern on Sunday afternoon, 
and I had the great deal of pleasure of opening up the innovative 
housing project right beside the nursing home, Country Gardens, 
in the town of Rosthern — eight units where elderly people could 
live with dignity in their own homes close to the nursing home, 
close to the facilities that would be needed perhaps in their 
deteriorating state of health. But they were still independent, they 
still had the dignity of living by themselves, and they had their 
own bedrooms, their own living room, their own kitchen, and 
they were making do. 
 
The one elderly lady that was so proudly showing me through 
this innovative complex couldn’t resist — and I say this humbly 
— throw her arms around me and give me a kiss. And that was 
one of the most rewarding experiences that I have experienced in 
my short tenure as a politician. It just reconfirms for me that in 
the programs that we are establishing that they are meeting a need 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when you combine programs like this and then you, in 
addition to that, have a program such as home care which can 
also extend the period of time that these elderly people can live 
with independence, can live with the dignity of supporting 
themselves as long as possible, that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how 
you reduce the morbidity rate. That is how you cut down on the 
costs, the high cost of health care facilities and health care 
programs within our province. 
 
Advances in modern technology have contributed to increased 
life expectancy, and it has also led to the survival of people with 
diseases that used to be fatal, no longer are, and they are with us 
that much longer and have to be cared for. But many of these 
people are now surviving these hereditary diseases and they are 
passing these genes on down to their children. And many times, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these diseases act strangely. They will miss 
a generation, and instead of surfacing in their children, they will 
only resurface once more in their children’s children. And what 
has happened is that you have an increasing population that are 
carriers of diseases, and many of them don’t even know it. And 
that’s kind of a scary proposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so 
as a result, many more people are seeking medical attention than 
before. 
 
And as I said, we are making changes to the health care 

system in response to changes in health care needs. I’ll repeat 
that: we are making changes to the health care system to respond 
to changes in health care needs. Now some of those needs and 
changes I have discussed already, and there are many, many more 
of them. Mr. Speaker, we do not apologize for this, because what, 
in effect, we are doing, is improving the health care system. 
 
(2030) 
 
Every one of us knows of someone, or has known of someone, 
who has had cancer. Cancer ravages its victims’ bodies and the 
minds of their loved ones, and the suffering is immeasurable. 
 
And if I might just be permitted to become personal once more 
just to exemplify the point I am trying to make, I lost my father 
about a year ago to cancer, and it was a traumatic experience for 
everyone. Last month we lost our mother-in-law, again to cancer. 
And I am just so totally convinced that what we must do is to as 
a government, put in programs, put in place facilities that will 
alleviate as much as possible the pain and suffering that is out 
there in our society — not only the pain and suffering of the 
victims, but also the pain and suffering that are concomitant with 
these kinds of problems for the loved ones of those who are 
victims. 
 
And in response to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
has built a new cancer clinic in Saskatoon in response to the 
needs of cancer patients and their families, in the hope that it will 
help to ease that pain and suffering that I was speaking about. 
 
And I think a key element in all of this, a key element in finally 
conquering this monster that has plagued the human race for so 
many, many hundreds of years already, is research — research 
that has provided us with valuable information about many 
diseases over the years, and I believe that it will continue to do 
so. We know so much more now than we did even a few years 
ago, about diseases that we have in the past, and this will 
continue. It must continue. And I suggest to you that cancer is 
exactly one of those diseases that I am talking about. 
 
We have as a government increased the funding to the cancer 
society by 89 per cent — 89 per cent. We have increased our 
funding for them and much, in fact I would say most, of that 
funding to the cancer society is dedicated to cancer research. 
 
We know that through research we’re getting closer to a cure. 
We’re not there yet, but we know we’re getting closer. I think 
we’re so close now that that axiom that everyone uses is coming 
closer and closer to reality, and that is that cancer can be beaten. 
That is the hope, I think, that is in the breast of all of us. And it’s 
perhaps because of funding that this government has provided 
into this research for cancer that one day we will be able to add 
the cure for cancer to that impressive list of Saskatchewan firsts, 
and I think that all members in this House would agree that that 
would be desirable. 
 
It’s not impossible, Mr. Speaker, it’s not impossible. I have a 
great deal of faith in the citizens of this province. I think this 
province has been endowed with an incredible, an   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1509 
 

incredible wealth of human resources. 
 
Hospitals, hospitals, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ll bet that the members of 
the opposition regret the day that they ever heard of that word. 
Perhaps even the member from Saskatoon Riversdale . . . 
although I’m not going to get on to that binge too heavily tonight, 
for we have undertaken several major hospital building projects, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that the members of the opposition 
hate to hear this because they have tried so desperately to deceive 
the people of Saskatchewan into believing that this government 
closes hospitals. But the fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government builds hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction projects that we have undertaken at the 
Regina General and Pasqua hospitals, are valued at over $143.3 
million. If $143.3 million is closing hospitals, well I would love 
to see and to hear what building hospitals is all about. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have entered into a joint 
venture with the government of Alberta to construct a $22.8 
million Lloydminster general hospital, which will have 118 beds. 
And recently construction was completed at the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre right here in Regina, and the cost of this 
project was over $56 million — $56.6 million, which will 
provide 316 beds in addition to renovation to that building. 
 
Then we have St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon: $53.1 million, 
105 new beds. In addition to those new beds, Mr. Speaker, there 
will be an updated laboratory and a central heating plant. We’re 
also in the process of constructing a brand-new hospital in 
Saskatoon, the City Hospital in Saskatoon in which many of my 
colleagues and I were at during the sod turning ceremony last 
spring. 
 
And I suppose in my role as government caucus chairman on 
health, I had the opportunity last Saturday to be in the Sheraton 
Cavalier in Saskatoon with Mr. Tony Dagnone, the administrator 
of the University Hospital, when they were doing something that 
I think the people of this province maybe do not do quite enough, 
and that is recognize the achievement of many of the people that 
work in University Hospital. They had an awards night, a 
long-term service awards night, a very, very positive experience 
for those people. 
 
And at that particular function, I happened to meet Elmer 
Schwartz, who of course is the administrator for the Saskatoon 
City Hospital. And the thing that struck me most was his 
enthusiasm for the construction of the facility that City Hospital 
is experiencing right now, and, in his words, the upbeat mood 
and the morale of the staff and the physicians and doctors and 
nurses and so on at that hospital, in anticipation of this new 
building coming on stream, so that it would better facilitate the 
giving of health services to the people of Saskatchewan. A very, 
very positive aspect as that $114 million and 488 beds, as a result 
of that money, will come on stream. 
 
Then we also will be building a $26.7 million hospital in St. 
Joseph’s in Estevan, as well as a $52 million Swift Current Union 
Hospital in, of course, Swift Current. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess what I have been doing 

is being a wee bit coy because I’m saving the best one for last. 
And we will be building another hospital in Saskatchewan. And 
where will that hospital be, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Perhaps I 
should be asking the members opposite, because they are the 
ones, under their leader, who were saying that this is the 
government that closes hospitals. I have tried to show that that is 
fallacy. I’ve just gone through a long litany of building projects 
that this government has undertaken. And there is one more, 
because exactly in the constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
in the town or village of Lafleche, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a new 
hospital’s being built. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And I cannot help, I cannot help but think to 
myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker: I wonder what the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg think of the NDP now? 
 
Then there is another favourite subject of the NDP, and that is 
nursing homes. Well, Mr. Speaker, this government builds 
nursing homes too. A few minutes ago I was discussing the fact 
that the average life expectancy in Saskatchewan is increasing, 
that it’s longer now than it has ever been, and as a result, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we are experiencing a growing senior 
population. It’s a phenomenon that is not exclusive to 
Saskatchewan, but it’s a phenomenon that very many 
jurisdictions have to deal with. It’s a gerontological aspect that 
has to be addressed. 
 
And it’s that old idea of . . . we used to have a triangle where the 
apex was on top, and you had a few elderly people up there 
supported by very, very many people, as it were, in the younger 
sections, in the working section, in the functioning section what 
was paying income tax and paying for all this expense of keeping 
the senior citizens, which are, admittedly, a high cost centre of 
our society. 
 
And what we have to address as a government, and as 
governments everywhere, is the fact that that triangle is 
becoming inverted, it’s becoming inverted — And I don’t object 
to that because I’m part of that inversion, and I hope to continue 
to be part of that inversion for a long time to come, where actually 
the numbers of seniors will outnumber the supporting cast. 
 
And that worries me, and I think that should worry any 
government that is thinking for the future, that is thinking ahead. 
How are we going to address that? The only way we can address 
that is by having programs like I have outlined for the last while, 
and getting ready for the time that is coming. And if we wait for 
the last moment, if we keep our head in the sand, if we refuse to 
acknowledge that times and conditions and needs are changing, 
then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we are doing an injustice 
to the people that have put us there, to the people that are looking 
to us for leadership and direction for the future. 
 
So I, for the life of me, cannot understand why the NDP, when 
they had the opportunity in the super ’70s, when times were 
good, when times were rolling, when we could have had a 
tremendous heritage fund being established, why then did they 
put a moratorium on nursing homes? The need was there. We 
knew in 1979   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1510 
 

and 1980 that we were developing an ongoing, chronic problem 
as far as senior populations were concerned, and they tended to 
ignore that. They tended to ignore that for the political 
expediency of the moment. That’s wrong; that’s not good, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Governments have to take the proverbial bull 
by the horns, recognize a problem for what it is, and wrestle it to 
the ground before it becomes such a monster that we are not able 
to control and to regulate it and channel it. 
 
And I hear this all over my constituency. The people in Dalmeny 
wanted that nursing home, and when we got into power after ’82, 
by 1985 the people of Dalmeny had their nursing home and 
they’re grateful for it. The people in the town of Rosthern have 
right now got the machinery in motion for getting their tenders 
out for a 30-bed replacement in Rosthern. It is needed, it is 
needed, and we have to do that on a continually ongoing basis. 
 
So why moratoriums? I suggest to you that it doesn’t make sense. 
But none the less they did it. And when we came into power, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we looked at that moratorium, we started 
building nursing homes, and we are still building nursing homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have been yelling about hospital waiting 
lists as well. And again we heard it from the critic opposite about 
the 9,000 lists. They’re shorter than they have; we’re working on 
that; we’re reducing them, and I really don’t know where they 
get off on yelling at us about hospital waiting lists when it was 
their own minister of Health during that time — and I’ll spare 
him the agony of identifying him at this time — but he did say 
that a waiting list is an efficient way of running a hospital system 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I recognize what the member from 
Regina Lakeview is saying, that I’ve taken that out of context, 
and I stand to be corrected. But I still will look forward to that 
member if he gets up in this debate explaining to me what was 
meant by that statement because I have used that statement 
before. I’m having a great deal of trouble understanding how a 
waiting list can be a sign of efficiency unless it’s weeded out that 
you use the triage principle where only the most desperate and 
needy get in and that you kind of left the others out. I’m not quite 
sure what is meant by that, but I would certainly welcome an 
explanation. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we never said that. We never made a 
statement like that. Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do not believe 
that. That was just the NDP trying to talk their way out of a 
politically dangerous situation, a situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I think that they could have avoided. I would suggest to you that 
our record will stand on its own. I do not think that we have to 
justify any further our initiatives on health care. They speak for 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, they speak for themselves in a 
powerfully positive way. 
 
I’m just going to indicate to you that I don’t think that you have 
an idea of how frustrated I become when I listen to the NDP 
accuse us of the very things that they did when they were in 
power, and that we did not do any of those; it was they that did 
that. I think that is what psychologists call displacement, blaming 
others for things that you have 

done yourself. 
 
Well we don’t accept that. We take responsibility for our actions. 
We did what was necessary; we’re doing what was necessary; 
we’re doing what was right; we believe in what we are doing, and 
as I have demonstrated over the last few moments, I think the 
public in its reaction to us is generally pleased with the action 
that we are taking to ensure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ensure the 
viability of this province, to ensure the viability of our health care 
system which is recognized as being the best, not only in Canada 
but North America and, dare I say, the world. And we want to 
build on that because we cannot remain static; we cannot 
maintain the status quo; we must continue to change as adapting 
to new changing conditions. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in response to the motion 
as put forward by the member from Regina Lakeview, I am now 
going to move an amendment to that motion, seconded by my 
colleague from Nipawin: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, 
and that the following substituted therefor: 
 
commend the government of Saskatchewan for its 
innovative changes to health care services, for its integrity 
for consulting with the people about these changes, and for 
its development of a long-term strategic plan for the positive 
improvement of Saskatchewan health care services. 
 

And I thank you for this opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be able 
to rise in the Assembly this evening to participate in the debate 
on this resolution that’s here today, a resolution brought forward 
by the opposition Health critic dealing with the government’s 
record on health care and the provision of health care in this 
province; discussing cut-backs and changes to those services; 
suggesting that they have been imposed without public 
consultation and causing a crisis in our system; and saying that 
we are failing to develop and pursue a long-term strategic plan 
for the positive improvement of Saskatchewan health care 
services. 
 
Further to that, and in support of my colleague’s amendment to 
that motion, which is: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and 
the following substitute therefor: 
 
(That this Assembly) commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its innovative changes to health care 
services, for its integrity for consulting with the people 
about those changes, and for its development of a long-term, 
strategic plan for the positive improvement of 
Saskatchewan health care services. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I indeed am fiercely opposed to the resolution 
number 3 as proposed by the member from   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1511 
 

Lakeview, a motion that deals with nothing but fiction and, I 
believe, half-truths, and is quite simply and plainly nothing but 
another attempt by the opposition to mislead the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in contrast with that, I would applaud this 
government’s initiatives in health care. I certainly am proud to 
have had the privilege of being involved in those initiatives, to 
be a part of a government that was looking to the future, 
recognizing the time for changing, recognizing that our 
population was . . . the demographics were changing and that we 
must adapt our health care system to those changes; a 
government that was prepared to accept new technology and new 
developments in the provision of health care — technology 
brought on by research that’s been ongoing and been done, being 
prepared to take advantage of it to provide first-class, quality 
health care to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government certainly has improved our health 
care system in Saskatchewan. Our residents do enjoy one of the 
highest quality of health care. Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that 
you’d find a better health care system anywheres in the world. 
However, the opposition members would like to have us believe 
by their resolution that’s filled with deception that that’s not the 
case. It’s not only a view held by the Health critic, the member 
from Regina Lakeview, but also by the rest . . . most of the rest 
of her colleagues, at least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might put forward that the people of 
Saskatchewan are tiring of what those members opposite are 
putting forward, they’re tiring of those half-truths, they’re tired 
of the same tired, old accusations. Mr. Speaker, they’re tired of 
watching the NDP licking their old wounds that have yet to heal, 
wounds that they suffered back in 1982 and again in 1986. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are above that. The people 
of Saskatchewan want to see us build for the future; they want to 
see us take advantage of the changes that are out there; they want 
to see us get on with the business of providing quality health care 
for our seniors, for our youth, and for all the citizens of our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely the opposition must realize that if they have 
pretensions about becoming the government some day, they’re 
going to have to come up with something new. They’re not going 
to be able to live in the past, go back to the old ways, the way 
they did it in the past. The same old accusations are just not 
working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan recognized in 1982 
how the NDP works, and they’re just not buying it. They didn’t 
buy it in 1982, they didn’t buy it in 1986, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 
buy it in 1988 in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are tired of those types of 
tactics. The people of Saskatchewan are looking to the future. 
They want to move forward. They do not want to be kept in the 
dark, although that’s what the NDP would have the people . . . 
where they would have the people, and that’s what they tried to 
do the people when they were elected and they were in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP attempted to keep the people of 

Saskatchewan in the dark about the issues that they had the right 
to know about. Pardon the cliché, but the NDP philosophy must 
have been, what they don’t know won’t hurt them. 
 
Like I said, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan saw 
through that deception. Mr. Speaker, that’s what this resolution 
is about again, and it’s disappointing to have to stand and speak 
to those types of things. I would think that the people of this 
province deserve much more. They deserve people who can be 
honest and forthright and put forward positive ideas and 
suggestions, not only be critical, not only attempt to tear down, 
but offer positive alternatives and solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said that Saskatchewan enjoys one of 
the best health care systems in the world, but let’s not just take 
my word for it, let’s look at the facts. I believe that those facts 
speak for themselves. Contrary to what members opposite might 
have the people believe, this government has, in fact, increased 
spending on health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent more money on health care than the 
NDP or any administration in this province’s history, Mr. 
Speaker, more money than other government in the history of 
Saskatchewan; in fact, from 1981 to 1989, 91 per cent more 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to the members opposite and the people 
of Saskatchewan that I am proud of that record. I am proud that 
we’re able to provide a first-class health care system for them. 
Perhaps it is that the members opposite, the NDP, just don’t like 
being upstaged. When this government did something good for 
the people of Saskatchewan, they simply want to bury their heads 
in the sand and refuse to acknowledge it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, going on with this resolution, it suggests that we do 
not consult, that we haven’t developed a long-term strategy or 
not developing that. Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the 
mover and the seconder of this motion as they talked about health 
care, talked about negative issues. Mr. Speaker, I never heard 
them mention the fact that over the course of the past year there’s 
been a commission of very qualified Saskatchewan people, the 
Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care, who 
have been out touring the province, who have been listening to 
the people, getting presentations from them, and hearing to their 
ideas, Mr. Speaker; a commission appointed by our Premier, a 
commission that’s going to bring in a report outlining 
suggestions put forward by the people for the direction that they 
believe health care should go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was the NDP’s reaction to that commission? 
They opposed it. They’ve opposed it every step of the way. They 
said it wasn’t necessary; they said it isn’t going to work. They’ve 
tried to discredit the people that are involved. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe it’s a real affront for them to oppose the establishment of 
a body comprised of such qualified people, people of 
Saskatchewan, people who are respected in their fields and in 
their communities. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Quill Lakes   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1512 
 

has lots to say from his seat, but once again is silent when it 
comes time to stand up and add his word to the debate in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that commission is a body that will make 
recommendations to the government on the directions that health 
care should be taken, directions based on the input of the people 
of Saskatchewan. For the first time in our history, the people, the 
reason that we are here in this Assembly today, have the 
opportunity to aid in the design of their own health care system, 
to have input into it. The NDP do not like that, Mr. Speaker. Good 
Heavens, no! let the people decide. Not for the NDP — they 
would ask: what do the people know about health care? They are 
only the consumers. We should know. They should dictate it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you this: what makes the opposition think 
that they, or we, for that matter, or any other political body, know 
more about health care, more about what is best for the people 
than the people themselves do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this Minister of Health, our 
Premier, is not afraid to ask the people for their input. In fact, we 
want to know what they think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my time as legislative secretary to the minister 
of Health, the former minister, I think back to the meetings that 
he held throughout this province — I believe 15 different 
meetings with interested people to gather their input and ideas 
into health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker — meetings where up to 
400 people attended and provided their input in frank and open 
discussions with the minister. This is where they brought forward 
ideas suggesting improvements to our system, improvements to 
home care, chiropody program; suggestions for integrated 
facilities; co-ordination of services between the various providers 
of health care in communities and in neighbouring communities 
as well. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was consultation. I recall in my days out in 
those meetings and listening to the people, and how happy many 
of them were as they talked about how that was the first 
opportunity that they had ever had to provide that kind of input 
to government on an issue that was so vitally important to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the old health care system was good at one 
time. I’m not denying that. As I said before, times have changed 
and are continuing to change. People are changing. Modern 
medical technology has increased the probability of survival for 
many people. They’re living longer lives, healthier lives. Mr. 
Speaker, diseases such as heart disease, which are now treatable, 
were once almost always fatal. Because we as a population are 
now living longer lives, the demands for medical services are 
changing as well. And, Mr. Speaker, we are changing the health 
care system to meet those changing demands. 
 
Let’s take a look at medical research, for instance, Mr. Speaker. 
Thanks to modern medical technology we now know more about 
certain types of cancer; in fact, there are some forms of cancer 
that can now be cured. Cancer, Mr. Speaker, a dreaded, vile 
disease, is described by my 

colleague, the member from Rosthern, who has experienced 
personally what it can do in a family situation and those close to 
you, a disease that claims hundreds of lives each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in response to the pain and suffering of cancer 
victims and their families, this government’s reacted. This 
government built a brand-new cancer clinic in Saskatoon. Not 
only did we build a new physical building, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
also increased funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation 
by 89 per cent since we were elected. Mr. Speaker, a large part 
of that enhanced funding has been directed at research and 
development, and $5 million over a five-year period has been 
allotted to new equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s only going to be the money spent on research 
today which is going to save further expense tomorrow. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not the expense which is near as important as the 
pain and the suffering that the disease causes to the people, and 
if people can be saved from that, and lives spared, it’s well worth 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to be working in co-operation with 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation in developing a program to 
help detect breast cancer in women in its earliest stages. Mr. 
Speaker, once again a need that was identified — this 
government reacted and responded positively to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another relatively new program in Saskatchewan, 
very much in keeping with our times, in keeping with changing 
life-styles that this government has implemented, is the Everyone 
Wins program, Mr. Speaker, a program which has promoted 
healthier life-styles, promoted eating right, keeping fit, reducing 
stress, quitting smoking, combating drug and alcohol abuse, 
avoiding accidents, preventing communicable diseases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the most important parts of that 
program — though the opposition would suggest that it’s only an 
advertising gimmick to attract attention — I believe the most 
important part of that program in my area, and the people that I 
talk to, is it’s involved people in their home communities, 
through their service clubs, through the groups and the 
organizations that has taken projects to promote healthier 
life-styles, to promote various things, and awareness programs 
within their communities for the people, their neighbours and 
friends and the ones that they know. Mr. Speaker, very positive 
comments through that program, very preventative, and 
something that’s going to have long-term, lasting benefit to the 
individuals and to society as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite once again have suggested that 
it’s a program that was unnecessary, that it’s not needed. Many 
times in the past we’ve heard the member from Regina 
Lakeview, the Health critic, harangue about how unnecessary it 
is and what a waste. Mr. Speaker, it’s not a waste when you 
spend, when you . . . not spend money, when you invest money 
today to save in the future, to save people’s lives and to help them 
have a healthier life-style. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a closer look at some of the things   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1513 
 

that that program is promoting. It’s promoting eating right. It’s a 
hard thing to comprehend in a province like this where we have 
so much, and yet many people simply do not need it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that if we eat right, we will be healthier, 
and if we are healthier, our bodies are more able to fight off 
viruses and diseases. Mr. Speaker, those same people who live 
healthier life-styles today will have better health when they 
become seniors, to enjoy their retirement years and to enjoy the 
life that there is later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s very important that we do that and 
continue on with that program. Mr. Speaker, for our youth 
keeping fit, reducing stress for working people, quitting smoking 
for everybody, do nothing but help all members of society. We 
all know that all three of these reduce the risk of heart disease, 
and they also know that quitting smoking reduces the risk of lung 
cancer. Once again back to that cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, avoiding accidents — sometimes it’s awareness 
and sometimes it’s education to help people avoid accidents. If 
this program can assist in that, it’s well worthwhile. No one gets 
into accidents on purpose; consciously trying to avoid them 
really does decrease their number. I can speak from personal 
experience in industrial work places, in the agriculture and the 
logging industry, that awareness and education is what prevents 
accidents. Mr. Speaker, we all have to be conscious of it every 
day. 
 
Wearing seat-belts is just one example. We all believe that they 
provide a very real benefit. We have countless numbers of people 
who testify that they’ve been able to walk away from accidents 
in which they would have otherwise been seriously injured or 
killed, because they were wearing their seat-belts. An awareness 
program sponsored through here helps once again to save lives 
and improve life-styles and have healthy population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, combating drug and alcohol abuse — we all know 
that drug and alcohol abuse only leads to an increase in the crime 
rate. Crimes such as assault, rape, and worst of all, murder. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very, very degrading for people to become addicted 
to chemicals in one form or another. If there’s anything that we 
as society can do to help prevent that or to help find cures or 
remedies for those people once they are in treatment to get them 
off of those habits, I believe it’s very, very important and 
incumbent upon us to spend our efforts and our time and our 
resources to do that. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, preventing communicable diseases — Mr. 
Speaker, they are a very real fact of life. Some of them are more 
serious than others. Certainly, in these present times, one that’s 
often on the news, one example is AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome). It’s a very depressing subject, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s a very real problem that poses threats, very real 
threats, and unfortunately we have no reason to believe that it 
will cease to be a threat in the near future. 
 
We all know that there is presently no cure for AIDS and there is 
no vaccine against it, and until there is, the only course of action 
available to us is prevention. Mr. 

Speaker, the best way to prevent the spread of AIDS and other 
communicable diseases is through education and awareness — 
awareness of the methods to prevent it and the ways to prevent 
it. Mr. Speaker, many people don’t want to know about it, but I 
believe for their own good and for the good of society as a whole, 
we all have to know about it. We all have to learn about it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Everyone Wins program is an educational program whose 
aim it is to prevent the things that we are capable of preventing. 
Unfortunately, there are enough medical and health-related 
problems that to date no one knows how to prevent, and they eat 
up enough time and money and research without the added strain 
put on our health care system by dealing with preventable 
diseases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one would argue today that the investment in 
polio vaccine was a good investment in the past. Once again, I 
don’t believe that the investment in health care research and in 
healthy life-styles, anybody can argue that it isn’t a good 
investment in our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the opposition would like the 
people to believe, this government, on a new tactic, does not 
close hospitals, we build them. We have undertaken major 
construction projects at St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon, 
University Hospital in Saskatoon, and construction will soon be 
under way on another new city hospital for Saskatoon. Mr. 
Speaker, here in the city of Regina, Phase III at the Regina 
General Hospital, as well as Phase III at the Pasqua Hospital have 
been completed. 
 
In our rural communities — and let’s not forget about them, a 
very important part of our province — we’ve also built hospitals 
in Gull Lake, Watrous, Hudson Bay . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cabri. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — My colleague says from Cabri, Lloydminster; in 
my home constituency of Nipawin. Mr. Speaker, those are only 
a few of them; there are many more, and there are more to be 
built in the future. And I think particularly of Broadview, La 
Ronge in the north, the people of the North, to provide much 
needed health care services up there, and last, in the community 
of Lafleche. That’s right, Lafleche, Saskatchewan in that now 
famous constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — The same constituency, Mr. Speaker, where the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, trying to continue on with his tactic of deception and 
misleading the public, circulated his letter that said that this 
government — this PC government that is building hospitals — 
was planning on closing all the hospitals in that constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an affront to the people of Saskatchewan, it’s 
an affront to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I believe that 
they deserve an apology for that, and if that Leader of the 
Opposition had any integrity he would apologize for those types 
of tactics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1514 
 

Mr. Sauder: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s only indicative 
of the way that they continue to operate on whatever topic of the 
day they choose to deal with. Deceive the people, try and mislead 
them, and hope that if you say it enough times they’ll start to 
believe what you’re putting out to them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg didn’t 
buy it. The joke was not on them, the joke was on the members 
opposite. We all know who they elected to be their representative 
in this House, and we all know why. We didn’t have to do it to 
the NDP, they did it to themselves. As I said before, they did it 
in 1982, they did it in 1986, and they did it again in 1988. I would 
ask, can they be trusted? We haven’t seen any reason to believe 
that they should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to my topic, this government builds 
more than just hospitals. We’ve also built nursing homes, special 
care homes for our seniors or people who are unable to function 
and live in their own homes, for our growing senior population, 
so they have somewhere to go when they can no longer care for 
themselves. 
 
We’ve built those special care homes, but the NDP placed 
moratoriums on them. That was the members opposite. That was 
when they were in government in the 1970s, those years when 
we had a buoyant economy, when the grain prices were good, 
when our resources . . . when the export market was good for our 
resources. Mr. Speaker, they had money to buy existing 
businesses in the province. They had money to buy out the farmer 
so that they could run their farms, but they didn’t have money to 
provide the services. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say shame on them. The people of Saskatchewan 
have said shame on them. No money for nursing homes, no 
money to provide the needed facilities. Mr. Speaker, one of the 
first acts of this government after they were elected in 1982 was 
to get on with the job of providing nursing home beds for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only was it something that we did after 1982 
when we were elected, it’s something that we have continued to 
do over the course of the last seven years. Mr. Speaker, we lifted 
that moratorium and we’ve continued to build nursing homes 
since then. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Twenty-four hundred, 2,400 new nursing home 
beds, Mr. Speaker — 2,400. As I said before, this government 
has recognized the needs, this government has responded to the 
people. We built the homes. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Unfortunately, the nice 
little chat is interfering with our member from Nipawin, and the 
separate debate is interfering with it, and let’s give him the 
opportunity to speak. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the NDP 
have shown that they’re not really interested in the 

motion. They’re only interested in putting forward their 
mistruths, their misconceptions, and deceptions. They don’t want 
to hear the facts put out. I appreciate you for drawing that to their 
attention and bringing them to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot even imagine what could possibly be going 
. . . have went through the minds of those people who advocated 
a moratorium placed on a service as essential as the care of our 
senior citizens, supposedly responsible elected officials who 
didn’t want to recognize the contribution that our senior citizens, 
the pioneers of Saskatchewan, the very people who had helped 
build our medicare system, the very people who had helped build 
our province, Mr. Speaker, and yet they didn’t hold them in 
enough regard to provide a place for them to live, to spend their 
final days once they could no longer care for themselves. They 
placed a moratorium on nursing homes, and we built them. 
 
I would ask, what’s changed, Mr. Speaker? The Leader of the 
Opposition, the present leader, who was part of that crew in those 
days, is still advocating that we shouldn’t be building facilities. 
Mr. Speaker, I disagree with that. Our Premier disagrees with 
that, and this government disagrees with that. Not only do we say 
we disagree with it, we’ve demonstrated it, and we’ve done 
something about it. We’ve built those homes. 
 
For instance, the Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon which was 
opened last year. I would urge some of the members opposite to 
tour those facilities, to talk to the residents in them, to talk to the 
staff in those facilities and find out if they were necessary, find 
out if we shouldn’t have them. Mr. Speaker, once again they’re 
critical, but no realistic alternatives — no alternatives at all. Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps they could check the (Senior Citizens) Eventide 
Home here in Regina, run by the Salvation Army; the Santa 
Maria (Senior Citizens) Home just over to the west of the 
legislature here, and find out if those facilities were needed. 
Many, many of our small communities around the province, as 
well, and I’m pleased to say that in my constituency of Nipawin, 
we’re presently undergoing an addition to the special care home 
there, which is going to provide more, much needed space in that 
facility and in that community and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another facility, an idea that came out of our 
consultation with the people, was to keep as many seniors as 
possible in their home communities, in the small communities 
where they had spent their lives, the small communities where 
they had family, the small communities where their friends and 
relatives still are today, Mr. Speaker, the place where they felt at 
home. Their idea and suggestion for that was that we should build 
integrated facilities, and I think of communities such as Rose 
Valley, and another one that I was at was Nokomis, where they 
were able . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I could beg leave to 
make an introduction? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
 

  



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1515 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the other members in the 
Assembly tonight, someone that’s very special to me. It’s my 
son. He’s here for the first time as a guest in the legislature. He’s 
enjoying the proceedings, and in about two minutes Dylan’s 
going to be going home to bed. So I’d like all members to 
welcome him to the Assembly tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 3 — Crisis in Health Care (continued) 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you very much. I too would like to join 
in welcoming the member’s son here to visit. I know it’s always 
a treat when youngsters can come and view the proceedings here. 
I know my family enjoys it when they get the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, not only have we built hospitals — 
cancer clinic, rehabilitation centre — but our small communities 
and the facilities that should be provided there in rural 
Saskatchewan, the place that’s so important to so many people in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, the fabric, the very fabric of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the integrated facility concept has been developed 
and is built to join together some special home care beds, 
long-term care beds, along with the acute care facilities. It’s been 
a means of keeping the medical staff many times in the 
community. It’s been a means of keeping the seniors in that 
community where their family, where their friends are, and 
where they still have an opportunity, if they’re able, to get out 
and spend time with those that they know, in surroundings that 
they’re familiar with, Mr. Speaker, I think a very excellent 
project to assist. It’s one more small thing to help to keep many 
of our small towns viable and alive, a reason for people to stay 
there and not want to move on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that I’ve heard the members opposite 
screaming about from time to time is a shortage of nurses. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, this government has dealt with that problem, we’ve 
addressed it, we’ve added 746 new nursing positions in 
Saskatchewan, and we will be expanding that number even more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hospital waiting lists are another pet peeve of the 
members in opposition. Well we have provided more funding 
through that problem, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it’s been an 
ongoing problem, it’s not anything that’s new to this government, 
it was around in the last government, and I would almost bet that 
it was around in the government before that. In the last four 
months of 1987, however, waiting lists have been reduced 
substantially and they’re continuing to go down. Yet, Mr. 
Speaker, when they get up to talk, even to this day they raise this. 
The present member from Saskatoon South, when he was 
minister of Health, his suggestion was that hospital waiting lists 
were an efficient and effective way of running a hospital. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve provided additional funding to take care of 
that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago I spoke of how this government 
has built hospitals. Well, Mr. Speaker, hospitals aren’t the only 
important part of the system; they also need equipment to go in 
them. We provided funding for equipment. For instance, we 
purchased CAT (computerized axial tomography) scanners for 
Saskatchewan’s six main hospitals. It’s interesting to note that 
over the supper hour I just heard a conversation of a constituent 
of a colleague of mine who said, don’t let anyone put that idea 
forward that there’s big, long waiting lists. 
 
She had had reason to attend a doctor recently, appointment at 11 
o’clock in the morning; she said that at 3 o’clock in the afternoon 
she had a CAT scan. The waiting list was not long. She said, 
we’ve got a very efficient system and very good service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also enhanced the open heart 
surgery program in Regina, and increased funding for day 
surgery in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, we’re also establishing a 
provincial organ donor program, a co-ordination so that the 
medical staff do not have to spend their time and their efforts 
finding organ donors, or in turn finding recipients for organs that 
are available for donation, Mr. Speaker, a program that has 
received very high commendation and praise from those people 
who are involved in those needs, and I’m very pleased this 
government has been able to provide for that. 
 
We’ve also increased funding for road and air ambulance 
services substantially, even more substantially than our 91 per 
cent increase in our global health budget — Mr. Speaker, an 
increase of 221 per cent, 221 per cent for ambulance services. 
 
We’ve also established Whitespruce, the first drug and alcohol 
treatment centre directed at youth in Canada; the Children’s 
Rehabilitation Centre in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve talked, 
I’ve encouraged members of the opposition to visit some of the 
facilities that this government has built, to find out the services 
that are being provided. 
 
I’d also like to encourage them to visit the new $50 million 
therapy wing of the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre in Regina, 
which recently had its grand opening. I know if they would take 
the time, the opportunity to tour it, to talk to the staff, they will 
be impressed, perhaps even a little jealous — jealous that they 
were not the initiators of such a project. 
 
All prior to 1982 and after an election they talked about a new 
rehab centre. They had been asked for it many times; they 
announced it. Interestingly enough, after the election when they 
were defeated, there were no plans in place, there was nothing in 
the works to provide the facility. They had talked before an 
election, but it was only to deceive and mislead, it wasn’t to 
provide any real facility or real services, or to address the real 
need of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also introduced the Hemophilus influenzae 
vaccine for 18-month-old infants. Once again, I make reference 
to polio vaccine and the benefit   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1516 
 

that it’s been to our society — for those people that need this 
vaccine, a very necessary thing and a very positive step forward 
in that disease. 
 
We recently have another new and very innovative thing 
provided in delivery of our health care; it’s our plastic health 
services card. There, once again, members opposite suggest, oh, 
it’s unnecessary, we don’t need it; we don’t need to improve the 
methods of delivery; we don’t need to improve the timeliness; we 
don’t need to improve our record-keeping. Mr. Speaker, this 
initiative increases the efficiency of our health care system, and 
also, and very importantly, decreases its abuse. 
 
And for any of us to suggest that there wasn’t any abuse, I think, 
would be very naive. I think we all have to be realistic about that. 
It makes me feel very good when I talk to medical people, 
doctors, when I talk to pharmacists who talk about the people 
who come in. When they punch their records . . . prescription into 
the computer and run their card through the system, they find out 
that that same person has had perhaps the same prescription the 
same day or a day or two previous, and when challenged on it — 
provided by a different doctor unknown to the one who provided 
the prescription — the people just leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health care and our drug system was a method 
for some people, a small element of our society, to abuse the 
system, and this is one more check that’s going to help that and 
be a positive for everybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as positive as it may be, and as much as we may 
talk about wanting to cut down abuse, members opposite voiced 
their objections, said it’s unnecessary. I don’t know how people 
who speak out of one side of their mouth, who claim to have the 
public’s best interests at heart, can oppose programs that are so 
obviously beneficial to them, and obviously beneficial to our 
society and to our residents and the constituents of our province. 
 
Sometimes I think that perhaps they are taking their official role 
a little too literally — opposition, indeed. Mr. Speaker, it would 
seem to me that an effective and realistic and a credible 
opposition would be offering constructive criticism and 
alternatives — not just opposition, not just degrading comments, 
not just suggesting that it’s not good enough, not just suggesting 
you should do more — but should be providing realistic solutions 
to problems that we’re facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge those members not on the government side 
of the House to re-think their position carefully and to be honest 
with themselves; but, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, be honest 
with the people of Saskatchewan. They deserve at least that 
much. 
 
(2130) 
 
It’s a travesty that members opposite would attempt to blatantly 
deceive the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, right from 
their leader on down it seems to be their trade mark and their 
hallmark that if they haven’t got anything positive to say, then 
we’ll attempt to deceive and mislead. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said 
before, our people 

deserve more than that. 
 
As I’ve pointed out, as I’ve went through my discussion here 
tonight, the opposition would have them believe that this 
government doesn’t build hospitals when, in fact, we do. We 
pointed out many instances of it and many more to come. 
 
They’d lead them to think that we don’t build nursing homes; in 
fact, we do. We have many, many residents in them this day who 
are testimony to that and who are very pleased and thankful that 
we have provided that for them. 
 
They’d lead them to think that we don’t and haven’t assisted and 
addressed the problems of waiting lists when, in fact, we have 
and we do. 
 
They’d lead them to think that we’ve cut funding, when the 
opposite is true. Mr. Speaker, if a 91 per cent more money over 
these seven years is a cut in funding, my arithmetic is something 
different. I believe they must be dealing with new math or 
something. As I’ve said before, it’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, and 
it just won’t do. It’s not good enough. I don’t accept it and neither 
do the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the reasons why I will be supporting the 
amendment moved by my colleague which commends the 
Government of Saskatchewan for its innovative changes to the 
health care services; for its integrity for consulting with the 
people about those changes; and for its development of a 
long-term strategic plan for the positive improvement of 
Saskatchewan health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting that amendment and voting 
against the motion put forward by the member from Lakeview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to enter this 
debate. I had intended on getting into the debate before the 
amendment was moved this evening, but, Mr. Speaker, I can 
speak on both for the next half hour or so. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I do want to set the record straight. The 
Minister of Education again is speaking from his seat as he 
usually does, but I do want to set the record straight. Both the 
mover and the seconder of the amendments tonight indicated, 
Mr. Speaker, that health care expenditures, Mr. Speaker, have 
gone up 91 per cent. That is simply not true. 
 
Both the member for Rosthern — and I’m very disappointed with 
the member from Rosthern who is a former educator, and who, I 
think, believed at one time that he should be truthful with the 
people of Saskatchewan, particularly the young people. The 
member knows better, and he knows that he was not speaking the 
truth tonight when he said that health care costs have increased 
by 91 per cent since 1982. That is not the truth. 
 
And if the member would just listen for a . . . 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1517 
 

An Hon. Member: — What about the waiting lists? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, would you please ask the Minister 
of Education to quit yelling across the floor. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It seems to me we’re having a dispute 
between members here. Let’s just all calm down and allow the 
speaker to continue. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the Minister of Education who’s 
constantly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The member 
opposite was getting kind of carried away in debate, which is all 
right, I suppose, but when he questions that I was not telling the 
truth, I can only conclude that he’s saying that I’m lying. I 
thought that that . . . We have a specific rule in this Legislative 
Assembly that prevents . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I am afraid that because of an 
intervention from one of the members, I am unable to hear you 
completely. Would you please repeat your remarks. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, I’d like to very much, if I could just make 
myself heard over the member from Quill Lakes. The point of 
order, Mr. Speaker, is that we have a rule in this Assembly which 
I think precludes one member calling into question the 
truthfulness of another member, and by the member of Saskatoon 
South indicating that I was not telling the truth during my 
comments, I suggest to you that only leaves one conclusion, that 
I was lying, which is against the rules of this House. 
 
And I suggest furthermore to you, Mr. Speaker, that my 
terminology of 91 per cent, if he brings that into question, it’s a 
matter of debate; it’s a matter of opinion; it is not a matter of 
black and white, truth or lies. That is the point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have listened to the hon. 
member’s point of order, and the way I understood it, he 
indicated that the member had indicated that he was not telling 
the truth. Is that correct? 
 
According to the rules and practices we follow in this House, that 
has been deemed as not an unparliamentary remark. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the conclusion that the 
member from Rosthern made himself. If that’s what he thinks of 
himself, that’s fine with me. I won’t debate that and argue that 
with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I said to the member from Rosthern and the 
member from Nipawin, they are not being truthful. They are not 
being truthful with the people of Saskatchewan when they say 
that health costs have increased by 91 per cent since 1982 
because what the government has done, what the government has 
done with the health care budget, they have moved about $250 

million from other departments into the Department of Health, 
and therefore they said the Department of Health has increased 
by 91 per cent. That is not telling the truth. 
 
That is not telling the truth, and anyone who claims that the 
Health budget has increased by 91 per cent since 1982 is simply 
being deceitful. Mr. Speaker, let me run it through for the 
member from Kinistino, who doesn’t understand. 
 
In 1982, grants to hospitals were under supply and services. You 
have now taken them out and put them under Health, which is 
about $4.5 million. In 1982, grants and allowance for ambulance 
services, another almost $7 million, were under Urban Affairs — 
they were not under Health. You’ve added them into the health 
care cost. Grants and allowances for home care, almost $24 
million — they were under Social Services. You’ve now put 
them under Health. 
 
And the big one, Mr. Speaker, the big one for the member from 
Kinistino — and he shakes his head; he agrees with me — the 
big one, Mr. Speaker, grants and allowances for special care 
services, $190 million, were under Social Services. You put them 
under Health. I ask the member from Kinistino, why didn’t you 
take the whole Social Services budget and put them under Health, 
and therefore you could claim that you increased health services 
by 1,000 per cent? Now is that the new math? I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, when they then claim that health care costs have gone 
up by 91 per cent, they are being dishonest. They are not being 
honest with the people of Saskatchewan, and it’s about time, Mr. 
Speaker, that someone draws that to their attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that is before us simply condemns the 
government for not consulting, not consulting when they made 
changes. They have added an amendment which says that we 
should congratulate them for consulting with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Who did they consult? Who did they consult, Mr. Speaker, when 
they dismissed over 400 dental nurses? Summarily they walked 
in and said, you’re finished, that’s it, no more, no more, you are 
now dismissed. Who did they consult? No one. No one, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not consultation. 
 
Who did they consult when they drastically changed the 
prescription drug program? No one, Mr. Speaker, no one; they 
simply went ahead and did it. 
 
Who did they consult when they had a study of rural hospitals 
and then disclaimed that particular study? Did they ask the people 
of rural Saskatchewan? Oh no, that was done in secret. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what did that report say? About 80 per cent of rural 
hospitals could be done away with without the hospital system 
suffering at all. And who agreed with that report? The Minister 
of Health. The Minister of Health agreed with that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the next few minutes that I have, I will show that 
the people opposite really are not committed at all to medicare 
and hospitalization. Let me read from an article. It is entitled, 
“Medicare too sacred to question.” “Medicare too sacred to 
question.” We will leave the   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1518 
 

author unnamed for now. I will mention the author later. Do the 
members opposite agree with some of the things that the author 
says? The author says this about medicare: 
 

Nothing I have since experienced has relieved my anxiety 
that the inevitable results of the present welfare state, in 
particular medicare, will destroy the freedom of the 
individual and greatly inhibit the original purpose of the 
healing arts. 
 

That’s one quote from this article. Let me go on. The author says: 
 

But somewhere along the way, medicare became so sacred 
that no editor or politician would even suggest that 
compulsory medicare insurance implemented by the state, 
as a monopoly, might not be the best way to deliver health 
care. 
 

Let me quote a little bit further. And this is what she asks, the 
authoress: 
 

Why do we need medical care insurance that is compulsory 
and a government monopoly? 
 

Let me read that again for the member from Shellbrook. Let me 
read that again for the member from Regina South: 
 

Why do we need medical care insurance that is compulsory 
and a government monopoly? 
 

Do the members opposite agree with those words? Of course they 
do, because they have defended this individual over and over 
again. And who is the authoress? Well, somebody by the name 
of Gay Caswell — Gay Caswell, who sat on that side, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who still speaks for that party opposite. Are they 
committed to medicare? By no means, Mr. Speaker, and I’d say 
to the people of Saskatchewan, should those people get re-elected 
again there’s going to be dramatic changes to hospitalization and 
medicare to privatize it. 
 
What does she say; what does she say? “Why do we need medical 
care insurance that is compulsory and a government monopoly? 
When was a monopoly . . .” And she goes on to say: “When was 
a monopoly, especially a government-run monopoly, ever proven 
to be a most efficient and benign way to deliver services?” 
 
What is she saying to the people of Saskatchewan? Let’s 
privatize medicare; let’s privatize hospitalization. And these 
words, Mr. Speaker, are not just the words of Gay Caswell. Those 
are the words that those people opposite would love to say to the 
people, to the public, but they are afraid of the political 
consequences. Deep down in their hearts they support Gay 
Caswell, who sat on that side and who has threatened to run 
again, and no doubt will get the support of many of those people 
opposite in seeking a nomination. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I know the 
members opposite don’t like that, but deep down in their hearts 
. . . at least one thing about Gay Caswell, she says what she 
thinks, not like some of those members opposite, not like some 
of those members opposite. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Who? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — You, for one. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the debate should probably be 
from the member for Saskatoon South speaking to the Assembly 
as a whole, and I don’t think we should have separate debates. 
And probably provocative remarks passing back and forth across 
the floor do not add to the debate. So I ask both sides to 
co-operate. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I know, I 
know that some of the words of Gay Caswell are provocative and 
they are disturbing to the members opposite. They are frustrated 
by the truth of this individual because so many of those members 
opposite believe exactly what she says. And they are saying to 
her, please, Gay, don’t be so truthful. We’ll take care of some of 
those things that you want once we get re-elected. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, be aware. Privatization 
is not just for the utilities which they said they would not 
privatize. Those people opposite also want privatization for our 
hospitals. They also want privatization for medicare and, Mr. 
Speaker, we are well on our way, as I will show a little bit later, 
in the members opposite trying to privatize hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and the members opposite, 
the mover and the seconder say, well, oh, we haven’t cut back in 
hospital . . . in health care. What did the Minister of Health say 
in an article by Dale Eisler? The Minister of Health, by his own 
admission: 
 

 McLeod says that cuts to the dental plan (cuts to the dental 
plan) will save the Devine government approximately $5.5 
million out of a total health budget of almost $1.2 billion. 
 

Those were the admissions of the present Minister of Health. To 
put that into perspective, to put that into perspective it translates 
into a reduction of .458 per cent of the spending of Health. For 
that amount of saving, for that amount of saving, 294 dental 
therapists and support staff are losing their jobs — 200 — leaving 
aside any debate over the social benefits of the health plans. 

 
It turns out that McLeod’s fiscal argument rings hollow 
when considered in the light of other events. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let me go again. “Health plans will die without 
cuts.” Were they said by a member in the opposition? No they 
weren’t. Well who was the author of those words? Well let’s read 
it, and he says, health plans will die without cuts. 
 

Saskatchewan has to trim its drug and dental plans in order 
to save them, Health minister George McLeod said 
Thursday. 
 

So, health plans will die without cuts. And the members opposite, 
the mover and the seconder said there were no health cuts. Well 
who’s telling the truth? Is the Minister of   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1519 
 

Health telling the truth or are the back-benchers telling the truth? 
It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that there were cuts. 
 
Now what does the Minister of Health say? He goes on to say: 
 

The province can’t afford open-ended programs any more, 
so it will chop about 60 million from its dental and 
prescription drug plans, fire about 330 staff, and change or 
eliminate some coverage, he said. 
 

Let me say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, here comes the 
member, the Great Britain person. “The province can’t afford 
. . .” Let me just . . . the member from Wilkie, let me just tell him 
what the Minister of Health said. I’ll read it for his edification 
again: 
 

The province can’t afford open-ended programs any more, 
so it will chop about 60 million from its dental and 
prescription drug plans, fire about 330 staff, and change or 
eliminate some coverage, he said. 
 

And that was the Minister of Health, the . . . well, the present 
Minister of Health. 
 
Well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear someone squawking 
from the back-benches, Mr. Speaker. Comes from, I think, the 
member from Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that the members opposite weren’t committed 
to medicare and hospitalization. Why do I say that? I say that, 
Mr. Speaker, because the headlines in the papers very clearly, 
very clearly indicate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Member for Saskatoon 
South. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your 
stopping the members opposite from interfering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that the hospital is not committed . . . is not 
committed to hospitalization and medicare because of the cuts 
that have taken place. And what else can we, Mr. Speaker, can 
we surmise when we read headings like, “Hospital lottery 
alarming.” And the article goes on to say: 
 

There is nothing very new about a lottery to raise funds for 
a football team, although for recent lotteries to reduce the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders’ deficit are on a somewhat 
grander scale than usual. However, there is something new 
and very alarming about a lottery being run to offset the cost 
of equipping hospitals in Saskatchewan. I say alarming . . . 
 

And the author goes on. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is alarming. It is 
alarming when the government does not made a commitment to 
adequately fund hospitals so that we can provide care for our 
citizens in this province. And that’s not the only article. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, another one: 
 

“St. Paul’s needs your help. St. Paul’s hospital hasn’t got 
sufficient fundings to provide services for its people so it is 
running a lottery. 
 

Here is another one from Regina, “Hospitals team up to solicit 
money.” 
 
Now I said also, Mr. Speaker, that they weren’t committed to 
rural hospitals. I won’t go into many of these, but here are some: 
“Rural hospitals closures studied.” And those aren’t my words; 
these come out of the Star-Phoenix, 1988. And it goes on to say: 
 

“About 80 of the province’s 133 hospitals could be closed 
or converted without hurting accessibility to hospital care,” 
says a report before the provincial government. 
 

Who commissioned this report? The Minister of Health, the 
present Minister of Health commissioned that report. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also said that the members opposite simply 
weren’t providing sufficient moneys so that our hospitals could 
operate. We had, Mr. Speaker, just about a year ago, over 11,000 
people — 11,000 people on the hospital waiting list in Saskatoon 
alone — over 11,000. And, Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister 
of Health back in 1982, the largest we ever had in Saskatoon was 
about 2,500. We now have almost five times as many in the city 
of Saskatoon, almost five times as many. 
 
Oh, I know the members opposite don’t want to hear this, but 
those are the truths. That’s the truth. Here’s another one: it says 
in the Star-Phoenix, “Hospital cuts, stupid move.” And this is 
what the person says: 
 

I am a quadriplegic and I spent a week in University 
Hospital in April for a check-up. All the government budget 
cuts in a hospital seem stupid when you are a patient. The 
cuts are in the wrong places. Nursing staff and other areas 
already cut to the bone are usually the places where 
additional cuts are made. 
 

And they are proud, they are proud of the services that they are 
providing. This is a quadriplegic who spent some time in the 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are lots of other quotes. Here’s another one: 
“Hospitals critically short-staffed.” I thought I heard the mover 
and the seconder boast about the staff that they have been 
providing. Let me read parts of this: 
 

Some Saskatchewan hospital wards are critically 
short-staffed due to summer bed closures, according to . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — 
 

. . . the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 

I’m glad you asked. 
 

About 660 hospital beds have been closed for   



 
May 30, 1989 

 

1520 
 

summer according to a survey by the union which said 
hospitals are not replacing nurses when they are sick or on 
vacation. 
 

Let me go on a little bit further: 
 

 Vacant nursing positions are not being filled, meaning 
there are fewer nurses to care for patients. 
 

And so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that all of these articles are making is that 
the health care system under this government has suffered 
dramatically. The quality of care has deteriorated, and the 
government opposite has simply not provided sufficient funds for 
our hospitals and for medicare. And when they say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the revenues for hospitals have increased by 91 per cent, they 
are simply not telling the truth. The Estimates of 1987-88, as I 
have indicated, clearly indicate what they have done. They have 
taken expenditures that were under other departments, moved 
them into the Department of Health — over 250 million — and 
then say that the Department of Health budget has dramatically 
increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to spend just a few minutes on a program 
that the member from Rosthern boasts about. And I don’t know 
too much about the program, but he says the program, Everyone 
Wins — Everyone Wins. Well I remember a program called 
Feeling Good program, which was a life-style program. It was a 
joint program between the federal government at that time, the 
Liberal government, and our government. The members opposite 
cancelled that program when they got into power. They cancelled 
it. Came up a little bit later with their own program called 
Everyone Wins, but basically had the same objectives. 
 
I don’t oppose that, but I ask the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster to check and see what the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley had to say when I introduced a 
preventative health care program, I believe, in 1979 or ’80. 
Check what he said about preventative health care. I agree with 
preventative health care. The member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley did not, was very critical of the then minister of 
Health, myself, for introducing a preventative health care 
program and a life-style program. 
 
I am not going to criticize that life-style program they have 
introduced. All I’m saying is that the objectives of that program 
are very similar to the Feeling Good program that we had when 
we were the government, which program you cancelled — which 
program you cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me also . . . The member from Nipawin said that, 
while he was boasting of the seat-belt program, that seat-belt 
program — that seat-belt program was introduced by us, over the 
objection of you people when you sat on this side — over the 
objection, strenuous objection because you said it interfered with 
the individual freedom and rights. We brought it in. Now you’re 
supporting it, and I’m glad you are because it does save lives — 
it does save lives. 
 

Mr. Speaker, preventative health care can cut costs, can cut costs 
and will cut costs in the long run, and we must spend a lot more. 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Rosthern talks about 
Participaction, Participaction was around much before they 
formed the government, and it was much more active and much 
more visible at that time than it is now. I support that too because 
it is a life-style program . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Other 
hon. members will have their opportunity. Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I also want the member from Nipawin to check 
with a very good constituent of his, a member by the name of Ted 
Azevedo. I want the member from Nipawin to ask Ted Azevedo 
what he recommended when Ted was the chairman of the 
provincial senior citizens’ council, what Ted Azevedo and the 
senior citizens’ council recommended on home care. 
 
I want also the member to check with Ed Marleau, Ed Marleau, 
the administrator of Sherbrooke nursing home and ask him what 
he recommended on home care in 1977-78. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . yes, the members 
opposite have made some changes. Some of those changes I 
agree with; most of those changes I do not agree with. They are 
a backward step. They are a backward step and we will pay 
dearly. We will pay dearly for those because in the long run, 
unless we put a lot more money in preventative health care, and 
that includes home care, the costs for health care are going to 
dramatically increase. I know the present Minister of Health 
agrees with that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more things that I want to say, but 
I’m being interrupted by the members opposite. But if you permit 
me, I will continue with another. Member from Rosthern 
mentioned the commission on health care and why it was brought 
about. The only reason the Minister of Health brought in the 
commission on health care because he was being hammered . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I have asked 
the hon. members quite frequently to refrain from interrupting. 
However, it being 10 o’clock, the House now stands adjourned 
till 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


