





























































Hansard: July 28, 1989


July 28, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 
Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good evening. I welcome the opportunity to 
wrap up my debate. I will be entering my summary remarks at this time and by the very 
nature of the fact they’re summary, that will mean there will be some repetition, but I will 
try not to elaborate too lengthily on the points that I have been able to make earlier on the 
day. 
 
I was talking at one stage about the Progressive Conservative government’s lack of 
having campaigned on the issue of privatization of, for example, the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, or Sask Power Corporation, but specifically the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I pointed out, sir, that in 1971, in the New Deal for People, the New Democratic 
Party had talked in very pointed terms, in a 21-page booklet, outlining what it is that we 
stood for. We outlined that one of the things we believed was that the resources of 
Saskatchewan, the natural resources, should be for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and indeed should be owned and controlled by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I then pointed out that in the New Democratic election or pre-election booklet, New Deal 
’75, which was a 24-page booklet, resources were highlighted on page 4 and, in even 
stronger terms than in the 1971 election, we pointed out that Crown corporations would 
be required to look after our natural resources and to protect the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I spoke of our vision of Saskatchewan’s ability to develop its potash reserves, its 4,000- 
to 5,000-year reserves at current rates of use. And I spoke of Saskatchewan people being 
absolutely second to none. I mentioned when the Deputy Speaker was in the Chair that 
the potash industry has got a tremendous resource in the people of Saskatchewan 
because, being a rural province, very many of us grew up and come from a farming 
background and, being a farmer yourself, sir, I know that you will appreciate there are 
very few challenges that I could throw to you regarding your farm that you would not 
overcome one way or another. There’s, I think, virtually nothing I could do to stump a 
Saskatchewan farmer. I’m of course not referring to something that’s going to force a 
bankruptcy. I’m referring to an equipment breakdown or something like that. 



 
Saskatchewan working people are well educated, very resourceful, and want to get the 
job done. So all of the potash industry, including the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, have got a very highly skilled group of employees. I realize that potash 
mining is somewhat different than farming, but I also realize that people with a hands-on, 
working background have a little more mechanical expertise, a little more ability to get 
jobs done as opposed to . . . oh, say somebody from a large urban centre such as New 
York — New York, New York. In all too many cases, they only learn through technical 
institutes or that sort of thing. 
 
I was talking, Mr. Speaker, about the beneficiaries of the sale of Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and who they would be if PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) is 
privatized. Would the beneficiaries be the people of Saskatchewan, who currently own 
that natural resource and own the corporation, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
or would the beneficiaries be the large, multinational corporations and wealthy investors? 
And, of course, we all know that the only reason anyone buys shares is to make a profit, 
so those profits would go to the new shareholders, the new shareholders being wealthy 
people and big corporations, not being people who are struggling on minimum wage — a 
minimum wage, I might add, that has been frozen at 4.50 for over four years now, and 
was frozen at 4.25 for three years prior to that. 
 
The point . . . How that ties in is minimum wage earners are desperately struggling to 
keep clothes on their back, food in their stomachs, and some semblance of shelter. So 
they certainly don’t have money to purchase any shares in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Indeed, many people who earn a lot more than minimum wage do not have that stash of 
cash that would allow them to make such a purchase, but at least if you’re making, you 
know, double or more the minimum wage, you have a chance of saving up some money, 
or you have a chance of going to the credit union or a bank and asking for a loan so you 
can purchase shares. Minimum wage earners don’t have that luxury. Single parents, in 
virtually every instance, do not have that luxury. 
 
So who benefits? Certainly not the majority of Saskatchewan people. I pointed out that 
only 14 per cent of the adult population of Saskatchewan own shares of any kind — only 
14 per cent. 
 
I’ve pointed out earlier in the month that on two successive days as I went canvassing 
door-to-door in the best part of my . . . the wealthiest part of my constituency, I could not 
find a single person who would even consider purchasing shares in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, a corporation that they know they now own. 
 
I also couldn’t find a single person who thought it was a good idea. I did, in the two days 
. . . I found one person each day who said, well I’m really not sure. One person each day 
said, I just don’t know all of the facts. And even given the benefit of the doubt, even 
saying that those people were not with the New Democratic Party, that still leaves an 



overwhelming majority of the people I spoke to saying that they would not purchase 
shares in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The present government has been driven to its position of trying to sell off the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and other Crown corporations because of their gross 
mismanagement, their gross financial mismanagement. It’s a case of trying to sell off a 
quarter of the farm to pay this year’s debt, and then next year they try and sell off another 
quarter to pay that year’s debt. Pretty soon all they’ve got is the homestead, that’s all. 
And all too often that goes as well and they’re off the farm. 
 
And that’s what’s going to happen to our ability to control our destiny, to control our 
future. That’s what’s going to happen with this sell-off of pieces of the Saskatchewan 
heritage — and that’s the heritage not just of government and opposition MLAs that have 
been duly elected; it’s not just the heritage and the preserve of our families and our 
friends, or our individual constituents; it’s a preserve of all Saskatchewan people, present 
and future, and future generations. And I think that the present government has lost sight 
of that very future, Mr. Speaker, and it’s really sad. 
 
If indeed the government had its vision to the future for the genuine good of the province 
of Saskatchewan, it would be very easy to do as I suggested earlier and the Premier could 
simply say, we’re going to pull this Bill; we’re going to fight the next election on it, 
whenever that may be. It can be, as you know, as late as the fall of 1991. 
 
But in the grand scheme of things, the fall of 1991 is a little bit over two years away. It is, 
of course, as you know . . . Historically elections are every four years so in all likelihood 
the election will be about a year from now, give or take six or eight months. But if the 
Premier were not looking at a quick fix for this very moment, then it would be so easy to 
pull the Bill and say, I will go to the people; that will be one of the election issues. 
 
In the meantime, we could get on with much needed legislation. We could get on with 
increasing the minimum wage. We could get on with Bills to deal with day care, to 
provide much needed day care throughout the province. We could get on with 
environmental Bills. We wouldn’t be stuck on potash, potash, potash, day after day. We 
could do pension reform, as was promised in the Speech from the Throne. We could 
cover all kinds of legislation because the government controls the legislation every single 
day. Every day you call what we deal with — every single day. And of course you know 
that we are going to speak out on potash every single day until you give up — every 
single day as long as we can. And I can assure you we can for a good long, long time. A 
long, long time. 
 
How Long? It’s a matter of . . . Well the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are very 
concerned with how long. They’re obviously upset because the per diems have ended, so 
they’re now forced . . . reduced to sitting here at their own expense . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you were elected to look after the people. 
 



You were elected to do business on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and nowhere 
did any of us in this room, any of us elected, never went to the people and said, elect me 
because I want to collect my per diem when the session is on. Not once did any of us — I 
can guarantee it — never said, elect me because I want to collect a per diem. I wanted to 
get elected to do the very best job I can for my constituents, and I’m positive there are 
better MLAs. I’m positive there are better people who can do this job even better than I in 
my constituency, but I’m also positive there’s not one of them willing to work as hard as 
I am to do what I can for my constituents and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following the goings-on in this legislature, 
following the SaskPower betrayal when the government had promised before and after 
the last election that SaskPower and SaskTel were sacred and then they tried to privatize 
the natural gas portion of SaskPower, following that, the people of Saskatchewan have 
completely lost faith in the Conservative administration regarding any and all 
privatization. The most common thing I am hearing when I talk to people across the 
province is, they have gone too far. And what they’re really saying is the government 
broke faith. The government broke the trust of the people by going to far. And it is almost 
irreparable. I say almost because, as you know, in politics a week is a long time, but I 
think it is irreparable. 
 
I think that the people of Saskatchewan in the main have made up their mind how they’re 
going to vote in the next election regardless of how this particular debate goes, this 
potash debate or any other debate goes. There is a critical stage that the government went 
beyond with the SaskPower privatization and they can’t, they just can’t seem to recover 
from it. 
 
(1915) 
 
I have been talking, Mr. Speaker, about our resolve to do everything within our power to 
maintain the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as an economic lever for the next 
government, whoever that is. And indeed earlier in the day when I said that, I said 
whether it be New Democrats or whether it be Liberals or some other party, but I also 
said earlier in the day it will not be the Progressive Conservative Party because that faith 
has been broken, Mr. Speaker — broken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me. The people 
will not be fooled twice. 
 



I did not go into a detailed description of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan earlier 
in my speech, but I do want to just reiterate the numbers, and I will be as brief as I can 
with it, Mr. Speaker. In 1976, the first year of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, it 
made a half a million dollars profit; the second year, 1977, it went to 1.12 million; the 
third year, $24 million; in 1979 it went to $78 million; in 1980 it went to 167 million; 
followed in ’81 with $142 million profit. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member is going over figures that have been used many times. 
I know he said that he’s going to summarize now his remarks; however, that doesn’t 
mean he should begin repeating everything he said, or somebody else said, word for word 
virtually. You’ll have to be very careful. I’m putting the responsibility on you. Like, 
you’ve chosen to speak a long time on the issue and that’s your right; but then having 
made use of that right, then you also have a responsibility that goes with it. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The six years of profit totalled $414 million. 
That figure I could have used. The next I did not summarize, and I’ll be really quick. 
Eighty-two had less than a million dollars profit — this is after the change of 
government; ’83 an $18 million loss; followed by a $25 million profit; $69 million loss; 
$100 million loss: $21 million loss; followed by $106 million profit this year. 
 
And as we know, the potash industry is cyclical; it goes up and down. I argue it’s gone 
through some of the down side and we’re now heading up that slope of firmer prices, 
firmer sales, and that’s based on the fact that international grains reserves, this minute, 
are the lowest they have been since the Second World War, the lowest in the world, lower 
than they’ve been since the Second World War. 
 
There is an urgent need, Mr. Speaker, for every grains-growing country in the world to 
grow as much wheat, as much rice, as much barley, as much of whatever they grow, to 
feed an increasing population in the world and a population that seems to be increasingly 
hungry. So there’s much demand for more production from our farmers. That demand for 
more production, quite naturally, will lead to the use of more fertilizer, and there’s only 
so much fertilizer to be had in this world. 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is in a unique position. It is one of the lowest 
cost producers in the world, the most efficient mines in the world, the highest ore grade in 
the world, largest reserves in the world. So really we’re in a fantastic position of 
controlling over 25 per cent of the world potash market, and we have a government that 
wants to give up that control. The one areas that Saskatchewan people have total control, 
the one area that we can indeed lead the world, we can continue to lead the world, and 
they want to give it up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I talked about Power bonds that the member for Weyburn had talked about 
and he called it privatization. I only want to summarize that by saying it’s tantamount to 



saying that if I purchase a Canada savings bond, I am somehow privatizing Canada. And 
nothing could be farther from the truth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You already said that. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I’m not . . . The member for Regina Wascana says, I already said it, and of 
course I already said it; I’m in my summation remarks which is . . . Okay. Now that we 
have that little thing out of the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m not going to go over the production of potash under New Democrats and under 
Tories other than to say it was very, very close to the same. The average price was very 
close to the same; marginal drop under the Tories. But the revenue dropped from $985 
million in a five-year period from ’76 to ’81, and under the Tories it dropped $274 
million from ’82 to ’88, and that is a $711 million loss that the people of Saskatchewan, 
the province of Saskatchewan, can ill afford. 
 
When the government foregoes that kind of revenue from a resource industry that they 
only get one chance to tax, when a government decides consciously to forego that tax, 
that means somebody else has got to pick up the tab. And we all know who that is: every 
one of us who pay the 2 per cent flat tax; every one that pays a 7 per cent E&H tax 
instead of a 5 per cent E&H tax; every one of us who have seen alcohol taxes, cigarette 
taxes, insurance taxes sky-rocketing under the Conservative administration; every one of 
us who understand that the give-away of our Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is an 
action doomed to failure. 
 
Everyone understands that you can do no better than what the New Democrats did from 
’71 to ’82 — 11 balanced surplus budgets, plus the purchase of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. All that, all balanced budgets, all taxes significantly lower than today. 
 
I’m in error when I say all taxes, Mr. Speaker, and you will understand that I am in error 
when I say that. We see the potash taxes having dropped over a five-year period by $711 
million. We see the oil and natural gas taxes having fallen more than a billion and a half 
dollars in total under this administration. Together that’s two and a half billion dollars, 
and we have a $4 billion deficit. All you’d had to do was a little bit of financial jiggery-
pokery to come up with the other billion and a half, or we could be faced with a billion 
and a half dollar deficit right now, instead of a $4 billion deficit. 
 
But we cannot collect a penny of that money that the Conservative government decided 
to forego to the potash industry and to the oil industry, the resource industries, because 
you only get one chance; when you pump a barrel of oil out of the ground, you get one 
chance to tax it. When you dig — or pump, in the case of Kalium — potash out of the 
ground, you get one chance to tax it, one chance only. That’s gone; that $711 million lost 
taxes and royalties in potash is a cancelled cheque. It is gone; it is gone, just like the 
government members opposite will be after the next election — gone. 
 



Mr. Speaker, if you will indulge, I have three paragraphs to read out of the Regina Free 
Press, dated July 4, and then I have one very, very brief summary step. 
 
I know this sounds a bit funny in this debate, but the title of this issue is “That’s Life” — 
that’s the title of this article. And it says: 
 

. . . there are very few mysteries left in this world any more. Birth used to be one 
until some genius invented a camera that could transmit in graphic detail what 
used to be exclusively under cover of the uterine wall. 
 
Death used to be one, until people discovered you could get free press and lots of 
big bucks when you went public with your out-of-body experiences. 
 
As far as I’m concerned, (the writer says) the three remaining mysteries yet to be 
solved are: (1) socks that go AWOL in your dryer; (2) why Grant Schmidt 
remains a cabinet minister; and (3) the pot luck supper. 
 

You could extend the number two to any of the cabinet. You could extend number two to 
any of the cabinet and you could certainly extend it to the Premier. Why do they remain 
members of the cabinet, or why do they remain the Premier? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why are they still in government? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Why are they still in government, as the member from Regina Lakeview 
says. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the puzzle. 
 
I wish to sincerely, sincerely ask the Premier and ask the back-benchers, just hear this one 
plea and tell me, in your next speaker that speaks, or tell me privately, where I’m wrong 
on this. Tell me where I’m wrong on this one very, I think, reasonable simple point. 
 
There’s no urgency to sell the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan this month as 
opposed to next month. There’s no urgency to sell the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan next month as opposed to next year, okay? 
 
So tell me where I’m wrong. Why would you not simply pull the Bill to sell off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, simply pull it as an act of reasonableness and say to 
the people of Saskatchewan: it is our firm intention, should we be re-elected, to privatize 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, to privatize SaskPower, natural gas, include 
electrical if you want, but campaign on it. And if you win an election campaigning on 
what you want to privatize . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you would simply take us up on that, put it off 
until after the next election, I think that’s a reasonable thing to do because 
Saskatchewan’s been around as a province since 1905 — 84 years. It’s going to be 85 



years next year. So one more year is hardly going to be significant in the grand scheme of 
things. Just put it off until after the next election; fight the election on it. 
 
If you win, and I am fortunate enough to first get the nomination in my constituency, and 
second, be successful in being re-elected, I will stand in this legislature, if you win the 
election, and I will say you have the blessings of the people; you’ve fought an election 
campaign and you won it. I’m not telling you I’ll lay down and play dead, but I am telling 
you that we would not be as vociferous in our defence of the potash corporation as we are 
now, as we are now. 
 
So I think it’s a reasonable request that I’m putting forward on behalf of certainly my 
constituents. I think it’s a reasonable request for the people of Saskatchewan. If the 
Premier has the courage he’s going to be the Premier after the next election, as he tells us 
he has, it should not be much to ask. Just put it off for a year, year and a half at the most. 
Fight an election on it, and if you win the election, privatize to your heart’s content, if 
you win the election. 
 
But you know you’re not going to, so instead you’re following this scorched earth policy, 
scorched earth policy; burn and destroy everything that can help the next government put 
people to work — scorched earth policy of the Tories. 
 
(1930) 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Magoo makes the government members opposite look like 
he has 20/20 vision. Mr. Magoo makes the government look like they have no sight at all. 
Mr. Magoo looks like a man of great world knowledge and great world vision as he 
bumbles around, bumping from one thing to the next. Compared to this government, Mr. 
Magoo is a genius, and Mr. Magoo wouldn’t let the people of Saskatchewan or anywhere 
else down. 
 
I am sincerely asking the government to put off passage. Stop pushing this Bill; deal with 
something else; deal with the many Bills that have some substance and some need for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Let’s get on to that. Let’s not be stuck on this potash 
privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m asking the Premier to say, whoa in a mud hole, in essence, and indeed, 
as my colleagues tell me, he is already there and he is stuck in the mud hole. So I am 
going to be ending my speech now. I am obviously going to be doing everything from 
here on to prevent the passage of this Bill 20. 
 
One final word, and it’s something I intended to do much earlier in my speech, and it has 
to do with a buyer beware — with buyer beware, when it comes to buying potash. 
Anyone who buys shares in the potash, any corporation who buys shares in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan . . . We don’t know yet, because we’re not the government, 
what we can do, but we have no obligation to protect corporations at all — big business, 



out-of-province corporations. No protection is guaranteed, that’s for sure. So buyer 
beware, if you purchase into the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am vehemently opposed to this Bill 20, this give-away of the greatest 
resource that the people of Saskatchewan currently own, this heritage, this Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. I will be voting against this give-away; I’ll be voting 
against the foreign control; and I will be standing up proudly with every New Democrat 
in this legislature and the many, many tens of thousands of people who are proud to call 
themselves New Democrats all around this province. We will be standing up together, 
arm in arm, in opposition to a Tory government that has gone mad with privatization 
madness. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve enjoyed my opportunity to participate in this historic 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I want to open my remarks by congratulating the NDP 
mayor of Regina, Doug Archer, who recently voiced his support for the SaskEnergy 
initiative because it’s helping Regina, and he was finally woke up to the fact that it’s 
doing that. And so I would think then that he would probably be delighted with the 
potential for the public participation of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — I remind Mr. Archer, in case he’s forgotten it, that — and I’m sure he’s 
watching tonight — that the 5 per cent tax will not go up because of SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of us in this Chamber can underestimate the importance of this debate, 
the debate on public participation in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. It is a 
debate about the future of our province and about this province’s great potential. 
 
My comments on Bill 20 will not be complete without reference to the speech made in 
this legislature by the leader of the NDP. The Leader of the Opposition opened his speech 
with a quote from the supporters of free trade, which I find rather astonishing, frankly. 
 
In the free trade debate, the supporters — notably trade minister, John Crosbie — said the 
critics and the NDP were walking backward into the future. You could imagine my 
surprise when the NDP leader, humbled by his failure to stop free trade, elected to use the 
same quotation in this debate, “walking backward into the future.” 
 
This is a very telling quotation. For this particular NDP leader, it’s a classic example of 
self-description — yesterday’s man advocating yesterday’s solution, yesterday’s rigid 
NDP ideology as he answers today’s economic issues. 
 



It’s no wonder he uses this phrase, “walking backward into the future”. It has direct 
application and meaning for the opposition leader and his party, particularly as it relates 
to the potash debate — intellectually, philosophically, and practically. They are tired and 
they are empty, and they are walking backward into the future. 
 
Bill 20 will give Saskatchewan people the opportunity to participate directly in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan through share ownership. This Bill provides a way for us to 
attract new money, new investment, and new growth into the potash industry, into the 
potash corporation. The government will be free to regulate, free to tax, and free to 
benefit from the profits of the corporation without having to own the mines and 
equipment that extract the ore. 
 
Does a government need to own a potash company in order to manage it? Obviously 
there are ways that an enlightened, modern, and sensible government — and I’m 
describing the Progressive Conservative government — there are ways that government 
can ensure that all of us benefit without risking the future of our children, without using 
taxpayers’ money, without borrowing against our heritage and staking everything on the 
management of bureaucrats, government administrators, and politicians. 
 
Bill 20, Mr. Speaker, provides safeguards to ensure that the new, modernized public 
potash company remains in Saskatchewan and that it will be a major player in our 
economy. 
 
Let’s look for a moment at the history of the potash company of Saskatchewan or PCS. In 
1976, when the NDP government nationalized the potash industry, they said that the 
American-owned potash companies had to go. They had to hit the road. They had to be 
kicked out of Saskatchewan. This is particularly noteworthy given the comments of the 
NDP leader who now boasts about how he personally led the attack in 1976. 
 
Just what did he do? What was his answer? The NDP took Saskatchewan’s heritage 
money, money that should have been used to improve health care services, education, and 
to build roads, and to help farmers and municipalities. They took Saskatchewan’s 
heritage money — money that should have been used for all Saskatchewan people, for 
our children and their children, and generations to come — and they squandered it by 
investing in the resource sector. They squandered it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The 1982 report on the Crown investments review commission estimated that over $1 
billion was invested in a resource Crown by the NDP. And that’s only the up-front 
investment. We must also factor in lost revenue and taxes and the cost of elaborate 
furniture. We must factor in the cost of travel for NDP fat cats, flying all over the world 
on taxpayers’ money, staying in the fanciest hotels, eating the best food, entertaining their 
friends, and playing the fat-cat role they do so well. And don’t they love it. 
 
In the case of the potash corporation, there were three NDP cabinet ministers on the 
board of directors and the Leader of the Opposition was one of them. The NDP 



squandered our heritage. They sold out the people of Saskatchewan to their ideological 
dreams. 
 
In 1975, there’s a moratorium placed on the construction of special care homes for the 
elderly in this province. A full 12 per cent of our population is age 65 or over. By the year 
2000 that percentage will top 30 per cent, and yet the NDP neither built or expanded or 
improved health care facilities for our seniors for seven years — seven long years for the 
seniors of this province. Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t afford to; they were spending 
Saskatchewan’s heritage money on money-losing resource Crowns like $1 billion for 
potash companies — holes in the ground, as the member from Melville often calls them. 
 
And our seniors weren’t the only ones who suffered at the hand of the NDP. There was 
no emphasis on alcohol and drug abuse programs for our young people, there were no 
improvements to rehabilitation centres, there was little help for the farmer or the small-
business sector or the Saskatchewan public. And through it all we had 21 per cent interest 
rates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there was no money, because they squandered so much of our wealth on such items 
as potash mines just because philosophically they had to own them. No, the NDP 
couldn’t afford to help Saskatchewan people build a better quality of life. They couldn’t 
afford to build a safety net or diversify the economy or create jobs or strengthen our 
social structures. They were too busy using Saskatchewan’s heritage money to 
nationalize everything in sight. 
 
They nationalized the potash industry and the oil industry and the uranium industry. They 
nationalized sodium sulphate and coal and pulp and paper and farm land, and the list goes 
on and on. When our heritage money was all gone, Mr. Speaker, when the cupboard was 
bare, the NDP borrowed money from American and European bankers to expand, not to 
diversify, the potash corporation. 
 
They committed Saskatchewan taxpayers to a $550 million expansion of the Lanigan 
mine — by all accounts, an unnecessary expansion for a market that was glutted with 
potash. A brilliant move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today Saskatchewan people are still paying back that debt to the American and European 
banks, and they say we own the mines. The same money invested in the acquisition and 
expansion of potash invested in our economy into a, say, a savings account at a credit 
union would be worth nearly $2.5 billion today. That would fund our health care system 
for nearly two years. 
 
Did the NDP look at the investment capability of our own people? Did the NDP look at 
Saskatchewan business to participate? Of course not. They took Saskatchewan’s heritage 
money to buy a potash patch from Americans and Europeans, and when the cupboard was 
bare, Mr. Speaker, they borrowed money from American and European bankers to 
finance an unnecessary expansion. And this was done by the NDP in full knowledge that 



the potash industry is a cyclical business, its fortunes rising and falling with world 
international fertilizer needs. 
 
Yes, the potash business was good in the mid-1970s. It’s good again now. But how do the 
NDP think that government ownership would carry this resource business through the 
market slumps and through declines? 
 
The old, tired NDP answer is that the taxpayer can always be tapped for more money. 
Let’s go to the pockets of the folks out there. That’s what the NDP say —let’s get some 
of their money. Well that’s not good economics; it’s not even good sense. When the 
losses and expenses of a government company are borne on the backs of taxpayers and 
our children and our elderly and those in need, it is simply not good business. I say, 
shame on you, NDP, shame on you for having the audacity to exercise the power of 
government to trick the people of Saskatchewan. How dare you. 
 
A duly elected government has the obligation to conduct the business of the province 
with foresight and with vision. As we examine the history of PCS, remember that the 
NDP leader had as his vision government money, government control, and narrow 
government ownership as the answer in both good times and in bad. 
 
I ask you to look at the facts. This NDP leader, the man who boasts about his role in the 
past, borrowed money at 11 per cent in our name as taxpayers. Over time it has yielded a 
return of about 3.7 per cent. I ask the taxpayers of this province: would anybody you 
know borrow money at 22 per ;cent and put it in the bank for an interest rate of 3 per 
cent? Not likely. But the NDP did. 
 
At this point I want to examine some statements made by the NDP leader related to the 
potash and public participation, which is what this potash Bill is about. He says that 
public participation has not helped drought victims, difficult farm times, and escalating 
health care costs. This is rather confusing, coming from the NDP. 
 
Public participation is just one year old in Saskatchewan, and there have been plenty of 
success stories to tell on both large and small scale. Government employees have started 
their own companies, become entrepreneurs. I look at DirectWEST, Printco Graphics, 
Media House Production, and the Meadow Lake saw mill, and I have to say the NDP 
must get their head out of the sand, get up to the real life. Weyerhaeuser, WESTBRIDGE, 
and Saskoil have brought new jobs, growth, and investment into our province. Just what 
are they talking about, this NDP leader? 
 
It’s curious, Mr. Speaker, that just maybe a week ago, the former leader of the NDP, Mr. 
Blakeney, was in town pontificating about the dastardly effects the privatization of potash 
would have on this province, and yet this is a man who bought shares in Saskoil, one of 
the first privatization companies put forth by this government. And that’s a smart move 
by the former premier of this province, to buy shares in Saskoil. That was a smart move. 
 
(1945) 



 
It’s curious, isn’t it? I mean there’s some kind of hypocrisy here that I find rather 
interesting — the man who opposes privatization, while really he doesn’t oppose 
privatization because there’s all kind of facts to show that. We have the minutes from the 
Crown investment corporation of Saskatchewan, January 14, 1982, of which he was a 
member of the board, in which they talk about privatizing for the people of Saskatchewan 
and selling shares to the people of Saskatchewan. Of what? Well one of the items, one of 
the visions that they had at that time was to sell shares in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And yet this is the same man who, just a week ago, came back to this 
province and went on at great length about the dastardly benefits . . . or the dastardly 
effects, rather, of privatizing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I mean the 
hypocrisy is mind-boggling. And this is the same man who owns shares in Saskoil. And 
he’s opposed to it? Mind-boggling. 
 
What about the bond issues we’ve promoted during the past year? Power bonds. 
TeleBonds, sensible and secure investments for Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, my wife and I have four daughters and each one of them bought 
a bond. They didn’t have very much money. They were students and they worked during 
the summer, but they thought it was a good idea, and they each bought a bond. My wife 
bought a couple more than one, but they each bought a bond. Well a few weeks ago they 
got a return on their investment, and it’s probably the first time that any one of them has 
ever got a return, a direct return from anybody on their investment, on the SaskPower 
bonds. They understand the value of that sort of thing. They feel they have an ownership 
in SaskPower. That’s an investment. Not a lot of money, but they’re happy with it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And why shouldn’t the guy or the woman who works in a potash plant have an 
opportunity to be part of the potash plant, to be part of ownership of the potash plant? I 
can’t think of one reason why somebody, a mine worker or somebody who works in the 
office for the potash . . . any one of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan mines, 
shouldn’t have an opportunity to participate in that. And I think we have an obligation, as 
a government, to find a way to make it easy for them to get involved in this when the 
time comes. I don’t know the details of it yet, how it’s going to be done, but I certainly 
like to think that would be part of it. 
 
And I, quite frankly, think that the potash workers of this province, the people who work 
for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, are probably listening with a great deal of 
interest as to how this might affect them. And it’s curious to me also that I haven’t heard 
negative comments coming from the workers of the potash mines. I mean, I would have 
thought . . . I mean, they weren’t out there when they had that rally out here a few weeks 
ago. No, they weren’t there. 
 
So it’s going to be interesting to see . . . I’d like one of them to come forward, give me a 
phone call some time, and say: Beattie, that’s not a bad idea. I sure hope you guys do that 
because my friends and myself and my wife who works in the office would love to be 



part of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, be part of the investment and to have 
investment opportunity. Perhaps that will happen. 
 
The bond issues that we promoted during this past year, the Power bonds and TeleBonds, 
sensible and secure investments for Saskatchewan people, raised $824 million through 
bond sales and kept at least 80 million worth of interest in this province. That’s money 
that doesn’t go to line the pockets of American bankers, no benefits. The easiest thing to 
sell in Sask bonds, the idea of the selling of SaskPower bonds, was that we do not have to 
go to New York or Zurich or some place else to borrow the money. 
 
Take the money from the people of Saskatchewan and pay them back the interest. The 
money stays here, Saskatchewan money goes to work, and that 40 million or $80 million 
doesn’t go some place in New York or to Zurich or Toronto or some other place. 
 
Some of the other programs that have developed from public participation are the White 
Track ski resort, which is a tremendous success story for some young people in Moose 
Jaw and some not so young people in Moose Jaw who saw the opportunity and seized it 
with some help from a variety of areas. And they’ve done a terrific job at White Track. I 
was out there this year, ski’d on the hill. I was so glad to see the initiative of these young 
people say, we can do it; we can make White Track ski resort something that works. 
 
The SARCAN return depot, direct involvement by Saskatchewan people putting 
underused government assets to work. For the first time in the lives of many of the 
handicapped in this province, they now have a steady job, and boy are they proud — 
wonderful to see them. Creating jobs through public participation, through 
diversification, creating jobs and benefitting the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation of potash and in energy and in SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) are major undertakings. They are major undertakings. Not one 
share has been offered for sale. The specific investment opportunities are not yet public 
knowledge, and yet the NDP has jumped to the conclusion that no one has benefitted 
from it. As I said earlier, I would certainly hope that the potash workers would be given 
an opportunity to participate. The kind of Bill that they would be comfortable with 
certainly makes sense to me. 
 
So I say to the NDP, just wait, be patient, Mr. NDP Leader. We have started by creating 
over 400 new jobs and many new opportunities already in public participation. And so if 
you’ll be patient, just wait and see the new investment, the diversification, and many 
opportunities that’ll come to all Saskatchewan people through public participation in 
potash. 
 
Now at the risk of hurting the rather sensitive and delicate feelings of the NDP leader, I 
must say how disappointed I was with his speech on potash. His speech was truly a sad 
example of self-serving platitudes. Yesterday’s hero spouting disjointed memories of the 
past. Yesterday’s hero, Mr. Speaker, spouting disjointed memories of the past. Nowhere 
did I hear the constructive men and women in the non-government sector. All we heard 



were negative, worthless reminiscences of the past. Yesterday’s man, a man for the ’60s, 
invoking the spirits of the past. There is no boss like a government boss, says the NDP 
leader. How wrong he is. We all remember potash commercial business. In fact, the 
Cornwall Centre right here in Regina, land banks, auto body shops, even SGI proposing 
to sell life insurance — they were all on the NDP’s agenda. Government as the master 
and not as a servant. A noble philosophy indeed. 
 
The people of our province remember — and they have good memories, Mr. Speaker. 
The NDP’s blind, ideological mind-set doesn’t work any more. The quick fix of state 
ownership is unrealistic, and, Mr. Speaker, it is simplistic. There is no approach . . . The 
NDP approach is not rational. It is not a common sense alternative. Like their leader, the 
NDP is locked into yesterday — the answers of the past, trying to work in a challenging, 
complex future. The NDP are good at scaremongering. They scare the sick and the 
elderly and the needy with vagaries and half-truths about public participation. 
 
As I deal with Bill 20, it is ironic, almost humorous, to hear the Leader of the NDP and 
other members who have spoken blame the losses of the potash corporation in recent 
years on the change in Saskatchewan’s government. 
 
Nowhere does the NDP leader or other members who have spoken mention declining 
world potash prices and declining demand for product. Nowhere when he criticizes the 
management of PCS in 1982 does he seem to recall that these same managers were the 
same people that ran PCS under the NDP government. And the Leader of the NDP has a 
credibility problem. No wonder, no wonder, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly there’s no doubt that the past few years have not been easy ones for the potash 
corporation. Difficult times, however, have given us two very good reasons to look 
favourably at public participation in the corporation. 
 
First, the investor base of PCS should be wider. Taxpayers should not be the only base of 
support for PCS, but many more investors, from private citizens to businesses to others 
who want to actively participate. Investors from countries outside our borders must not be 
discouraged. In Bill 20 there are safeguards to keep foreign investment to 45 per cent and 
voting control to 25 per cent. The operations and the headquarters of PCS will stay here. 
And I’ll repeat that the operations and the headquarters of PCS will stay here. Let me 
make that point one more time, because I know that one of the scare tactics the NDP are 
using is the ownership issue. 
 
There are safeguards to keep foreign investment to 45 per cent and voting control to 25 
per cent. The operations and the headquarters, the control of PCS, will stay here. Industry 
control will always be in Saskatchewan with government laws, government regulations, 
royalties, taxes, and special agreements. 
 
A broader base of shareholders will lessen the impact on taxpayers. Market losses and 
expansion costs in potash are presently costing our taxpayers about $220,000 a day. 
Market losses and expansion costs in potash are presently costing our taxpayers about 



$220,000 a day — $220,000 every single day — money that could be used for essential 
government priorities, Mr. Speaker, like health care, education, helping the needy, and 
the various social programs that we have, drug and alcohol abuse. Maybe we’d help some 
of our young athletes, our young artists. 
 
The second reason for public participation in PCS is to provide an opportunity for the 
potash corporation to expand and diversify. If PCS can diversify, then the company will 
no longer be as dependent on the market ups and downs of potash sale. By maintaining 
the status quo, the only way for the company to expand is to borrow more money with the 
taxpayer again responsible. However, by broadening the shareholder base of the 
corporation, access to the funds necessary for expansion and diversification should be 
more readily available. 
 
Expand into what, you might ask. Well at the present time, PCS provides the U.S. corn 
industry with one of three key fertilizer components — potash. PCS does this through an 
established distribution network. In Saskatchewan, our farmers use very little potash, if 
any. Our largest fertilizer demand is for nitrogen-based products which the potash 
corporation does not carry or produce. It has been suggested that the corporation could 
diversify into other fertilizers like nitrogen and use its distribution network to make PCS 
a dominant player in the entire fertilizer industry. 
 
It’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, that diversification with new investment will strengthen PCS. 
A broader shareholder base will make this possible and public participation can make it 
happen. 
 
The Leader of the NDP, in his rambling discourse in this House, talked about many other 
aspects of potash, aspects that will be addressed by other members of our government, 
though I’d like to say how much I agree with the NDP leader on one statement. He said 
that this potash debate is, and I quote from Hansard: 
 

. . . about the kind of future for our great province — the future for ourselves, our 
families, and our children, and our children’s children . . . (this) will determine 
how our province will manage, develop, and sell (our most) an important non-
renewable resource, potash. 
 

Yes, Mr. Opposition Leader, that is what this Bill 20 and this debate is all about. A 
potential world-class, diversified, international company based right here in 
Saskatchewan, developing and expanding, with the world on its threshold — jobs, 
expertise, and more building in our province. This is a good idea and it’s an initiative of 
this government. 
 
I warn that these things will not happen by embracing the tired approaches of the past, 
governments running businesses like potash companies and limiting their growth. Our 
future and that of our children will be guided by men and women who are generally 
committed to those who want to unlock our true potential, those who have vision, 



determination, and drive. We have the potash, the expertise, and the ability to take on the 
world. 
 
Our government and all of us as citizens will reap benefits through a larger, diversified, 
and more profitable potash company that pays its fair share of returns back to the 
government through royalties and taxes. Public participation, Mr. Speaker, in potash will 
free Saskatchewan to broaden its economic base and build a stronger economy, one that 
will support our social foundations now and in the century ahead. This will happen with 
Bill 20. Saskatchewan will grow and face the future with confidence and with pride. 
 
The Act provides for public participation in the potash industry of Saskatchewan. It 
represents an important opportunity for this province, for the people of this province, one 
that we can all be part of. Public participation in the potash corporation opens new 
opportunities for us to build together and grow together and create a dynamic, world-
class corporation, as I said, headquartered here right in Regina. PCS will become an 
international fertilizer development and trading company rather than just a potash 
company. This will bring new investment, new jobs and markets to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — jobs for Saskatchewan youth and for families who rely on agricultural labour 
jobs, labour jobs in agriculture, moving to province after province looking for work 
during bad, bad crop years. Imagine having to rely on the weather for your livelihood — 
not much security. 
 
(2000) 
 
So why would the NDP oppose the diversification philosophy that dozens of other 
countries in the world are now embracing? Many of the socialist countries like Sweden, 
France, Australia, and yes, Mr. Speaker, Cuba. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague, the member from Weyburn, made the point well 
earlier today and he made a strong argument, a well documented argument, that the NDP 
simply refuse to bring their minds forward from the ’60s, and that the NDP are paying 
blind homage to the labour leaders, not the rank and file, Mr. Speaker. They don’t really 
care about the rank and file, but to the selfish interests of the labour leaders, both here in 
Saskatchewan and in Ontario, and subsequently to the labour leaders in the United States 
— a party philosophy of the past and controlled by a handful of labour leaders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could they deny the potash workers an opportunity to own a piece of 
the action? Why shouldn’t those who work in potash mines or any resource industry not 
have some ownership potential? The NDP say, no. Well I say, yes. Make it easy and 
attractive for the workers to be part of ownership. 
 
By securing offshore markets throughout minority equity participation, allowing 
Saskatchewan mines to have secure markets, even during downturns, Saskatchewan will 
become the first choice of our customers rather than the last choice and our miners will 
keep working. And hopefully they will be working on behalf of themselves. 
 



Mr. Speaker, I feel very strongly about that particular issue, about people who work in 
mines and people who drive buses or people who work in shops or in the industry that . . . 
any of the industry that the government’s involved in, that they should be part of the 
action. I cannot imagine how anybody could deny people who work for the government 
in the resource industry not having an opportunity to participate in the activity. And 
we’ve seen it work so well. 
 
The Meadow Lake pulp mill is probably the best example, and I’ve already mentioned 
that so I won’t go into it again. But boy, they’re happy up there. People want to be part of 
ownership, Mr. Speaker. People want to have something in their hands. 
 
People want to have something they can pass on to their grandchildren. They want to 
have something they’ve passed on to their children; say, I own a piece of this potash 
mine; I work in this potash mine and I own a piece of this potash mine, and I can pass 
that down to my family and they can pass it to their grandchildren, as it gets better and it 
grows and it brings more rewards to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that note I close and I say without reservation, Mr. Speaker, that I will be 
supporting Bill 20 with all I can reserve. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, first of all, Mr. Speaker, just before 
rising became aware that there has been an extreme . . . That’s incorrect information? 
Well I’m pleased to hear that then, that the information about jeopardy to one of the 
communities in your constituency is not true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise to enter into this historic debate because of love for my province of 
Saskatchewan. And it is truly an historic debate that is taking place in this Legislative 
Assembly at these times, not just simply because we happen to be debating on a Friday 
evening in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan for the first time in I don’t know 
how many years. It’s been a long, long time since that’s happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But really the historic tone of this debate was forecast, as a matter of fact, by the 
government in the Speech from the Throne of Wednesday, March 8, 1989. And at that 
time, on page 11 of the Speech from the Throne, read by Her Honour and written, of 
course, by the government, Mr. Speaker, she said, and I quote: 
 

Public participation will continue to chart a new course for economic growth, 
diversification, and job creation in Saskatchewan. Designed to meet the specific 
needs of our province, it expands upon our history of co-operative ownership in 
business, community involvement, and the delivery of public services. 
 



Mr. Speaker, while I don’t agree with the positive intonation that’s included in those 
comments read by Her Honour in this Assembly, I do agree with the fact that it was 
forecasting that there was to be, during this session, an historic debate that would involve 
the piratization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as part of the ongoing agenda 
of the PC Government of Saskatchewan today. 
 
And so we find ourselves today in this Assembly confronted with an issue that has far-
reaching implications in Saskatchewan and most importantly in Saskatchewan people, 
and I think surely all of us in this Assembly can agree on that point. 
 
Obviously the debate has gone on for many, many hours and will continue to go on for 
many, many hours, while members of this Assembly seize on the opportunity to state to 
their constituents and the people of Saskatchewan why we stand and where we stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear at the outset that I will, upon conclusion of my 
speech, be advising the Legislative Assembly that I will be voting in opposition to Bill 
20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
more frequently referred to, Mr. Speaker, as the piratization of the potash corporation. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I guess one could simply say that’s my position and I 
could sit down and we could go on to the next elected member. But that’s not what this 
democratic institution is all about. That is not the right that we, every one of us on both 
sides of this House, contested elections asking people for the right to represent them, Mr. 
Speaker. It was not simply . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I will welcome 
the remarks of the member from Rosthern when he enters into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Let us allow the hon. member from Moose Jaw North to 
continue unabated without interruption. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It may be, it may be that some members of this 
Assembly . . . And I allow that privilege to all members of this Assembly, to explain their 
rationale in choosing to want to represent their constituents and perform in the best 
interests of their constituents in this Assembly — and that may be the case for members 
opposite. 
 
However, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we have an obligation in coming here to not 
only say where it is we stand but also, and in the long run perhaps even more importantly, 
why it is that we stand there. Surely that is an obligation that all of us have in providing 
community leadership in the political sense to those constituents that we represent in the 
broader constituency of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think all of us recognize 
the significance of the comments made by the retiring former leader of the opposition, 
Allan Blakeney, in this Assembly — and former premier, of course — as he was retiring 
from active public elected life. 
 
And all of us will recall the comment that he made that was made in the best interests of 
the parliamentary tradition that calls all of us here, that motivates us all on both sides of 



the House, when he referred to the role that is played in this Assembly. And we will all 
remember very clearly — and I saw nodding on both sides of agreement, as Mr. Blakeney 
said: at time this process we call democracy is a plodding one. At times it seems slower 
than sometimes our frustrations would like us to see happen, but that compared to any 
other system that exists anywhere else in this world, it is still the best that there is 
available. 
 
And he referred, Mr. Speaker, to the role of parliament, or coming together. This 
Assembly is a talking place; it’s a place that we have the responsibilities as members 
elected by our constituents to come to vote; yes, to make decisions, but to stand and to 
say in standing not only where we stand but why we stand there. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with love for my province, caring for most importantly the 
people of Saskatchewan, and a strong faith in the future of this province and the potential 
that lies ahead for the generations that we have here now and, more importantly, the 
generations to follow, for those of us who have responsibility providing political 
leadership in this province, that I rise to speak in this debate and also to say why it is that 
I stand where I stand in opposition to Bill 20. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I have listened carefully to the debate that has gone on in the 
Assembly so far. My assessment would be that approximately 45 hours, I think, is not an 
inaccurate calculation of the numbers of hours of debate that have gone on in Bill 20 so 
far. 
 
I have been, I would say without hesitation, Mr. Speaker, extremely proud of the 
representations made by my colleagues in the New Democratic Party, as 12 before me 
have stood to say where it is they stand and why it is they stand there. 
 
They’ve spoken — I suppose it would be debatable, Mr. Speaker — at times with more 
eloquence than others, but always, Mr. Speaker, with sincerity and with caring for the 
people of Saskatchewan and the future of this province. 
 
I have noticed as well, Mr. Speaker, that government members — and I’m pleased to see 
this — that government members opposite have chosen to begin to enter into this debate. 
And we’ve seen already in response to the 12, and my being the 13th speaker on the 
opposition side, we’ve already seen six government members stand on their feet and say 
where it is they stand and to some degree why they stand there. 
 
I want to particularly, Mr. Speaker, make comment regarding the presentation made by 
the member from Regina Wascana. The member from Regina Wascana chose to take a 
different approach from the five who spoke before him, including the minister. And I 
would say to the member from Regina Wascana that I particularly appreciate that. I don’t 
agree with many things that he said, Mr. Speaker, and I will outline that later on in my 
remarks, but the thing that I’ve appreciated from the member from Regina Wascana is 



that, of the six from the government side who have spoken, he’s been the first to have 
spoken with a sense of comprehension of the larger picture about which this debate is 
placed within. And it seems to me that that is very important in an historic debate, 
because I believe this is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve heard members from the government side oftentimes sounding more like the 
opposition than the opposition. We’ve heard frequently, in fact I would say 
predominantly, from the government side, members standing in this debate in attack of 
the Leader of the Opposition and some of the track record of the New Democratic Party 
which lost its mandate to provide government in 1982, and for some reason in this 
historic debate, seems to, in the minds of many of the government members, be worthy of 
being under attack. And as I say, many government members in their speeches sounding 
more like opposition than opposition members. I don’t know . . . Perhaps it forecasts what 
they are seeing for a role for themselves in the time to come, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
practising. 
 
But I’ve appreciated from the member from Wascana, and I appreciated as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that you allowed him to speak beyond the confines of only potash and potash 
management. Certainly that’s a key part of this debate, but it also has to fit into a broader 
picture in its impact on the society of Saskatchewan. I’ve appreciated that from the 
member from Wascana. I would encourage other members of the government to take that 
same kind of approach in this debate because that’s the way the debate should go — 
where all of us as elected members can come and take our places and say where it is we 
stand and why we stand there, and speak with a sense of vision and caring from our 
hearts. And I welcome that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2015) 
 
So let me refer as well, Mr. Speaker, to the process of democracy. We are in the midst 
right now of a democratic exercise that I think is part of the strategy of the government 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, is to infringe on the democratic part of this exercise that we’re 
undertaking right now. And I’d like to take some time to refer to that because I think it 
also reflects a part of the political vision of both sides of this House and is not 
incongruent with the respect for democratic traditions and principles, procedures, that has 
been typical or characteristic of this government, certainly in the time since I’ve had the 
honour of being in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And if I may just make my case, Mr. Speaker, that it is my view that the risk to allowing 
for democracy to find its natural course through the potential risk of closure in this 
debate, which clearly the government has forecast, is being seriously considered. Also, 
Mr. Speaker, through their attempts to manipulate, the freedom with which opposition 
members will be able to speak with a sense of vision and caring in our speeches is also in 
jeopardy, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll come to those later. 
 
But first of all, let me outline why I say that this is not incongruent with this government 
that sometimes purports itself to be the great defenders of democracy. I recall, Mr. 



Speaker, coming into this Legislative Assembly in December of 1986 and one of the very 
first pieces of business that this Legislative Assembly dealt with was Bill 5 of that first 
session, Mr. Speaker, which was The Government Organization Act, which very, very 
significantly — very, very significantly, Mr. Speaker — was a major initiative of the PC 
government to remove authority from the Legislative Assembly, to translate the decisions 
related to the formation or the restructuring or the dissolution of government departments 
and Crown corporations out of these chambers, out of these chambers inhabited by the 
representatives of the people to decisions made behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
And so you see, Mr. Speaker, there was forecast there a first initiative to move away from 
constructive decision making in the democratic traditions and the democratic chambers of 
the people of Saskatchewan. We saw, prior to that even, Mr. Speaker, in my view, blatant 
abuse of the notwithstanding clause of the Canadian constitution. We saw, in my view, 
the use of that clause for blatant political purposes by the Premier of Saskatchewan. I’m 
referring of course to the ordering back of government employees to work, who were 
doing some rotating strikes as a result of a collective agreement dispute. 
 
Although the reasons for that dispute were misrepresented, I think, at that time, the 
Premier was dealing what is sometimes known as the wimp factor, and was feeling the 
need to toughen up his image, and so ordered back government workers who really 
weren’t out; misrepresented why the decision was made and in fact became a precedent 
setting decision in this nation of ours as an abuse of the notwithstanding clause of the 
constitution, the Canadian constitution. 
 
We’ve seen last session, Mr. Speaker, this government undertake by legislation, require a 
committee to do a review of electoral boundaries which totally ignored previous 
precedents for fair distribution of the principle of one person, one vote; requiring a report 
to come forward which subsequently has, although it’s not come to this Assembly by way 
of legislation, that will allow for major, major differences in the size of . . . number of 
electors in different sized constituencies, an exercise referred to by many people around 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as a gerrymander. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that may have been a message from on high that there are others 
besides those in this Assembly who have taken issue with this gerrymander attempt and 
that was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I see, Mr. Speaker, that the government members 
opposite are a bit sensitive about the fact that a loud bang in the spheres beyond this room 
may have been indicative of the fact that there are higher powers which disapprove of 
these actions that they’re taking as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — However, they will take some assurance, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that the 
initiator of that communication outside this Assembly will not have a vote on this Bill. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve moved off topic and let me get back. I’ve seen as well, Mr. 
Speaker, during the fall of 1988, failure to call the session to bring back into the 



Legislative Assembly the members to do the business of government — a violation of 
tradition. 
 
I’ve seen the auditor this year bring a report which says the government was breaking its 
own laws. And in response to that, the Minister of Justice attacked the auditor, which is 
quite contradictory to democratic traditions of this House. We’ve seen the same thing 
happen from the same member, as a matter of fact, the Minister of Justice, in an attack on 
the Law Clerk earlier in the session. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, it would be about a month and a half ago or so, I guess it 
would be, or a couple of months ago, the introduction of a rule 33 amendment as a 
response by this government to the fact that opposition members chose to use one of the 
rules of the Assembly to express their opinion about privatization, about privatization, 
another initiative of which is this potash Bill before us here. 
 
And as the opposition chose to use that democratically entitled expression of opposition 
to what this government has proposed to do — by the way, accurately reflecting, very, 
very accurately reflecting the sentiment of Saskatchewan people — the response of this 
government was not to say, there was a legitimate use of the rules of this Assembly; what 
is the message that there is for us as government? The response of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, was to say that, doggone it, the opposition rang the bells, the people rallied with 
the opposition; that makes us feel a little unpopular, more unpopular than we felt before, 
and we’d better change those rules. That was the response of the government. 
 
Well we saw as well, Mr. Speaker, then, in coming into this debate earlier in this week, a 
motion without consultation and contrary to both a written agreement made between the 
two House leaders of the government and the opposition, and contrary again to the 
traditions of the Legislative Assembly, a motion introduced to change the sitting hours. It 
would be argued by some — I don’t know that I would necessarily hold this opinion 
myself, Mr. Speaker, although it is a plausible explanation — it would be argued by some 
that this was a subtle or perhaps not quite so subtle attempt to bring closure to debate on 
Bill 20, the Bill to piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s an option that was referred to by the member for Thunder Creek in the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald yesterday, Mr. Speaker, who referred to his frustrations, and his 
inclination, he said in yesterday’s Times-Herald, to urge the government to consider 
using closure to end this debate. 
 
Well I find it kind of interesting. The Minister of Justice calls across from the floor, Mr. 
Speaker, that there’s not a whole lot of point in speaking because he advises me that the 
television production of this debate has ceased because of the weather; it may or may not 
have. 
 
It’s kind of similar, Mr. Speaker, to the comment made in this Assembly by the Minister 
of Finance earlier today, who laughed in response to the reference by one of the members 
of the opposition to this being an historic debate and said it can’t be an historic debate 
because there’s no members of the media, or few members of the media in the gallery. 



And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why it is that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Justice . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder . . . It’s the third time now that the member for 
Rosthern has walked up close to your chair, has yelled out at the member from Moose 
Jaw North making the speech, asking questions. I wonder if you’d call him to order. I 
think everybody here appreciates the speech and we’d like to hear all the comments by all 
the members from both sides and I think that we want to establish a kind of a decorum in 
this House that you’ve been trying to establish, sir. Maybe you can just remind the 
member. 
 
The Speaker: — Point well made. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I find it — as I was 
saying — I find it a bit odd that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Justice would 
consider the debate to be significant only if the gallery is filled with media personnel, or 
only if it is being carried over the television airways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, it is not an historic debate because the media are there. It’s not an 
historic debate because it’s on TV. It’s an historic debate because of the significance that 
this Bill has on the future of Saskatchewan, and the abilities of governments of all stripes 
to respond to the needs of their citizens. That’s what makes this an historic debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and for that reason, as I’ve said, for that reason it is important for all of us to 
stand, to say where it is we stand, and why we stand there. That’s what this exercise is 
about. 
 
Well that has been some suggestion by the government opposite that in dealing with this 
historic debate on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Bill No. 20, that closure is 
being considered. The word obstructionist has been used in response to the fact that 
opposition members have stood in their place for a number of hours, stated our points of 
view, and have not allowed the vote to yet be taken in second reading on Bill 20. 
 
In fact, the Premier is inclined to state very frequently, virtually at every given 
opportunity, to imply when speaking in this Assembly — and primarily I’m referring to 
his comments in question period, Mr. Speaker — to imply that the business of the House 
is only being done when Bills are being carried, and to imply, as the member from 
Rosthern seems to apparently believe, based on his reaction to the comments I’ve made 
earlier, that the only important thing that members of this Assembly do in this Assembly 
is vote. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is a mistaken notion. It is a notion which does not respect 
the traditions of democracy that are the bases of all of us coming to this place with similar 
desires, but different ideas as to how the aspirations of our constituents can be realized. 



 
And the implications, Mr. Speaker, that I find offensive as a member of the Assembly, is 
that in debating this Bill on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the piratization of 
it, that the opposition is being obstructionist, is being obstructionist when putting on the 
record in great detail — I apologize not for great detail — why it is where we stand and 
with what vision for the people of Saskatchewan. And I’d like to put that into context 
because I found that implication particularly offensive, Mr. Speaker, on the debate of this 
Bill. 
 
(2030) 
 
I would like to put on the record three quotes from people who would be recognized 
authorities on parliamentary process and the role of the opposition. 
 
It is not the role of the opposition to say, we’re going to come to our seats, and when it’s 
voting time we’ll vote. The role of the opposition is much, much stronger than that, Mr. 
Speaker. And perhaps it’s not pure coincidence that the opposition is formally referred to 
as Her Royal Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. Perhaps that is not pure coincidence in the 
wisdom of those who first initiated the British traditions of democracy . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we’re getting a very eloquent dissertation tonight 
about her royal . . . Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, and I don’t know as it has anything 
to do with the Bill before us, the potash debate, Bill 20, and, Mr. Speaker, according to 
rule 25(2) in this House, debate must be relevant, I believe that member is irrelevant. 
 
The Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. The hon. member will have to prove to 
the House that his remarks are relevant. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be very happy to do that. I thought I had, but for the 
member for Weyburn, for his interest, I’d be happy to repeat that. And if it’s not been 
clear to the member or others in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the fact that 
he brought that to my attention, to your attention, and I would hope that he would 
understand clearly. 
 
It is encouraging, Mr. Speaker, to see that members opposite are interested enough in 
what is being said to ask for clarification. So let me simply state again, Mr. Speaker, what 
I think is the relevant point here. 
 
In approaching the debate on Bill 20, a Bill to privatize, to piratize the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, the government has undertaken in its strategies in this 
House and in its comments, implications for closure; has taken the position that for the 
opposition to enter into extended debate, putting on the record why it is where we stand, 
that that is somehow a violation of the democratic privileges of members of this 
Assembly. 
 



I object very strongly to that, Mr. Speaker. It is my view, and I’ve outlined that that is an 
approach taken to the debate on this historic Bill which is consistent with previous 
actions of this government and I insist . . . (power outage) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re back on the air. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The power’s back on. It takes a few minutes to light up the 
dome, but the microphones are working. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find myself here feeling a great deal like a 
Tory. I find myself speaking in the dark, and so I find myself feeling somewhat 
empathetic with the members opposite in their addresses in this historic debate. 
 
But let me reiterate then what I was saying in response to the question brought forward, 
Mr. Speaker. It is my view that it is consistent with the previous actions of this 
government, in their disrespect for democratic traditions that has been part of their 
strategy, quite frankly, in leading up to and participating in this debate on Bill 20, the Bill 
to piratize the potash corporation. 
 
The opposition has a very important role to play in this and it is extremely important that 
the opposition be entitled to play that role in this debate. And in defence of that, Mr. 
Speaker, I will refer to you to quotes from three different parliamentary authorities 
regarding the role of the opposition and how they relate to this historic debate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They only had the television picture on. The sound is off, and now 
they can’t get a picture. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Again the Minister of Justice implies, Mr. Speaker, that this debate only 
has significance if it’s being televised. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would state that it 
has significance because it is being put on the record. And so the most significant part of 
the facilities of the House at this point in time is the fact that Hansard is still functioning 
and that the remarks of the hon. members of this Assembly can be recorded. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me refer you first of all to a quote from Herbert Morrison, 
who was an English author and statesman who stated the following. And I quote: 
 

If the opposition is genuinely convinced that the government has no mandate for 
controversial measures and that they are not urgent, it has a moral justification for 
sustained opposition. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that precisely . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 



Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, point of order. Prior to you taking the 
Chair, I raised a point with the hon. member wherein his debate, albeit eloquent, was 
really just a discussion of the role of Her Majesty’s Loyal or royal Opposition. 
 
The Speaker then ruled that the point would be well taken if, in fact, the hon. member 
didn’t prove relevancy. He has not proven relevancy. He’s just continued debate on a 
monologue tone here, and the debate would be more applicable to a debate about rules 
and proceedings in this legislature, not about debate on Bill 20, the potash Bill. 
 
Therefore, according to rule 25(2), he is clearly irrelevant and out of order and should 
discontinue. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. I just want to say that I’ve been 
listening to the member referring the democratic process directly to Bill 20, talking about 
the role of the opposition in the debate on Bill 20, and I disagree totally with the minister 
who says that it’s irrelevant. I find it to be totally relevant to the Bill 20 that we’re dealing 
with; much more so than the discussion that he had earlier this day relating to the NDP’s 
leadership convention . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve been listening very closely to the debate since I’ve taken the 
Chair, and I will continue to listen closely to see if the member is relevant. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that ruling. It’s a little difficult to 
make jointed debate and arguments, Mr. Speaker, when being interrupted, and so I’m 
afraid I’m going to . . . Let me just simply repeat this statement, and then make direct 
comment related to this Bill and the role of the opposition. 
 
The statement again, it’s just one sentence, Mr. Speaker. 
 

If the opposition is genuinely convinced that the government has no mandate for 
controversial measures and that they are not urgent, it has a moral justification for 
sustained opposition. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this opposition is genuinely convinced that this government 
has no mandate — and I will be making that argument more specifically later in my 
remarks — for a controversial measure. This is a proven controversial measure based on 
publicly published polling, requesting the people of Saskatchewan to express their 
opinion about an initiative of the government, which as I will describe later, as well, Mr. 
Speaker, has more opposition to it than support. 
 
I don’t know how members of government could be more specific in considering that to 
be controversial. And that they are not urgent — I don’t know that the matter before us 
really meets that criteria in any way, Mr. Speaker, that it has a sense of urgency about it, 
risk the safety of the people of Saskatchewan. Certainly there is a risk to the secure future 
of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s to a large degree what this debate is, and should be 
about. But I don’t believe that it’s urgent. And in those cases, then, that the opposition 



has a moral justification, perhaps that could be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, described as 
responsibility, as a matter of fact, for sustained opposition. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m simply saying that this opposition, Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition in the province of Saskatchewan, takes great issue with Bill 20 before us, and 
intends to provide and continue sustained opposition to the piratization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. I take issue as well then, of course, with the efforts of the 
government to jeopardize the opposition’s right, if not obligation, in fact to do that within 
our democratic system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also bring to the attention of the Assembly the words of Speaker Jeanne 
Sauve who made a formal statement to the House of Commons back in 1982. And this 
came, Mr. Speaker, after the Conservative opposition in Ottawa at that time — the 
opposition was Conservative — had used obstruction to stop the Liberal Pierre Trudeau 
government’s omnibus energy Bill, and those of us in this Assembly will all remember 
that. 
 
Following that ordeal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Madame Sauve made the statement, and 
again I quote: 
 

I may point out that obstructive tactics are allowed by the rules; however their use 
must be regulated so as to safeguard the government’s right to have the House 
consider its order of business, (and that’s a reasonable expectation, and I 
underline the remainder of this sentence, Mr. Deputy Speaker) and the equally 
important right of the opposition to criticize, to oppose, and even obstruct a 
government measure. 
 

An equally important right of the opposition. Mr. Speaker, it is my view that in acting in 
what I suppose some government members would consider a non-facilitating manner in 
responding to this Bill, it is my view that the opposition is, as a matter of fact, serving the 
people of Saskatchewan, and, many would argue, serving them well. Again I repeat, it’s 
my view that this government has in fact no mandate to undertake the piratization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a quote from the Canadian constitutional authority, Eugene 
Forsey, who wrote in 1956, or following the pipeline debate of 1956, these words, and 
again I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A government makes its appeal by dissolution. 
 

In other words, a government has at any time the authority to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Section 25, rule 25(2) of our 
members’ handbook clearly states that debate must be relevant to the issue at hand. 



 
The member’s remarks, for the last 15 minutes at least, have constantly referred to 
anything but the potash debate. The arguments he is framing are entirely into process, 
rules, the operation of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not at all relevant to the potash 
debate. He is clearly out of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to make the comment that I’ve been sitting in the 
Assembly for the last, I guess it’s been about a half hour since my colleague from Regina 
North started speaking. And I want to say that the member from Weyburn has . . . I don’t 
know how many points of order he has raised tonight, but a large number of them, 
basically all on the same issue as if we didn’t have a Speaker in the chair. 
 
What I’m saying is that the last time he raised a pint of order he immediately left the 
Assembly. He returned to stand in his place and raise another point of order. I wonder 
how it would be possible for him to know, when he hasn’t been involved in the 
Assembly, to know whether he’s been following the debate or not. He hasn’t even been in 
the House since he raised the last point of order. 
 
I know that the Speaker will know that to be the truth, and that he hasn’t been in the 
Assembly since he raised the last point of order. I would like the Speaker to rule whether 
or not his intent is real or whether it’s a harassment of our member from Moose Jaw 
North. I believe it to be harassment, and I would ask you to ask him to cease calling 
points of needless order on the member who’s giving a very excellent speech on potash 
debate and how democracy relates to it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. There have been many points of order called today. 
Many of them have certainly been in order, some of them have not. And in this case I 
have been listening very closely to the debate. The member did, a few moments ago, 
relate it to the potash Bill. And I am listening very closely to make sure that he is 
relevant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a point of order. When the member from 
Elphinstone raised his point of order, he clearly referred to my absence or presence in this 
House. That too, Mr. Speaker, is a breach of the rules. I can cite you Beauchesne, 316©. I 
can cite you rule 26 in our handbook, and I can cite you standing order 28 in the House of 
Commons which all would deal with that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m of the view that member of the House owes me an apology. Mr. Speaker, because he 
has clearly and deliberately breached the rules of this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. It is certainly against the rules to mention the 
absence or presence of any member. 
 



Mr. Hagel: — I thank you for your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that and again . . . In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, in a moment I will draw specific reference to the technique that the 
member from Weyburn is using because it is my view that what he is doing is, as a matter 
of fact, consistent with government actions, and I will make that point as well related . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Procedure of the House is not under debate. The 
debate here is on Bill No. 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan be now read a second time. And I’d ask the member to stay 
on the Bill that is before the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I appreciate and respect that 
ruling. Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, Eugene Forsey, following the pipeline debate of 
1956, said, and again I quote: 
 

A government makes its appeal by dissolution. 
 

In other words, government which wishes to exercise its acceptance, its desired authority 
by the electorate, has an easy vehicle for doing it; it’s called dissolution. In our Canadian 
parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker, the government, the Premier, has the authority on any 
day to go to the Lieutenant Governor to ask that the legislature be dissolved, and then, 
Mr. Speaker, to go to the people for a mandate. 
 
As I’ve said previously, I don’t believe, I don’t believe for a minute as I enter into this 
debate on the piratization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan that this 
government has a mandate. And I will refer specifically to why I mean that later in my 
speech. I do not believe they have a mandate to be bringing this Bill into this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The government has, as Mr. Forsey points out, Mr. Speaker, the ability to achieve a 
mandate, and that ability to achieve a mandate, Mr. Speaker, the government has, on any 
given day, the ability to go to the people of Saskatchewan for a mandate to privatize, to 
piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
It only takes the Premier to go to the Lieutenant Governor and ask to have the Legislative 
Assembly dissolved, a dissolution, and an election is called. That’s the tool, that’s the 
vehicle, according to Eugene Forsey, that the government has. I don’t think we can take 
issue with that. 
 
An opposition, on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, makes its appeal by trying to force 
dissolution. An opposition which believes that it represents the wishes of the people, in 
this case the wishes of the people regarding the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, has its own vehicle, its own vehicle to try to force dissolution, to force 
that an election be called, to force that the will of the people will be honoured by those 



who sit on government side and their Legislative Assembly, by obstruction. And I quote 
again: 
 

Used as it should be, and almost always has been in Canada, only for the gravest 
reasons, it is a legitimate and indeed essential part of the parliamentary system. 
 

And so you see, Mr. Speaker, what I’m simply saying is that the very act of lengthy 
debate being jeopardized by the threats of closure, the subtle attempts at closure by 
extending the hours of debate to a period of time of 25 hours per day, without 
consultation with the opposition, says to me that this is a government that refuses to use 
its tool to get a mandate. 
 
How does it get its mandate? By dissolving the Legislative Assembly and going to the 
people with an election for a mandate, at the same time attempting to deny the opposition 
a very legitimate democratic tool of preventing decisions when it believes that the issue is 
important and in the best interests of the people, and also believes that the government 
does not have a mandate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is my view that the members opposite . . . I’ve accused the members 
opposite of a number of things. I’ve accused them of not acting in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people. I’ve accused them of making incorrect decisions. I’ve accused 
them of not honouring their promises or their commitments made in election, but I have 
never, Mr. Speaker, accused them in election, but I have never, Mr. Speaker, accused 
them of being stupid. It is my view that the members opposite are not stupid, unless there 
is anyone over there that wishes to take issue. 
 
The member from Weyburn indicates that he finds that comment objectionable. Well the 
member from Weyburn has already entered into debate, Mr. Speaker, and we will leave it 
to those who read Hansard to draw their own conclusions, Mr. Speaker. But it is my view 
that the members opposite are not stupid. 
 
And so what have we got happening here today, in fact exemplified by the member from 
Weyburn? Most recently, just a few minutes ago is a conscious strategy to deny, to 
attempt on Bill 20, the Bill to piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, to deny 
Her royal Majesty’s Loyal Opposition their legitimate means for bringing this debate to 
an issue that requires the seeking of a mandate. 
 
How is that being done? How is that being done? Because these members are not stupid 
and I don’t for a second . . . I will take issue with the member from Weyburn because, 
contrary, we may have a difference of opinion on this, but I do not believe he’s stupid. 
 
The member from Weyburn has consistently intervened n this debate by calling rules of 
order. Purportedly 25(2) of the rules is what he refers to, and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a strategy here that is different from seeking good, honest, solid, committed 
debate on the issue before us, the Bill to privatize the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 



 
You see, in attempting to call those issues . . . that rule consistently and clearly . . . In 
fact, I would say the record would show it’s been at least four times within the last 50 
minutes, at least four times in the last 50 minutes, the member from Weyburn is trying to 
narrow the focus of this debate, this debate, Bill 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The government — and I’m not referring just to the member from Weyburn — the 
government is attempting to focus this debate to being one that is limited specifically to 
potash, the management and the extraction of potash, and only that. Now on the surface 
that may seem to make some sense in its appeal that does carry some weight with those 
who may not be as bright as the member from Weyburn. You see, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
view that there is a central issue here, a central issue to this whole debate on Bill 20, an 
Act to piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The debate is not simply about the most cost-effective means to extract a natural resource 
from our soils; that’s not what it’s about. That’s not at all what this Bill is about, Mr. 
Speaker. That becomes some of the content of the debate, but more than anything else 
what this Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker, is the role of government, the role of government 
in the management of the economy, in providing employment opportunity. That’s what 
this Bill is about: number one, the role of government in management of the economy, in 
provision of employment opportunity; and number two, the second central issue of this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the role of government in taxation, in the 
management of natural resources to provide services to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now it is my contention, Mr. Speaker, that this debate is much broader . . . Piratization of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is much broader than simply cost-effective 
extraction of natural resources from the soils of Saskatchewan. Because it seems to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that reflecting the wishes and the political will of those in the wisdom — 
and I compliment them for that — who established the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan after another historic debate back in 1975 and ’76, the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan is simply a means to an end. It’s not an end in itself. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not there for debating merely the cost-effective 
extraction of potash from our soils. What we are debating is a vehicle which is a means to 
an end. And we have to look at the means clearly. We have to look at the vehicle, Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. We have to look at the implications of specific parts of the 
Bill. But we also have to look at the end, at the end objective and how therefore 
effectively the means to the end serves that role. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’ve appreciated that, as I said before, the member from 
Wascana in his debate on this Bill to piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
that he did something different, something differently from previous government 
speakers in that he took a broader view of the political issue before us. And it’s on that 
basis that I would hope the people of Saskatchewan will conclude, whenever they have a 
chance to express that opinion in a democratically meaningful way, that they will base 



that opinion based upon the visions — and they may very well be conflicting visions — 
of the members of this Assembly, represented as a party of different political parties, and 
the role that each of us sees for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to serve as a 
means to an end in service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2100) 
 
It’s for that reason then, Mr. Speaker, that I say clearly that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan should be retained, because I believe, I believe that the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan has served the people of Saskatchewan well. It has served the people of 
Saskatchewan well in a number of ways, and I will deal with those in more detail. 
 
But I see it at this particular point in time in our history as a very critical factor because of 
the climate within which we exist these days, high deficit, growing deficit, high 
unemployment, out-migration, reductions of securities for people in many ways, 
including services from their governments and their Crown corporations. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has a role to play to be of service, 
and the ability of governments of all stripes, and not just in the ’80s, not just in the ’90s, 
but beyond — not just for decades — to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because we have been blessed, by virtue of the Canadian constitution in Saskatchewan, 
with the constitutional right to have the extraction taxes and the royalties related to 
natural resources be determined by the Government of Saskatchewan, presumably and 
hopefully, the government acting in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. And 
so we’re talking here about a vehicle to make that happen, at a time in which our 
government tells us repeatedly that the funds are low and that the demands are high. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have to look at a number of issues that in my view 
justify that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan should be retained as a wholly 
owned Crown corporation belonging to the people of Saskatchewan, and that Bill 20, an 
Act respecting the piratization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, should be 
defeated. 
 
I would like to make that case in some detail, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what is going on 
as we debate on both sides of this House with our conflicting visions related to the role of 
government and the future of the people of Saskatchewan, we have a conflict before us. 
 
Represented on the opposition side, Mr. Speaker, is a vision of Saskatchewan as a place 
where the citizens of our province can be significant determiners of our own future, a 
place, Mr. Speaker, where the citizens of our province are not merely victims of 
economic circumstances that are dictated beyond our borders — are not merely victims of 
political circumstances determined beyond our borders — but as a matter of fact, through 
political action can take control, or maybe control is too strong a word, but can exercise a 
great deal of influence over our fates and our fortunes and our futures in a collective 
sense. 
 



Philosophically, Mr. Speaker, to a large extent that’s what this debate is about. And so we 
have, on the one hand, a vision of a mixed economy, a balance within our province and 
an economy that functions with a combination of private sector interests, co-operatives, 
and public sector interests as well, on the one hand — that being the vision and the 
economic model that led to the formation of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
after the historic debate of 1975 and ’76. 
 
On the other hand would be what I believe is fairly represented a description of the PC 
vision, which is one of unfettered free enterprise, reinforcing all those grand notions of 
dog-eat-dog and survival of the fittest, where the rich get rich and the poor get poorer, 
where market-place demand is the only criterion that is used to make decisions about 
provision of services or existence of institutions or entities. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I found it kind of interesting to note that members of the 
government, when speaking to this debate, have somehow concluded that they’re being 
futuristic, that what they’re proposing by removing the publicly owned instrument for the 
production of potash in the province of Saskatchewan — which by the way, is only 40 
per cent of the production of potash in Saskatchewan . . . as a matter of fact, potash 
production in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is predominated by the private sector. About 
60 per cent of the production is being done by private sector corporations in the province 
of Saskatchewan. What we have here in this province then, is the public sector 
corporation, owned by the people of Saskatchewan, which produces about 40 per cent of 
the potash. 
 
And what the government is proposing in this Bill then is to eliminate, eliminate 
completely that one actor in the production of potash, the public sector corporation, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, through their ill-fated and ill-famed exercise of 
piratization. 
 
Is that visionary, Mr. Speaker? Is that futuristic? Is that the kind of direction that will 
serve the people of Saskatchewan well into the ’90s and into the 21st century and beyond, 
that will provide opportunity and security in the balance that’s needed in the context the 
government brings both of those to the people that it’s elected to serve? 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if we want to understand that economic model that is being 
proposed by the government in piratizing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, we 
would have to go back about 160 years in time, because the model previously existed — 
the model of unfettered free enterprise where competition reigned supreme and is the 
only determining factor. The market-place demand is the only determining factor. Social 
justice is not a factor in making decisions by governments or otherwise where dog eats 
dog, and it’s survival of the fittest, and the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. That’s 
the model we had that took us into the Dirty Thirties. It took us into the Depression era 
that simply devastated so many families, so many people here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, as a result, it was directly as a result of the experience of 
privatization which was the economic guide-line that took us into the Dirty Thirties, that 
the people of Saskatchewan responded by saying, there’s got to be a better way; there can 
be a better way; and subsequently, Mr. Speaker, they determined that there is a better 
way. The models of co-operation can serve people well. Instead of dog-eat-dog 
competition being the determining factor, decide what institutions exist, what fail, how 
that impacts on people’s lives. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan came out of the Dirty Thirties saying that if we band 
together, if we combine our efforts and our belief in ourselves and in the future of our 
province, and work hard, and work in co-operation with each other, that we can build a 
better way, a better future for ourselves and for our children. 
 
And out of that era, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, were born initiatives, politically 
expressed by the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, the CCF, the forerunner of the 
New Democratic Party. Out of those, as well, Mr. Speaker, were born credit unions, 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and co-ops as a way of getting things done for yourself in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it seems that here we come after having passed through the Dirty Thirties into, I 
suppose, what could be referred to as in some ways the dirty ‘80s, that had some 
difficulties, in fact some of the same conditions that existed in the ’30s. There have been 
the weather factors that were similar . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Swift Current says it’s been dry and I agree. It’s been dry and that’s been a factor . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from Swift Current also offers other 
comments that I’ll allow her to put on record if she chooses at her own time. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen similar factors. We’ve seen a Conservative government 
that took us kicking and screaming into the Dirty Thirties in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we’ve seen in the 1980s, Conservative governments that have dragged 
the people of Saskatchewan kicking and screaming into the ’80s. Still a repeat, history is 
repeating itself. 
 
And what we’re seeing though this initiative of the piratization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan is an attempt to, in the world of potash and the role of the only publicly 
owned potash corporation in this province producing about 40 per cent of the potash — 
not 100 per cent, we’re not talking about all. In fact, if we want, the members opposite 
have frequently referred, Mr. Speaker, to the extremism. They somehow imply that the 
members of the New Democratic Party would like to see all potash production be done by 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the publicly owned corporation. I don’t know, 
Mr. Speaker, that any member on this side has ever said that. If they did, I would not 
agree. To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, no member has ever said that. 
 
But in fact, the extremism is in the Bill. The extremism is being expressed by the political 
biases, the ideologically hidebound biases of the Government of Saskatchewan, the PC 
Government of Saskatchewan, who want to, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, eliminate 



the only public involvement in the production of potash in Saskatchewan and bring us 
back to where we once were in this province, with all of the production of potash being 
done by the private sector. 
 
That’s the extreme position, and therein lies the conflicting view, Mr. Speaker, the 
conflicting view where on the one hand the New Democrats are saying what we need is a 
mixed economy — serves us well. Private sector initiative and risk that should ought to 
be rewarded, dealt with fairly by its governments and its people; co-operatives to allow 
people to invest their sweat and their energy as well as oftentimes their financial 
resources, to address some of their needs; and at times the public sector to meet social 
objectives in addition to the pure profit objectives, which are typical of private 
corporations and quite understandable. For the mix — private, co-operative, and public 
— as expounded by the New Democrats, is the vision for the economic model that 
provides opportunities and security for Saskatchewan people, reflected for the potash 
world by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s involvement, on the one hand. 
 
(2115) 
 
On the other hand then, Mr. Speaker, the view put forth by the government members 
implicit in this Bill that would eliminate the public sector involvement and would 
eventually — I don’t imply for a second that the government intends to do it in one fell 
swoop; they’ve said they won’t and I believe them — but would eventually lead to 100 
per cent private sector extraction of potash, or production of potash in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and all of its implicit problems that we can understand by the history in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so that’s the conflicting views that we find ourselves being faced with in this debate 
on Bill 20 — an Act to piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then I ask myself how does, specifically then, how does the potash 
corporation serve as a means? How does this entity, this corporate entity serve to be 
meaningful to the lives of Saskatchewan people? As a social democrat, why in the world 
do I care about the existence of a corporate entity? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s because of its 
impact on people. 
 
Clearly, private sector corporations exist for one purpose. Some of the most honest 
entities we have in our society, Mr. Speaker, are corporations. They tell you exactly 
where they’re coming from. They’re there to make a profit. That’s why they exist —no 
bones about it, no apologies; fight like the dickens when you change the rules that 
jeopardize profit, but you know where they’re coming from — no problem with that. 
 
What about then the public sector, the public sector potash corporation? How does this 
corporation serve the needs of Saskatchewan people? And I suggest it’s in three ways. It 
is in three ways that this public corporation serves the needs and impacts on the lives of 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; three ways and with one criterion. 
 



First of all, Mr. Speaker, it impacts on their lives if direct profits — same objective as the 
private sector corporation — if the direct profits of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan are transferred to the Consolidated Fund or to the operating revenues of the 
government, in turn being used to do two things: one, reduce taxes; and two, provide 
services, the relationship between cost and service to the people that every government 
has to deal with. 
 
So one way that the corporation directly impacts on the lives of Saskatchewan people is 
the degree to which it manages to achieve a profit in its operations and transfer those 
funds to the Consolidated Fund to keep down taxes and provide services for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, through the payment of taxes and royalties the same as any other 
potash corporation. As I said before, clearly by the Canadian constitution, natural 
resources in this province belong to the province, to the people, as administered in that 
authority and that right, administered by the government, which has the right to levy 
taxes and royalties on the production and extraction of potash. 
 
And so along with the private sector corporations, taxes and royalties, private sector and 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan are also transferred to the consolidated fund to 
keep down taxes and provide services. So in that sense, the second reason, Mr. Speaker, 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is no different from a private potash corporation 
— in that second sense no difference. 
 
Firstly though, in terms of profits there is a difference; the profits that can be directed 
there to the consolidated fund. 
 
And thirdly then, Mr. Speaker, and this is very significant in the history of potash and the 
payment of taxes and royalties in the province of Saskatchewan. Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, 
the potash corporation serves as a means to an end in the degree to which it causes private 
potash companies to pay their fair share of royalties and taxes. 
 
That’s not always been the case, Mr. Speaker; it’s not always been the case. In fact, prior 
to the formation of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan it was not the case that the 
private potash corporations paid their fair share of royalties and taxes — that was not the 
case. The very bringing into existence and then subsequently the functioning of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan along with the legislative authorities entitling . . . 
given to the Government of Saskatchewan through that legislation passed in ’75 and ’76, 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, directly related to the fact that taxes and royalties paid by private 
companies increased dramatically, and I’ll describe that shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you see, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, if I may just summarize then, lays 
three very, very important roles in bringing to the financial revenues of the Government 
of Saskatchewan the means to provide services. And it’s in that context — although not 
only in that context, and I will get to that as well later, Mr. Speaker, as the Potash 



Corporation of Saskatchewan in addition can provide a social justice, in a sense, but it 
can meet social ends as well. I’ll get to that later. 
 
But initially, Mr. Speaker, we can, I think, just on these means alone, we can justify the 
existence — in fact, I think arguably make the case for the necessity — not just justify 
the existence, but the necessity of a publicly owned Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
which pays profits directly to the revenues to provide services, pays taxes and royalties 
the same as the private companies to the Consolidated Fund to provide revenues . . . or 
services, I should say; and then thirdly, by its existence forces private potash companies 
to pay their fair share of taxes and royalties to the Consolidated Fund. 
 
But I said, Mr. Speaker, there are three reasons, three ways that the potash corporation 
serves as a means to an end for the Saskatchewan people. I must add, as I said before, Mr. 
Speaker, a criterion. And the criteria is this: the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan does 
those things if, if it is properly managed. 
 
And as we proceed through this debate, Mr. Speaker, on the piratization of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, I will be making some reference as well to the proper 
management of the potash corporation. Clearly the records will show that the 
management of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan under the political direction of 
the New Democratic Party governments committed . . . That’s surprising — I mean, this 
is not surprising, but it’s fact, the New Democratic Party government which created the 
entity, obviously committed to making it work, and it did. 
 
A Progressive Conservative government which inherited the corporation in 1982, in fact 
opposed its creation and philosophically objected to its existence, have continued to do 
that while being responsible for managing it, and, not surprisingly, mismanaged it, in my 
view, so that it no longer continues today to serve the needs of Saskatchewan people as 
effectively as it could or should, can, and I also believe, Mr. Speaker, again will. 
 
Well let us take a look then at the history of these things in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Potash, as has been referred to a number of times here by a number of speakers on both 
sides of the House — it doesn’t need further explanation from — is used for fertilizer. 
The mining of potash has been going on in Saskatchewan for some . . . oh, I guess we’re 
looking at something less than three decades, but not a whole lot — since the ’60s — as a 
substance to be used in the creation of fertilizer, production of food. 
 
We as well know, Mr. Speaker, that a large part of North America, as a matter of fact, has 
soil which is potash deficient and therefore requires potash as one of the ingredients in 
fertilizer in the growing of food in the agricultural industry. We use very little, of course 
—potash and fertilizer that’s used in Saskatchewan — because our soils here are not 
potash deficient. 
 
The needs are largely in the United States, in North America, particularly in the Midwest 
and the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico coast. There are also needs overseas, Mr. 
Speaker — China and Japan, offshore. There are a large number of countries who, in 



undertaking their agricultural industries, will require potash as a very necessary 
ingredient in their potassium-starved soils as a part of fertilizer in their production of 
goods. That’s been going on then since the mid-’60s here in Saskatchewan, that potash is 
being extracted to meet that need within our own continent and internationally as well. 
 
Up to the mid-’60s, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, there would have been, as we went 
through the ’60s into the ’70s, about nine or 10 potash companies that were located and 
working in Saskatchewan, I believe all but one American owned. By the way, if you have 
a list I’d be happy to read it into the record —it’s not terribly important to me but . . . All 
but one, I believe, Mr. Speaker, American owned; all of them, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
offering shares on the market; all of them allowing the kind of investment in a potash 
corporation that the Government of Saskatchewan is in Bill 20 suggesting will become 
the future of the total existence eventually of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Somehow this participation in investment is believed by the members opposite to be in 
the public good. But after all is said and done, when we call a spade a spade and separate 
the wheat from the chaff, Mr. Speaker, what we find is the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan envisaged by the PC government today would give us one more potash 
corporation which has shares on the market available to anybody who wants them. Now 
I’ll come to that again later in more detail because that will be contested by some 
members opposite, and I’m not saying . . . note, Mr. Speaker, I did not say initially 
available entirely to anybody who wants them, but eventually that would become the 
reality. 
 
And so the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan that is part of this so-called visionary 
direction of the Progressive Conservative government would give us one more company 
in which shares could be owned in the same way that they’re owned in the private sector 
companies that previously existed before the potash corporation, and still do today. 
 
It’s an odd notion that we see being put forth, Mr. Speaker, by the government, that 
somehow by owning these shares in this entity called Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan piratized, PC-style, that people of Saskatchewan, they say, would be 
participating in the company. 
 
(2130) 
 
I’m just a little at a loss, Mr. Speaker, to understand quite how this happens; how the gas 
station attendant who has $100 worth of shares, or the grocery store check-out clerk who 
has $50 worth of shares; the parking lot attendant who has $25 worth of shares; the low 
income working family that’s having a tougher time qualifying for family income plan 
wishes it had some shares; senior citizens who are finding it increasingly difficult just to 
make ends meet may have their 5 or $10 worth of shares; how some of those farmers 
faced with those 10,000-plus foreclosure notices, having a hard time just keeping the 
farm afloat, and their 5 or $10 worth of shares if they’ve got some. 
 



Mr. Speaker, I mean, I don’t want to drag this on eternally, but I find it a little odd that 
members opposite and the member from Regina Wascana, I think, exudes great 
enthusiasm. I admire enthusiasm; he has the ability to get worked up over virtually 
nothing. In fact, he did. And, Mr. Speaker, I like to see enthusiasm, but it would be nice if 
the enthusiasm seemed to be directed at something more than just an unbridled 
expression of emotion. 
 
I find it hard to understand how these people who can’t afford these shares or who have 
only a small number of shares, how they’re somehow participating. I mean, this is some 
kind of a pretty exciting exercise, according to the members opposite, that the people of 
Saskatchewan are having a great deal of difficulty grasping just how it happens. 
 
In the same way, Mr. Speaker, that shareholders with IMC (International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation) go to their annual meeting which would be held once a year in the 
United States, in New York, well the annual meeting of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan could be held in the post office box if it’s held in Saskatchewan; that’s 
what this Bill says. I doubt that they would hold it in a box; I don’t suggest that for a 
moment. It would be held somewhere and, initially, I’m sure it would be held somewhere 
in Saskatchewan — initially. 
 
What happens at an annual meeting? Well you go and you hear reports which most, a 
large majority of the shareholders find a little difficult to understand. You get to ask some 
questions without a lot of specific knowledge and get some general answers, and 
oftentimes they even get to provide a proxy vote for somebody else to vote on their 
behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Somehow you just don’t, in the private sector — people who own shares in a private 
sector potash corporation — you just don’t get in the image because it’s not the reality. 
You don’t get the image that somehow they go to these annual meetings and they are just 
tickled pink because they’re participating in the corporation. This is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — After the meeting’s over they give you a glass of wine and a hot 
dog . . . 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well I’ve never been to a potash corporation annual meeting, but my 
colleague from Regina tells me that after the meeting that you get a glass of wine and a 
hot dog and go home. The member from Regina South says that he would have a hot 
coffee and a cookie. Well, I mean we’re not here to debate what you’re going to eat when 
you leave the annual meeting, Mr. Speaker. I’m being facetious, obviously, and I don’t 
want to drag this out for ever. 
 
But it seems, Mr. Speaker, that that is an odd notion that somehow this is participating in 
your public potash corporation any more than it’s participating in being an influential 
decision maker in a private corporation. Yes, it’s a nice sounding phrase but the reality is, 
Mr. Speaker, that it has very little meaning, particularly to people in Saskatchewan, 
particularly to people in Saskatchewan, particularly recognizing that first of all only about 



14 per cent of all adults in the province of Saskatchewan do invest in the ownership of 
shares, and particularly recognizing that under the leadership of the PC government of the 
province of Saskatchewan, times are tougher than they’ve been since the Dirty Thirties, 
and that there are fewer and fewer people who have opportunity to even buy these shares, 
let alone get some kind of an exotic experience out of their public participation in the 
corporation. 
 
Well let’s be honest; let’s call a spade a spade. What we’re talking about here is forming 
a corporation, selling shares in which people would participate, no more and no less, to 
the extent that they would if they bought their shares in IMC, Cominco, or any other 
potash companies in the province of Saskatchewan, all of whom offer public shares to 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we went through the ’60s and into the ’70s with potash corporations in 
Saskatchewan all being private, all but one being American headquartered, American 
owned, and, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, making very, very little contribution, 
very little contribution to the Consolidated Fund of the province of Saskatchewan in order 
to reduce taxes and provide services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in fact just in order to provide a comparison with later figures, I note 
that during those years and prior to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan coming into 
existence in 1975-76, the royalties and taxes being paid by the private corporations came 
to the grand total of an average of about $2 million a year and a rate of about two and a 
half per cent. Now that’s a grand return on the natural resource owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan, belonging to the people of Saskatchewan according to the Canadian 
constitution, as paid and required by the Liberal government of the day and in the early 
years of the New Democratic Party government coming to office in 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then an interesting thing took place. Not only was there really essentially an 
unregulated production of potash going on in the province of Saskatchewan, as allowed 
by the government of the day, that was later to change, and what we were seeing in the 
province of Saskatchewan was boom and bust. We were seeing heavy stockpiling, 
expansions when prices were up driving prices down, and by and large a very inefficient 
potash industry going on in the province of Saskatchewan by anybody’s definitions — by 
the definitions of profitability of a private corporation, by the definitions of public 
resources coming through taxes and royalties to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact it came to the point that the premier, Ross Thatcher, began to attempt to regulate 
the extraction. His comments, and I’m paraphrasing, were to the effect that the potash 
corporations were extremely inefficient and that they needed some government direction 
in order to shape up their act, so to speak. 
 
Well we came to the mid-’70s, Mr. Speaker, and the months just prior to the first historic 
debate related to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, its creation. In those days, Mr. 
Speaker, the government of the day, led by Premier Allan Blakeney at that time, were 
having a great deal of difficulty collecting any royalties or taxes from the private potash 



corporations. They said that the royalties being requested by the government were unfair. 
The Blakeney government said, well if it’s unfair, show us why it’s unfair; show us your 
books; prove to us that you can’t afford the kinds of royalties and taxes that we’re asking 
for you. We believe that the level of royalty and taxes being charged is much too low; it 
should be substantially higher. You’re saying to us that you can’t afford to pay a higher 
rate; show us that. We’re reasonable people. We’re willing to negotiate a change, and we 
have no interest in putting anybody out of business. 
 
Obviously those resources belong to the people of Saskatchewan, and if you’re out of 
business then we have no income to provide services through the Consolidated Fund, 
funded by the Consolidated Fund. And so show us that we’re being unfair in our request, 
because we also have an obligation. The NDP government of the day said, we have an 
obligation to take the advantage of the natural resource, potash, and to transfer that to 
benefit the people of Saskatchewan. That’s our obligation as the government of the day. 
You say we’re being unreasonable — show us that we’re being unreasonable. 
 
Well, the potash company said, you’re unreasonable and you’ve got to take our word for 
it because we’re not going to show you. We’re not going to show you our books, and on 
top of that we’re not going to allow you, we’re not going to follow any direction 
regarding the regulation as to the rate of extraction. 
 
And so as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, in response to that, the Allan Blakeney New 
Democrat government of the day responded then through legislative action, which 
followed a debate in these Chambers in 1975 and 1976 related to the formation of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a corporation which would, number one, provide 
opportunity to pay profits directly to the Consolidated Fund; number two, would pay its 
fair share of taxes and royalties; and number three, it was hoped, would cause the private 
potash corporations to begin to pay their fair share. Because the legislation, as I 
understand it, that was carried at that time provided legally for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to purchase — and it was done, purchases were done at fair market value 
to purchase a controlling interest in each potash corporation of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, if the potash companies weren’t going to play fair ball with 
the Government of Saskatchewan acting in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan, then the Government of Saskatchewan would deal with them on their own 
terms and in terms they understood very clearly, by purchasing controlling interest, and 
therefore ultimately being able to make majority decisions in the boardrooms of those 
corporations and ensure that a fair return will come back to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As it turns out, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t necessary to purchase a majority of the potash 
industry in Saskatchewan. That didn’t become necessary. All that was necessary was to 
have the legislation to provide for that possibility, and the private potash corporations in 
Saskatchewan all of a sudden began to realize that they did have the ability to pay 
royalties and taxes that just a short time ago they just couldn’t afford, they said. 
 



And so we found that, whereas in the years of the Liberal government there were 
royalties and taxes of about $2 million per year coming to the province in 1977 to 1981, 
the first five years after the bringing into existence of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, the taxes and royalties jumped, not from $10 million over a five-year 
period, but taxes and royalties over that five-year period, Mr. Speaker, jumped to $985 
million — $985 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And so all of a sudden for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 
potash production industry in this province was no longer a $2 million a year industry, it 
was no nearly a $200 million a year industry. What a difference, what a dramatic 
difference overnight as a result of the creation of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Was that because the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, made some 
benevolent decisions and decided that we came into being in order to express a political 
will to serve for the benefits of Saskatchewan people, and so we’re going to volunteer to 
pay humungous taxes and royalties, as that would jack the numbers up. 
 
(2145) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact that’s not the case. Of the $985 million that were 
paid over that five-year period in taxes and royalties, only $271 million came from Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, which as we all recognize is still a minor actor in the 
potash industry in Saskatchewan — it’s a minority actor. And as a matter of fact, $715 
million were paid in that five-year period from the private potash corporations to the 
province of Saskatchewan. What a dramatic change and what an increase in the revenues 
available to the government to provide services to its people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that period of time as well, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
averaged . . . What was PCS paying? Well, was it the niggardly two and a half per cent as 
the percentage of sales that was the reality prior to the coming in of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan? In its first five years, Mr. Speaker, the PCS, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan averaged over 23 per cent in its taxes and royalties paid to 
the province. Again, what a dramatic difference, a fair return to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and along with that, the private potash corporation playing fair ball as 
well. 
 
And so we could see, Mr. Speaker, that the plan was working. The plan was working and 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was serving the people of Saskatchewan well, 
serving as a means to an end, a means to increase the revenues through direct profits, fair 
taxes and royalties from the corporation itself, and fair taxes and royalties from the 
private potash corporations. It served the people well right from the very beginning. 
 



I’d like to now deal with the performance of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
under the era of political leadership provided by the New Democratic Party and by the 
Progressive Conservative Party. And I’d like to do that in a fair amount of detail, Mr. 
Speaker. As I said before, it’s not surprising, it’ll be surprising to absolutely no one that 
the performance was substantially better under the direction of the political leadership of 
the New Democratic Party than under the uncommitted leadership of the Progressive 
Conservatives or the PCs. 
 
Why does this all matter? Well, as he said before, in order to reach the objective of 
keeping down personal taxes and to respond to the needs of Saskatchewan citizens 
through the initiatives of government — and these are particularly important, Mr. 
Speaker, in these troubled times that we’re facing right now. 
 
Unfortunately, and in my view, largely as a result of the general piratization initiatives of 
the PC government, we are experiencing a crisis in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
I’m referring of course to the crisis of out-migration or loss of population from our 
province. It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting that one of the phrases used 
by the member for Estevan, the Premier, in his election campaign prior to 1982, was the 
battle cry, “Bring home the children,” because he claimed at that time that Saskatchewan 
was losing population and that was a sign of some problems. 
 
As a New Democrat, I look back at those times and I wish that that would not have been 
the case, and I would prefer not to admit that it was reflective of the government of the 
day. But obviously in 1982, Mr. Speaker, the people decided it was a factor, and the 
mandate to govern changed. Well what’s good for the goose is good for the gander, Mr. 
Speaker. And we now have ourselves being at a time faced with a crisis, a similar crisis 
that the Government of Saskatchewan has a responsibility to respond to, and 
unfortunately, it’s my view as well, Mr. Speaker, that to some large degree the 
Government of Saskatchewan has, as a matter of fact, caused through its policy decisions. 
 
Let me just refer to this harsh reality of this crisis that faces the people of Saskatchewan 
now. There’s no one of us here in this Assembly who hasn’t had countless conversations 
with constituents and friends and neighbours who have all had friends and neighbours 
who have given up hope and who have left Saskatchewan. 
 
I recall back in the days of Liberal Premier Ross Thatcher. The joke in Saskatchewan at 
that time was the phrase, “Will the last person out of Saskatchewan please turn out the 
lights.” Unfortunately . . . the good new is, Mr. Speaker, I’ve not heard anybody make 
reference to that sick joke lately, and I hope that I won’t. But the unfortunate reality, Mr. 
Speaker, is that that same phenomenon is occurring again under a right-wing government, 
and I think . . . I make the case, Mr. Speaker, to some degree caused by the piratization 
initiatives of the Government of Saskatchewan — the PC Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what is the reality that we have, Mr. Speaker — and I’d just like to outline it because 
the trend is alarming. And I note that the Minister for Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment is here and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that he’s well aware of this trend as 



would, I hope, most of the government members opposite. But for those who may not be, 
as well as for the people of Saskatchewan, I’d like to just briefly outline what that is. 
 
We have an alarming trend, Mr. Speaker, that in fact began in 1985. It may be 
coincidence — I think not — that as a matter of fact the piratization initiatives of this 
government largely began in 1984 and ’85. That was the beginning of the same kind of 
piratization initiatives that lead us to Bill 20, an Act to piratize the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So in 1985, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately Saskatchewan lost 4,151 more people than came 
in. I’m not talking about 4,151 who left; the number who actually left Saskatchewan was 
larger. As we all know there’s a natural flow as people move back and forth between the 
provincial boundaries . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Premier has a theory that he 
puts forth and I will respond to that shortly and provide for him — too, I hope the 
Premier will enter into the debate and let us know his vision of piratization and help those 
who are grasping with the notion to just understand how in the world piratization has 
been good for us. 
 
There are a whole lot of folks who tell me, since we had piratization, that taxes have gone 
up. Since we have piratization, our services have gone down. Since we’ve had 
piratization, my friends have left the province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t think 
we can blame the dog running away on piratization, Mr. Speaker, I think that would be 
drawing a long bow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a whole host of folks who are just having a hard time grasping this 
notion as to how piratization has been serving us well and how more of it will continue to 
somehow, instead of make things continue to get worse, to get better. Unfortunately 
reality — and I won’t make . . . I do not make light of this — is that things are getting 
worse, Mr. Speaker. It is pride for no province to point to the number of people that are 
leaving and to see that the number leaving our province is greater than the ones who are 
arriving. We always welcome people coming to our province to bring their talents and 
their energies, their spirit, building and participating in their communities, as they’re 
always welcome. Unfortunately in Saskatchewan they’re moving the other way. We see 
the tail-end of more moving vans than we see the front ends, I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in 1985, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had a net loss of 4,151 people more moved out of 
Saskatchewan than came in. In 1986 this would have been the election year, and, Mr. 
Speaker, at that time there were, as a matter of fact, in addition to those who were voting 
at the ballot-box, there were 7,276 who voted with their feet — 7,276 more people in 
1986 left Saskatchewan than came in across this way, across the provincial boundaries. 
 
I suppose it would give for those of us in this Assembly just a moment of reflection as the 
significance of those people who left Saskatchewan, far too frequently with their hopes 
being dashed and the confidence in their futures here in Saskatchewan for themselves and 
their families being dashed. And had those 7,276 folks stayed home in Saskatchewan and 
distributed themselves properly, it could very well have turned out, Mr. Speaker, could 



very well have turned out that the party that not only won the majority of the votes would 
have won the majority of the seats and that the roles in this Assembly would be reversed. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, that makes for perhaps interesting speculation and nothing more 
than that. The reality is that it’s lost people, it’s people who are lost, as the Premier says, 
and the people who had given up on their hope for a promising future under the 
government of the current Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1987, Mr. Speaker, the response to piratization initiatives of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, as reflected in this Bill to piratize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
. . . In 1987, Mr. Speaker, the trend continued and got worse again; 9,983 more people 
left Saskatchewan in 1987 than who came into our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s there we’ve seen them: in 1985 over 4,000; 1986 over 7,000; 1987 
within 17 of 10,000 more people left the province of Saskatchewan than came in. In 
1988, Mr. Speaker, it got worse again, I’m afraid . . . I’m sorry to report. In 1988, as a 
result to some degree, at least partially, of the piratization initiatives of the PC 
government of Saskatchewan, 13,346 more people left our province than came across our 
border into Saskatchewan to build their hopes and their futures and their dreams. 
 
I just will go through them very quickly, Mr. Speaker, because I simply want to point out 
that in 1988 there was not a single month in which we had a net gain in population — not 
a single month. In every month of 1988 we lost more people than came into the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I simply point out that the response, the impact on people of this piratization agenda 
was not something that came in fits and flurries. Mr. Speaker, or as a result of increases 
in the summer months, which may be considered a month frequently used for people to 
make changes and therefore moves, but they were as a matter of fact consistent. Every 
month in 1988 we lost more people than we gained: January, 908; February, 1,171; 
March, 937; April, 883; May, 722; June, 1,278; July, 550; August, 1,219; September, 
1,724; October, 458; November, 2,310; December, 186 — every month, month after 
month, people leaving the province of Saskatchewan with shattered dreams and having 
given up hope — over the course of the year, 13,346. 
 
(2200) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to the Government of Saskatchewan, we’re now into our 
fifth year of piratization. We have before us Bill 20, an Act to piratize the potash 
corporation, as an expression of this overall piratization agenda —year five. 
 
And as a result of this piratization agenda, Mr. Speaker, are things getting better? Have 
we been victims of some kind of circumstances over which we have no control and is the 
trend reversing? Kind of interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that out of those 13,346 net loss 
in 1988, where did we fall compared to the rest of the nation? Sad to report, Mr. Speaker, 



in 1988 Saskatchewan had by more than double the largest population loss through out-
migration, net loss through out-migration in all of Canada — in all of Canada in 1988. 
 
Second, second largest loss, and to some degree, not surprising. It offers, it in fact 
reinforces and gives some merit, a degree of merit to the argument that the Premier 
sometimes uses to say we’re having tough times because of the drought. Our neighbour to 
the east . . . 
 
The Speaker: —Order, order. I’m going to have to ask the hon. members to more closely 
relate his remarks to the Bill under discussion. He’s discussing public participation, by 
and large, with some peripheral references to the potash Bill, Bill No. 20. I would like to 
ask him to more directly relate his remarks to Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I respect that ruling, and as I said earlier, the potash 
corporation plays a very necessary role in the provision of services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us how. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well the member says how, Mr. Speaker. Do you want me . . . should I go 
through it all again? I really don’t wish to repeat the argument. Let me just summarize the 
main point: through direct payment and profits to the Consolidated Fund, payment of 
taxes and royalties, same as any other private potash corporation, and also therefore 
through its existence the causing of private potash corporations to pay their fair share as 
well. As the potash corporation then has caused the revenues of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to expand and therefore be able to provide services and meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, it serves them. 
 
As I said before, the process, the whole process of piratization, one of which, the latest of 
which, the one before us right now of which is the piratization of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, is a process that I believe has not served, has not served the people of 
Saskatchewan well. Nor do I believe that the piratization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan will serve the people of Saskatchewan well if, as a matter of fact, it’s 
carried in this Legislative Assembly, and I still do harbour some hope that that may not 
be the case. 
 
The track record of people having deserted our province in this period of time which the 
government refers to as having increased its piratization activity since 1985 has been an 
increasingly sad picture, Mr. Speaker. And I simply am making the case that as they’ve 
increased the piratization activity, the impact on our people has gotten worse. 
 
And so therefore it would be reasonable to predict that if another piratization initiative, 
piratization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan takes place, based on the current 
trend, that things would get worse, even worse than they are now. And so it’s for that 
reason, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate your raising the question if I’ve not made that clear, 
that I bring these items into this debate. 



 
And I want to, as well, respond to the question raised by the Premier across the floor just 
a few minutes ago in responding to this, because he asked where they’re going. People of 
Saskatchewan unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, are going out, that’s where they’re going. 
 
But when we compare the 1988 results of loss of population to other provinces, we don’t 
fare well. As I said, we’re worse. Manitoba, our neighbour to the east, is second worst, 
with a loss of some 6,200 people in 1988; and Alberta, our neighbour to the west, has, as 
a matter of fact, had a population gain of some 5,600. I believe it is, in 1988. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the difference between Manitoba and Alberta from 
Saskatchewan? Manitoba, 1988, Conservative government; Saskatchewan, 1988, 
Conservative government; Alberta, 1988, Conservative government. Is the difference the 
governments? Is the difference the governments? That’s who they are now; I wouldn’t 
bet a whole lot on that being the case for a long time, but that’s the way they are now. Is 
the difference the governments? Then no, it’s not the governments —same political 
stripe. 
 
Is the difference the impact then of the drought? That’s frequently the argument brought 
forth to this Assembly to explain this loss of people from our province. It’s the drought; 
these are hard times. It’s affected agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, I agree; it has. I do not deny we’ve had drought; we’ve certainly had drought, as 
have Manitoba and Alberta . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is the Premier suggesting that 
somehow . . . The Premier appears to be suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that somehow the rain 
clouds came off the west coast . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member from what I can gather is off the topic. 
And number two, because an hon. member makes a comment from his seat doesn’t give 
the individual speaking licence to then decide to speak on that topic for a while. I’d like 
to bring that to the attention to the hon. member from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I respect that. I think that’s a good ruling. It could 
divert us from debate in this Assembly if every time one of the members opposite went 
off on to some wild tangent that we started to focus on that and try and make sense out of 
it. So, Mr. Speaker, I fully appreciate that it’s not wise that I should get into debate by 
responding to what the Premier is saying from across the floor, and I respect that and will 
cease to do that. 
 
Let me simply conclude my point, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this loss of people, in my 
view, is clearly related to the difference between the activities or the priorities of the 
governments in the three provinces affected by the drought — the three prairie provinces. 
Of the three, it’s the one in the middle, it’s Saskatchewan that has made it a number one 
priority to engage in piratization of its services in these later years. And I think we’re 
seeing clearly the impact of that in 1988, an absolutely devastating year in which 
Saskatchewan had a net loss of over 13,000 of our people. And as I said, by more than 
double, we’re worse than our neighbour to the east which also experienced the drought. 



Unfortunately it’s gotten worse again this year, Mr. Speaker, and I respect your ruling. I 
won’t go though them month by month, but I will simply . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening very carefully to this member for the 
last 15 minutes now, and other than referring to the potash Bill one time — you’ve sat 
him down twice — and again for the last four minutes since your last ruling, he has 
simply talked about the three prairie provinces and the movement of the people therein. 
And you know, the people moving around in our provinces have no relationship at all to 
the potash industry. You know, we’ve listened to the Alamo history and now we’re 
listening to movement of people within the prairie provinces, and I think that all of his 
remarks are totally irrelevant and he’s not on the Bill at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just take a short moment to speak to 
the point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I listened to the point of order by the member from Regina 
South, and I’ve also listened to the speech by the member for Moose Jaw North, and I 
find it a very fascinating and intriguing argument that he’s making, talking about the 
privatization in this province and the extent that it has gone to and tying it to the 
population loss. I’m sure his next point is going to be that if we privatize potash our loss 
of population will be even more dramatic in the next year; I’m sure that’s the point he 
was just going to get to. 
 
So I think that he’s weaving his way around to the exact point that privatization to this 
point has lost 16,000 people this year, and if we privatize potash we’ll probably lose 20 
or 30,000 people because of the spin-off as a result of it. I’m sure that’s the point the 
member was just going to make in relating it to privatization. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. members point of order from Regina South, and 
the response. I must say that the hon. member’s point of order from Regina South is well 
taken, and I have indicated on two occasions just in the last few minutes to the hon. 
member that he is a little off the topic. And the argument that: I’m going to eventually get 
on the topic, is not a solid argument. Relevancy should always be part of the debate, not 
at some future time, and therefore I ask the hon. member to keep his remarks relevant. 
He’s a skilled debater, and I know he’s able to do that, so would he be on the debate. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that ruling. Actually I wish the 
member from Regina South would not have raised it, because I’d be through the point by 
now and on to another topic. Because it’s a bit disappointing in this debate actually, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member from Regina Elphinstone got my argument out just before I was 
and now he’s on record as having said it ahead of me. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that by 
putting it on record as my opinion it won’t be ruled as repetitive; however, I will leave 
that to your good judgement, Mr. Speaker. 
 



As I said, last year we had a population loss of over 13,000, and this year in the first six 
months alone we’ve had a net population loss of over 13,000. And my concern, Mr. 
Speaker, is this, is that with the . . . and I will be referring shortly to some of the 
employment records specifically of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan because, as 
a matter of fact, they do parallel. They parallel our employment record and our 
population loss record. I think they are reflective of the lack of committed management to 
make them effective by the Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. And in 
addition to that, I think it’s reflective of their overall management and their overall 
piratization agenda. So I simply make that point, and I’d like to move on, Mr. Speaker, 
and as I said, I did not want to belabour that. 
 
Unemployment is a very significant factor in the government addressing its 
responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, and that factor cannot be ignored by any of us here. 
 
And so it seems to me that as the Government of Saskatchewan undertakes its piratization 
agenda through the potash corporation piratization Bill No. 20, what it’s providing for the 
Saskatchewan people is not a solution but a promise of more of the problem. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, what causes the members opposite to conclude that that is 
consistent with their right to govern, but it certainly is not consistent with the will of 
Saskatchewan people as I understand it, as related to me both individually as well as 
through other cumulative sources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2215) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if resources are not providing adequate government income, what 
happens? What’s the consequence when you reduce the income that the government 
counts on through potash or any other natural resource, but specifically in potash? If we 
significantly reduce our income through potash, some things have already happened and, 
as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, some things will continue to happen or increase. 
 
The first thing that happens, as I said before, the potash corporation is a means to an end. 
Just to remind the members, prior to the existence of the potash corporation, an average 
of $1 million in royalties and taxes; the first five years after the creation of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, an average of some $200 million a year in royalties and 
taxes from all sources. 
 
What happens if you do something then to jeopardize the income from those royalties and 
taxes from all sources, the potash corporation itself as well as the private sector 
corporations? Predictably, Mr. Speaker, some things happen that have happened, and I 
will be going through later the specific numbers as to the royalties and taxes paid by the 
potash corporation, Mr. Speaker, in comparing the two administrations, the New 
Democrat and PC. 
 
But some things have happened, as a matter of fact, under PC administration; the income 
from potash has dropped, dropped substantially. And some predictable things have 



happened as a result of that, I believe. Taxes have gone up. How have they gone up? A 
flat tax has been introduced, currently 2 per cent on gross income . . . or net income, I’m 
sorry, 2 per cent on net income, a brand-new tax. It didn’t exist before the PC government 
came into office, and has come into being since the whole piratization agenda has been 
undertaken, and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has been, in my view, 
mismanaged by the PC government. A flat tax has been introduced, 2 per cent; now up to 
2 per cent on net income. 
 
The sales tax has been increased, again contrary to a commitment made, from 5 per cent 
to 7 per cent, an increase of 40 per cent of what it previously was. People are now paying 
40 per cent more sales tax than they were prior to these things happening under the PC 
government. The gas tax is now at 10 cents per litre, contrary to a 1982 activity of the 
government to completely eliminate a gas tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since these changes have taken place, there’s been felt need for more revenues in order to 
provide services. If you’re not getting them from potash . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, you know I’m prepared to speak next on information 
that is relevant to Bill 20. Now the member opposite is going on and trying to prove a 
point, but he’s gone way beyond his point. Even with potash revenues down, if that is 
what his point is, and that’s how it started off, he has mentioned taxes that totalled 
probably five or six times those revenues. And I think that he’s not at all on the Bill, and 
I’d like you to rule accordingly. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I was listening to the member speaking about taxes and tax 
increases. I think the point that he was clearly making dealt with, if you’re going to lose 
revenue from potash, you’re going to have to raise taxes. And it seems very clear to me 
how tax increases are very relevant to Bill 20. 
 
And I don’t know how you can expect to lose money on potash, as opposed to make 
money on it; if you’re going to lose money every year, then you’re going to have to raise 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve listened to the hon. members . . . Order. The member 
from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of order and the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, and sometimes it’s difficult to perceive the relevancy of an argument, and 
that seems to be the case now. Therefore the onus is on the hon. member from Moose Jaw 
North to clearly indicate in his remarks how his remarks are relevant to Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I totally agree and I accept your ruling. The minister 
becomes frustrated, I think, Mr. Speaker, for reasons that I referred to early in my speech 
when I referred to the very exercise of the opposition obstructing legislation for very 



legitimate means, following the rules of the Assembly. I understand the minister’s 
frustration. The minister would like to see this thing proceed, would like to see this 
debate proceed very quickly to a vote, without debate and without the opposition using its 
legitimate right to debate as a vehicle in the political process. 
 
As I previously pointed out, Mr. Speaker, I have seen members opposite attempt, in my 
view . . . I recall very clearly saying that I didn’t think they were stupid. I don’t, and I 
recall very clearly saying that in my view, as I watched debate go on so far, what I was 
seeing repeatedly were government members attempting to focus the debate on this issue 
to the narrowest possible form in order to make it more difficult for the opposition to 
carry out its legitimate role in a legitimate way with the use of the rules, and to get a 
narrower interpretation of the rules. 
 
In no way, Mr. Speaker, am I implying anything about your decision on the rules; I’m 
making a comment simply on what I am seeing as a strategy being used by the 
government, and I think the minister has just attempted to do it again. 
 
I’m not offended by that; I understand his frustrations, and it is his right to do that, just as 
it is my right —it is his right to stand on that point of order, to use that as a technique in 
debate; I totally accept it, just as it is my right in the context of the general principle Bill . 
. . I believe in second reading, debate on the general principle of a Bill which has major 
historical significance and social impact on the people of Saskatchewan, that it is too 
narrow to, as I said before, to debate only on the narrow topic of specifically cost-
effective extraction of potash. 
 
That would obviously make the debate a lot quicker because you’d be outside of that 
realm much more frequently, and that’s why I said when I said before that I appreciated 
the debate of the member from Wascana, who took a much broader view of the issues 
before us, made occasional reference to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and 
potash — not frequent. I’m not offended by that because I think he understood this issue 
in its broader context and reflected that in his speech, just as I am doing now I hope. 
 
I hope that I am effectively doing that and putting on the record why it is that I stand 
where I stand, why it is I’m opposed to this. I don’t apologize for taking a long time to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. Number one, I believe that there is a great deal that is relevant to the 
topic that is part for me of drawing my conclusion that this piratization initiative in Bill 
20 is ill-founded or wrong-headed. But at the same time I ask for, and if I was a member 
of government, would permit for the opposition to perform its role, and I quite freely 
admit that some of it is obstructionist. I simply say that that is a part of a role that serves 
the democratic process. And I believe that I made that case earlier. 
 
I apologize to the Minister if he didn’t understand that clearly. I hope by re-explaining it 
for him — I didn’t do that to be repetitive. I’ve attempted very hard, Mr. Speaker, to 
avoid being repetitive. If the Minister wants that explanation, then I hope that clarifies it 
for him. 
 



As I said then, Mr. Speaker, if you’re jeopardizing your revenues or your potential 
revenues — and I will come again later again in my speech, Mr. Speaker, to deal with 
potential revenues because of the potential in the industry, the sale of potash — then 
what’s the consequence? How do people pay the price? Somebody’s got to pay the price 
for loss of revenues. If somebody’s got to pay more, or somebody’s got to receive less 
services, what happens? My view, Mr. Speaker, is that what we get is both and, in fact, 
we’ve gotten both. 
 
I mean, I thought I was proceeding fairly rapidly here and in outlining the tax increases 
that have been put in place by the PC government. I totally understand why the members 
opposite are sensitive about this issue. The people of Saskatchewan are very sensitive 
about this issue, and it would be my hope that you would understand that and make some 
appropriate changes. 
 
We’ve seen the introduction of the flat tax, as I said, 2 per cent on net income. We’ve 
seen the increase of sales tax from 5 to 7 per cent, both of them contrary to promise, by 
the way. We’ve seen the gas tax, which was removed as a result of an election promise in 
1982, reintroduced; now higher than it’s ever been before at 10 cents a litre. 
 
In fact the revenues to the Consolidated Fund, which is short on potash revenues, are now 
higher than they ever were prior to the PC government coming into power. 
 
We saw some tax experimentation, other tax experimentation take place. We saw the 
temporary introduction of a used car sales tax that was subsequently dropped. Mr. 
Speaker, these are all new things that happened, I believe, as the result of, in part at least, 
the management of potash by the PC government. 
 
We saw again in this budget this year the introduction of yet another new tax — the bingo 
lottery tax of 10 per cent. That again reflects the failing of the PC government, through its 
piratization initiative as well as management of the potash, to need more revenues, and 
therefore to require that the people shall pay those revenues when potash is not, at least in 
part. 
 
And I believe the issue is larger than that because of other piratization activities taken by 
this government. I don’t for a second, Mr. Speaker, say that these are totally dependent 
upon the impact of the management of potash by the PC government, but in part they are. 
In part they are, and therefore relevant to this debate. I guess it’s a . . . Well I would be 
out of order in saying that, Mr. Speaker, and I won’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to, as I said before, when you look at the way the potash 
corporation serves as a means to an end, to bring revenues to the Consolidated Fund, to 
keep taxes down and provide services, we’ve seen increases in taxes. But we’ve also seen 
the other one too. We’ve seen reductions in services. 
 
And so over the same period of time, since privatization generally, the management of 
the potash corporation of the PC administration has taken place, we’ve seen our 



government here in Saskatchewan tell us that there just isn’t the money there that we 
wish there was for health care. So there would have to be cut-backs and restrictions there. 
We’ve seen the significant cut-backs in the school-based children’s dental care program, 
which has been particularly difficult in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen as well, first of all, the withdrawal and the alteration of the prescription 
medicine plan here in Saskatchewan; we’ve seen growing waiting lists in hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker, and the list goes on. 
 
We’ve seen it in highways. People in Saskatchewan prior to this government coming to 
office once felt very proud of their highways. But since the piratization agenda and the 
PC management of the PCS, we’ve seen highways deteriorate, and partially as a result of 
the piratization of highways, the transferring to the private sector of highways work, 
contracting for highways work being done by out-of-province firms, and so on, instead of 
government employees, and the subsequent deterioration of highways. 
 
(2230) 
 
We’ve seen it as well, Mr. Speaker, in social assistance. And I would like to just take an 
extra moment to reflect on this, because so frequently what happens is that when 
governments face themselves in cash-strapped times, often, all too often what happens is 
that those who can least afford to have their security provided by government reduced are 
in fact all too often the first to feel the brunt of it, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately that 
has been the case under this administration with the poorest of the poor, those who live 
on social assistance. 
 
I won’t make a long case, Mr. Speaker, but I’d just like to relate three circumstances and 
the numbers in terms of financial security provided to the poorest of the poor in our 
society from a government that has said very clearly, we’re strapped for cash; these are 
tough times; we can’t afford to do it, and has made some conscious decisions about its 
management of natural resources and the policies that that has impacted on the revenues 
that they have got to work with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let us just look by way of comparison at social assistance rates for the 
poorest of the poor in our province, comparing 1981,the last year of the New Democrat 
government, with 1989, current administration of the PC government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1981 — some of these are really quite alarming, the impact of a 
government translating its responsibilities to the poorest of its poor citizens, and using as 
an excuse its reduced ability to pay because of policy decisions made related to natural 
resources including potash . . . In 1981, a single person classified as fully employable, 
Mr. Speaker, would have received $581 per month on social assistance. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the hon. member’s remarks quite 
closely, as a matter of fact from the time he began them, and it seems to me that the hon. 
member in reality is getting into a wide-ranging discussion of overall government policy. 



It’s difficult to justify that as being on the topic with Bill No. 20. I’m sure the hon. 
member must realize that, and I once more ask him that in his remarks he must become 
more relevant. A wide-ranging and total discussion of government policy is really not a 
discussion on Bill 20. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, according to rule 25(2): 
 

The Speaker . . . after having called the attention of the Assembly . . . to the 
conduct of a Member who persists in irrelevance . . . 
 

Now it’s an ambiguous kind of ruling, Mr. Speaker, but you have sat that member down 
on your own for three occasions now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have given the ruling, and I don’t believe that the hon. 
member should be questioning it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I respect that ruling and simply state, Mr. 
Speaker, that if the revenues available to the Consolidated Fund through the kind of 
management of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan under the PC administration 
were equivalent to what they were under New Democratic Party administration, we 
would not have a government either feeling forced or using as an excuse a reduction in 
financial resources available to it in the way it serves its most vulnerable citizens. I 
simply make that point. 
 
And that affects real people in real ways, and I understand why the government members 
do not want this to be understood. They would much prefer that nobody understood this. 
This government would much prefer that somehow people would conclude that there was 
this black shroud that just coincidentally fell over Saskatchewan in 1982 and all of a 
sudden the world became difficult and it had nothing to do with them. They’re just hard 
luck soldiers. It is all pure coincidence and it is just hard luck that just happened to 
happen the same time as they came to government. The government itself is victims of 
circumstances, they would suggest. And I say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have given the ruling, and I don’t believe that the hon. 
member should be questioning it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I respect that ruling and simply state, Mr. 
Speaker, that if the revenues available to the Consolidated Fund through the kind of 
management of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan under the PC administration 
were equivalent to what they were under New Democratic Party administration, we 
would not have a government either feeling forced or using as an excuse a reduction in 



financial resources available to it in the way it serves its most vulnerable citizens. I 
simply make that point. 
 
And that affects real people in real ways, and I understand why the government members 
do not want this to be understood. They would much prefer that nobody understood this. 
The government would much prefer that somehow people would conclude that there was 
this black shroud that just coincidentally fell over Saskatchewan in 1982 and all of a 
sudden the world became difficult and it had nothing to do with them. They’re just hard 
luck soldiers. It is all pure coincidence and it is just hard luck that just happened to 
happen the same time as they came to government. The government itself is victims of 
circumstances, they would suggest. And I say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d also like to ask the hon. members to allow the member 
from Moose Jaw North to continue his remarks without continuous or close to continuous 
interruption. It’s difficult to speak under those circumstances. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve already said that I wouldn’t be long with 
this, and if we hadn’t had these we’d be well on to something else again, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ll show you that in the amount of time it takes. 
 
I simply use by way of example again how these specific government decisions have 
impacted on people. If that is not a criteria that we use as a high priority in making policy 
decisions that are either determined or carried out as a result of decisions made in this 
Legislative Assembly, then I don’t know what is or what should be. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, let me relate the impact. In 1981, the end of a New Democratic 
government term which had its own policies on revenues from natural resources 
including potash, a single person classified as fully employable would have received 
$581 per month on social assistance. Not a whole lot of money, Mr. Speaker, but $581. In 
1989 this same person today receives — is it $581? Has it changed? It’s changed; it’s 
gone down, down to $375, Mr. Speaker, for a numerical loss of $206 per month. That’s 
the impact. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, that’s a numerical loss, and if you take into 
consideration inflation, which is a reality — it’s a reality for all of us and a particularly 
harsh reality for the poorest in our society — in today’s dollars that’s been a reduction of 
not $206 but a reduction of $367 a month in 1989 terms, Mr. Speaker. That’s part of the 
consequence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a single parent with two children in 1981 — I said I would use three 
examples and I will. Just three examples. In 1981 a single parent with two children would 
have received $916. In 1989 today the benefit, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I have been . . . I want to raise a point of order, and I want to 
outline that the member has dealt with the topic of his discussion in a consistent pattern 
all the way through. He has not changed or adjusted his pattern of discussion from the 



very first time that he was interrupted by you, sir, Mr. Speaker, and you have sat him 
down three times for not bringing the attention back to the point of the discussion of Bill 
No. 20 and that deals with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
He has not changed his pattern of speech nor in his speech has he ever resumed the 
thought that Bill No. 20 was a part of the discussion. And I want to bring that to your 
attention that you’ve ruled three times on that, and on your own you’ve done that, and the 
member from Regina South has asked you to bring this member to order twice. And 
that’s five times in the last half hour, and I’d like you to rule on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to this point of 
order because it’s the question of relevance which you’ve ruled, and we think on this side 
of the House very fairly throughout this whole debate, is being questioned by that 
particular member, particularly after the last point of order was raised. 
 
And now it appears to be becoming a habit by members on that side of the House to 
attempt to disrupt the flow of speech of the member who is making point after point after 
point in this debate linking the loss of revenue from the sell-off of our natural resources 
— in this case the potash corporation — to its effect in other areas of government policy, 
is particularly relevant, Mr. Speaker, particularly after the last time you asked the 
member to draw that relevance. He has done so. He has done so in a very, very forceful 
manner, I believe. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is a point upon which that the kind of constant interruption of 
speeches by raising vexatious points of order must be, I think, sir, commented upon by 
yourself. And given the conduct of both, by the member from Weyburn and the member 
from Regina South in consistently trying to interrupt the speech, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
those members are doing nothing more than harassing that member. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that that is an infringement upon this member’s right to speak in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — As I have indicated earlier, I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order, and I’ve given the hon. member quite a wide latitude in his remarks, as I’m sure all 
members in the House appreciate, and I have asked him to attempt to make his remarks 
more relevant to Bill 20 so not only the Chair but other members in the House can more 
clearly understand the points he is making. And I know he’s trying to do that, but I don’t 
believe he’s quite achieving it. 
 
So in that context I have to accept the point of order raised by the member, of course, as 
being well taken. And I once more urge the member from Moose Jaw North to have his 
comments much more relevant and clearly defined so that it’s more easily discernible 
than it has been. 
 



Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. While you were up here making your 
comments and making a ruling, the member from Weyburn was shouting from his seat, 
and I want to ask for a ruling on that. 
 
The Speaker: — Well the point of order raised by the hon. member, of course, is a point 
of order that’s well taken and applies to all members in the House. When the Speaker in 
on his feet, of course, no member should be interrupting and talking whether it’s directed 
at him or anybody else in the House. So on that basis, certainly the member’s point of 
order is well taken. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the ruling and I will do my best to directly relate 
these issues. I guess if the member from . . . if members do not understand the 
connection, then I’ve obviously not been as clear as I would like to be and will attempt to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I simply make the point, and ask the members to listen carefully. When you 
mismanage natural resources — potash, among others — potash, when you mismanage 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan you reduce the revenues to the Consolidated 
Fund of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. What’s the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —Under rule 18(1), I just want to read it for the benefit of the House, 
but it says: 
 

The Speaker shall preserve the order and decorum and shall decide questions of 
order. 
 

Under section 3 it says: 
 

When a Member is speaking, no Member shall interrupt him except to raise a 
point of order, nor pass between him and the Chair. 
 

The member from Weyburn is interrupting constantly the member for Moose Jaw North 
while he’s trying to give his speech. And I want to say to you that that interruption 
constantly is affecting the ability of the member to speak and I would ask you to rule on 
it. He has been hollering from his seat all night, and I would ask you to either remove him 
from the Assembly or get some order in this place. 
 
(2245) 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to say that this evening, by and large, there has been order. I 
think that’s clear. However, and I believe that the hon. members, when they raise points 
of order against the conduct of other members, should be careful that they themselves 



may at one time or another not be included in s similar point of order. However, having 
said that, the point of order is well taken certainly. 
 
The member from Weyburn has been talking and has not responded, and I ask the 
member from Weyburn to cease and desist from interrupting the speaker. And if he 
doesn’t, he will be called to order again. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I’ll take another run at this. Every time I get half way 
through my very short comment it’s interrupted. So it’s, Mr. Speaker, my sincere desire 
to avoid repetition in this debate. And so, Mr. Speaker, please forgive me in attempting to 
clarify for the member from Weyburn, who has shown a great deal of interest in wanting 
to understand with clarity what the point is that I’m making. I would hope that that also 
means that in spite of his having made his address earlier today, that he’s still open to 
considering the topic, and if he better understands it, may undergo a change of mind; it 
would certainly be welcomed by the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I won’t 
dwell on that point. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, if you mismanage the potash corporation, natural resources, 
reduce the income to the Consolidated Fund, taxes go up, services go down, people are 
affected. That’s the argument, Mr. Speaker, that’s the argument I make. The PCs have 
mismanaged the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Also, because of that, for the same 
reasons that it was difficult collecting royalties and taxes prior to the very formation of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, so have the non-PCS revenues to the 
Consolidated Fund been affected. As a result of that, at least in part, Mr. Speaker, 
people’s lives have been directly affected by a government which has used that as an 
excuse, as an excuse to say that we can no longer do what was once done. 
 
And I find it particularly insulting, Mr. Speaker, when the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan says that the poorest of the poor in our society, those who are least capable 
of determining their own fates and fortunes and futures as individuals, when those people 
are directly affected, I find that particularly insulting. 
 
And I make the point, and I said I bring only three examples, and I’ve already presented 
one — I won’t repeat it — of families living in poverty. Families who are receiving social 
assistance have been affected by cut-backs. The irony of this, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a 
government that says, these are tough times. We’ve got a government that says, there are 
people in our society who are dependant upon their government as their source of 
income. We have a program by legislation, social assistance, that exists for them. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, and then after having made policy decisions to reduce, the impact 
of which was to reduce the revenues, the government that says these are tough times for 
the government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I realize that it’s approximately 12 minutes to 11 on a 
Friday night and hon. members perhaps are a little edgy. However, I think if we co-
operate and adhere to the rules, and that includes the member for Regina Elphinstone and 



the member for Saltcoats, if we just adhere to the rules we will get through the evening. 
And I think that should be our goal, to get through the evening in a reasonable and 
responsible manner. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome that intervention. As I was saying, Mr. 
Speaker, I find it particularly insulting that that line of reasoning results in decisions 
being made to reduce the income of the poorest of the poor, who are most susceptible to 
the impact of tough times. When the government says, it’s tough times that causes guys 
to do this, it’s a circular argument that gets curiouser and curiouser, Mr. Speaker. And 
how has it affected the real people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Because you are poor in this province does not make you any less of a citizen. In some 
ways, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be fair to say that for those of use who come to these 
Chambers to represent the people of our province, we have a special obligation for those 
who are least capable of determining their own fates, fortunes, and futures, and rely on 
other systems and structures, one of which is government, to assist them in meeting their 
living needs. 
 
And that is how, I mean, we can get caught up in the rhetoric and the high-floating words, 
the big words, the notions, Mr. Speaker, that somehow high finances have nothing to do 
with people. When a government makes a policy decision on natural resources and 
mismanagement of natural resources, people will ultimately be affected by that to their 
betterment or to their detriment. 
 
This government has made decisions in the interest of its private sector natural resource 
friends that have caused the poorest of the poor, at least in part, to pay the price for that 
policy decision. That is, Mr. Speaker, in my mind, an unacceptable consequence that you 
will have a government composed of members who get a little antsy when they’ve got to 
sit and do the people’s business without their per diem, making policy decisions about 
natural resources that impact on the poorest of the poor. 
 
And how has it done that? It’s done that in very significant kinds of ways that cannot be 
justified. We have to, Mr. Speaker, when we come to this Assembly, look at these 
decisions, and say, not what’s the decision, and then, by gosh, how did that affect people? 
We have to come here saying, what do we want for the people of Saskatchewan, and how 
do we achieve that? What are the mechanisms? What are the means to the end? 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is a means to an end. It is a means to provide 
income so that we can improve the quality of life for our citizens. That’s what it’s all 
about. It was born because of that vision and the belief that the natural resources belong 
for the people, to the people, and should be used for the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So we’ve seen different decisions made . . . 
 



An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Two members opposite, the member from Estevan and the member 
from Weyburn, have been yelling from their seats and the member is trying to complete 
his speech. It’s 10 to 11; if we’d be quiet we could finish up. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s point of order is not well taken. The member 
. . . Order, order. The member from Regina Elphinstone, there were no hon. members 
yelling in this House. There were no hon. members yelling. There were one or two 
comments, but to term it as yelling is incorrect and therefore the point of order is not well 
taken; however, hon. members should not interfere with the speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue reducing the volume. I realize 
that I was getting louder as the noise was emanating from the other side, some of which 
came from the close proximity of the Premier’s chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a single parent with two children in 1981 would have received $916, in 
1981. Today this family receives $900, an actual reduction again . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, on rule 25(2). I accept that the hon. 
member has the right to make the case in this potash debate about revenues that would 
come from potash to go to various spending programs, Mr. Speaker — health, education, 
social service, whatever. But the rules clearly state that you cannot get into it, and as you 
yourself have said from that chair, you cannot get into the details of those areas, for 
example, listing the dollars available to single parents and families under welfare 
payments, the same kind of thing he’s doing now. Clearly that is out of order, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s one thing to have wide-ranging debate. I accept the thesis, but I do not 
accept him getting into it into that detail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The debate that we’re having on Bill No. 20, 
the Act to reorganize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
historic debate. It’s a very complex, overriding issue in the entire Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve got the government trying to sell off one of the most important resources and 
important Crown corporations in the entire province, and the member from Moose Jaw . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member, it seems to me, is debating the point of 
order. If he wishes to speak to it briefly, I certainly give him that opportunity. 
 



Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been following the member from Moose Jaw North’s 
comments, and I find that they are involved with explaining an overriding issue as they 
relate to the Bill No. 20 and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And I would 
maintain, Mr. Speaker, and put forward that the member’s comments are very relevant to 
the debate, that they are pertinent to the details that are necessary to be exposed to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I would ask you to consider his remarks in order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to make a brief comment. I’ve said before, and I say again, 
that these points of order, particularly the ones coming from the member for Weyburn, 
are becoming vexatious. They are done with the effect, if not with the intention, of 
interfering with the member who’s speaking and making it difficult to speak. I’ll say as 
well that I think it ill behoves the member from Weyburn to raise the point of order. He 
spoke for 45 minutes without ever setting foot on the subject under . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I don’t believe that’s a new point of order, but I will 
recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — With regard to the member from Weyburn calling the point of order 
and not calling them properly, if you check the records of Hansard, you will see that the 
Chair agreed with those points of order on 90 per cent of the occasions. I think that 
they’re totally intact. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll give her the opportunity as well. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my opinion that these points of order, and the manner in 
which they are being made, is a harassment and a denial of the democratic rights of the 
member from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And that is the tactic of the PC government and in particular the member 
from Weyburn, who appears to be the spokesperson tonight for the government. Their 
intent is to harass the member from Moose Jaw North and to deny his right to speak to his 
constituents about why he feels he cannot support this piece of legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — I will now recognize the member for Melfort, but he’ll be the last 
individual I’ll recognize on this point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, as Deputy House Leader I want you to know, and I 
will give you the following commitment, and I will give the commitment to the 
opposition as well, that members on this side of the House will no longer raise issues 
under Rule 25(2), if and providing the opposition will not be irrelevant and repetitive and 
redundant. 
 
(2300) 
 



The Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. members’ points of order, and their various 
responses. It’s been a long night. The hon. member perhaps has been trying to be more 
relevant. I think the point made that a great detail is out of order, I think that’s a point 
well taken. I’d like to bring that to the attention of the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, in light of the time, there is much more I’d like to 
say and I will venture to be within the rules, as you’ve outlined them and I respect that, 
and I will therefore move adjournment of debate. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in that case I’ll call it 11 o’clock . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 11 o’clock, the House stands adjourned until Monday at 
8 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11 p.m. 


