


















































April 13, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 13, 1989 
 

773 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
The Acting Clerk: — Mr. Petersen, chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills, presents the fifth report 
of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

The committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for private Bills and finds that the provisions of 
rules 56, 57, and 60 have been fully complied with. The 
petition is for the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of 
Alberta, of the city of Edmonton, in the province of 
Alberta. 
 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Prince Albert: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, a group of students from my home town, Cudworth. 
They are grade 8 students; there are 19 of them. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Jim Bridgeman. I hope they will 
enjoy the question period. I will be meeting with them at 3 
o’clock for pictures and refreshments. I ask the members of this 
Assembly to please help welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member from 
Humboldt, I’m very pleased to introduce to you 27 students 
who are here with their teacher, Curtis McCoshen, in your east 
gallery. They are grade 8 students from Bruno School in Bruno, 
Saskatchewan, and they will be meeting with Mr. Koskie, or 
Mr. Upshall, or one of us, at 3 p.m. for pictures. Welcome to the 
students from Bruno. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you a 
group of people who are here today from the Pioneer Village 
here in Regina, in the Rosemont constituency. I want to 
introduce them on behalf of my colleague from Rosemont. And 
I know that all people will want to join with me in welcoming 
them here today, pioneers who helped build this province are 
here to watch question period. And we’ll be meeting afterwards 
for refreshments and a discussion on the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Second Look at Environmental Studies on Rafferty Dam 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, and it has to do with recent 
news reports. The federal Minister of the Environment, Mr. 
Lucien Bouchard says, according to newspaper reports, that the 
federal government will: “ . . . take a second look at 
environmental studies done in connection with Rafferty.” 
 
On April 11, just a few days ago, the Manitoba government 
wrote to Mr. Bouchard saying that Ottawa should adhere to the 
requirements of the recent judgement and that no licence be 
reissued until the full study is completed, (paraphrasing the 
words of the letter). 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: is it the position of 
your government that you should follow the lead of Mr. 
Bouchard in Ottawa and the Manitoba government, and namely 
to fully comply with today’s environmental laws, federally and 
provincially, as interpreted by the courts of the land; or is it 
your government’s official policy that somehow Mr. Bouchard, 
federally, has so-called ministerial discretion to ignore the laws 
and the judgements of the courts of the land? Which is your 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. I have answered that question several times to the 
media today, and I will say very quickly and very succinctly 
that we fully intend to live by the letter of the federal law as 
well as provincial law and international law. And we have to 
date been operating under federal licence, and if they decide 
that it is the appropriate thing to do to further study the water 
project or the power project, I’ll say to the hon. member, we 
will comply with the law. I don’t necessarily agree with the 
decision that was made with respect to this project, but I fully 
respect the federal jurisdiction. 
 
I can finally say, Mr. Speaker, that we had concurrence by the 
federal government in Canada, the United States federal 
government, the Government of North Dakota, and the 
Government of Manitoba, as well as our own, plus our own 
environmental impact study under the watchful eye of the 
federal government, and have been operating under that 
agreement for the last few years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we will respond and honour the law and certainly respect the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, and am quite confident that this is a 
very good project for the people of Saskatchewan and the 
people of the United States and the people of Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to 
the Premier. In light of his most recent answer to me, with 
respect to this first question, can we assume accordingly that 
your government has abandoned the notion of an appeal of the 
federal decision? 
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

774 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we haven’t abandoned any 
of the alternatives that would be before us. 
 
As I said at the outset, I don’t happen to agree with the decision 
that was made. I respect the fact that the decision was made, but 
I don’t agree with it. And if there are alternatives that would 
include appeal or any other legal things, we’re certainly going 
to review them because it’s so important to the people of this 
province to have water and to manage water. So we’re going to 
review all the possibilities, and if it includes appeal, certainly I 
wouldn’t be afraid to appeal. We’ll see what is necessary. 
 
Put it this way — we would like to co-operate to the fullest 
extent so that we can manage this water and this project and 
have it financed in part by the United States so that we can all 
have water year round. And under the present conditions, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s just impossible because, although we’re entitled to 
50 per cent of it by international law, 98 per cent of it leaves the 
province, and to date we haven’t been able to keep it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier 
on this subject matter, and perhaps the Premier could enlighten 
myself and the House when I give a very brief preamble to this 
question. 
 
Mr. Premier, on or about October 30, 1986, in a memorandum 
from your own Department of Justice to one George Hood of 
the Souris Basin Development Authority, the memorandum, 
among other things describing the legal aspects, both federally 
and provincially on this matter, says among other things and in 
part the following: 
 

. . . define federal projects as those initiated by federal 
departments and agencies, those for which federal funds 
are solicited, and those involving federal property. 
 

Underline the word “involving federal property.” 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, obviously your government should have 
known and does know that about 4,100 acres of federal Crown 
land would have been affected by this project. Ottawa knows 
that, Manitoba knows that, everybody knows that. And the 
Justice department flagged that legal opinion to you and your 
officials, sir, two years ago, almost three years ago now. In the 
light of all those facts, how in the world is it that you explain 
the failure of the federal government to carry out, and the 
failure of your government apparently to recognize federal 
jurisdiction in this area, resulting in this unfortunate result 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps one of the more 
helpful ways to respond to this is that one of the federal 
employees, Mr. Halliday, was interviewed today by Dennis 
Gruending and the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), 
and Dennis said to him after Mr. Halliday went on and on — I 
can give you a copy of  

the . . . what he said — and Mr. Halliday said: 
 

Well, we will probably just review all the literature in 
Saskatchewan and in the United States studies which have 
been done, and then we may just decide — and it will be 
the minister’s discretion — that it’s fine. 
 

And so Dennis Gruending came back and said: 
 

Let me understand this then. You may decide after doing 
what is mainly a study of existing literature that there’s 
going to be no significant effect, and you may recommend 
then to the minister that the project simply go ahead. 
 

And Mr. Halliday said: 
 

That could be the decision. 
 

Now what it means, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government 
looked at this and said: we don’t have money in it. And the 
4,000 acres in property, in terms of the magnitude of this is, as 
you know, in any common sense is almost incidental. And it’s 
international, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’ve joined with 
the United States and with the Army Corps of Engineers and 
two governors of the state of North Dakota — one Republican 
and one Democrat. 
 
People on both sides have said this would be good for them and 
good for us. And if we have to turn the books, if you will, Mr. 
Speaker, upside down and examine them another way so that 
we can do it federally, so that it’s examined, we’re prepared to 
do that. But what the federal bureaucrat said is that we just may 
decide that the federal review of this has been done completely 
and the project can go ahead, and that would be a ministerial 
decision. It was a ministerial decision to give us the licence, Mr. 
Speaker, because under his judgement no more research needed 
to be done. And I agree with that today, and I agreed with that 
then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
The very same Robert Halliday that the Premier quotes, also the 
director of Environment Canada is quoted as saying that the 
wildlife federation was right to take the court action. And he 
also said that his department did not act in a manner which is 
consistent with the federal guide-lines. In fact, forget about Mr. 
Robert Halliday; Mr. Justice Bud Cullen of the Federal Court of 
Canada said that the federal government did not act in 
accordance with the guide-lines and the laws, notwithstanding 
the fact that there are 4,100 acres involved. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, my question to you is this. There seems to 
be rather an inexplicable omission, 4,100 federal acres of 
Crown land not being considered, an inexplicable omission, 
which the justice described as being negligent — a very harsh 
word indeed. My question to you, sir, is this: how is it you 
explain, or do you have an explanation, for Ottawa’s acceptance 
of the issuance of a licence on a project of this cost and this 
magnitude, as  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

775 
 

you’ve described it, sir, in the bare face of the facts that 4,100 
acres of federal land was involved; what could be the possible 
explanation for this failure of the federal government to conduct 
what needs to be done, namely a full, complete environmental 
study? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what words the 
courts use, but I’ll use the word that most people would like to 
think that decisions are made on matters like this, having to do 
with the environment and people and so forth, that they use 
common sense. If in fact there was a quarter section — let me 
finish, Mr. Speaker — if in fact there was a quarter section of 
land or a part of a piece of land or a road allowance that was 
under federal jurisdiction, would you expect a double study of 
the complete environment of an international waterway, Mr. 
Speaker? And I don’t expect so. Now you know the magnitude 
of acres involved in this project and in that river, and if you’re 
saying something like a section and a half or two sections of 
land would make that kind of difference, you know that’s not 
very fair. 
 
With respect to the wildlife federation, the wildlife has said 
over and over again that they’re not against these projects. They 
wanted to test the process . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
that’s exactly what they said. Mr. Speaker, I have — and I can’t 
wave it around, so I won’t — I have before me an ad by the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation on the Rafferty and Alameda 
dams, and they say at the bottom of it: we do not oppose the 
construction of the Rafferty-Alameda dams. Now if the wildlife 
people don’t oppose them, Mr. Speaker, and they said they 
wanted to test the process in law, all we’re saying is, that if the 
hon. member says “the process,” well fair enough. 
 
We are talking about thousands of people’s lives, about 
Saskatchewan receiving federal money from all across Canada 
because of drought. We’re concerned about rural population. 
And if they are testing the process because of a few acres of 
land in the grand scheme of international waterways, then 
common sense would say, common sense would say there’s 
been enough study over the last 50 years to let Saskatchewan 
people manage their resources, Mr. Speaker. And I believe in 
the original decision, and I would encourage them to make that 
kind of decision again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I agree that common sense says a lot, and it would be nice if he 
and his government followed common sense from time to time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m not talking some federal roadway; I’m 
talking about sufficient lands that your own officials and your 
own Department of Justice said posed a serious legal problem 
in this regard. You people were forewarned to that effect. You 
were forewarned and yet the federal government went ahead 
and issued the licence, notwithstanding the requirements and 
notwithstanding Mr. Justice Cullen’s decision. That is the case. 
 

You knew all about it. There’s an expenditure that’s out there. 
Who bears the responsibility for this fiasco and this mess? I say 
to you, Mr. Premier, that your government, fully aware of what 
the circumstances and the law and the requirements are, pushed 
this deal indecently in your own ridings. The responsibility falls 
on the shoulder of the Deputy Premier and George Hill, and 
they ought to resign for this fiasco. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in my humble opinion 
we are going to see these water projects in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. We are going to see them because common sense will 
prevail. 
 
The hon. member knows that on 4,000 acres of land, the net 
cost to the federal government is zero because of mitigation. It 
doesn’t cost . . . and those 4,000 acres mean nothing in terms of 
the international waterway, so he is as bad as anybody I’ve seen 
picking this thing apart to stop it. 
 
Now look, we don’t know . . . we know, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have been building a lot of projects. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 
that the opposition is against public participation, and they’re 
against water projects and power projects and upgraders and 
paper mills and meat-packing and diversification and 
processing and manufacturing, a uranium — all the things, like 
they were against every one of them. Now I know they’re in 
opposition and they have to be against things, Mr. Speaker, but 
when it comes to water for the people of Saskatchewan, if the 
Leader of the Opposition thinks he’s on the side of right and 
common sense to deny my people or any people in the province 
of Saskatchewan water, he’ll be sitting in an opposition till his 
hair’s a lot greyer than it is today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. I’m not against what the Premier says. What I am for 
is this government and every government following the laws of 
the land. That’s what I’m for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to say to you, Mr. Premier, that 
it was your government and your Deputy Premier who 
committed the money. It was your government and your 
Minister of Environment who pushed ahead the environmental 
impact study regardless of what the people of Saskatchewan 
thought it being insufficient. 
 
It was your government that foisted it upon the federal 
government, as well as part of a deal for the Grasslands 
(National) Park, according to Miss Elizabeth May. It was not us 
who launched the lawsuit, it was the Canadian Wildlife 
Federation. And it wasn’t us who stopped it, it was the judge of 
Canada who said that what you did was unlawful and illegal. 
The responsibility is yours. You owe that responsibility to all of 
those people in Estevan and throughout all of Saskatchewan, 
and why don’t you admit you made a mistake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure some day  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

776 
 

we’ll get the chance to test whether that statement was right or 
whether we’re right, Mr. Speaker. And I’m fully confident most 
of the people in Saskatchewan know who had common sense in 
trying to manage water. 
 
Let me just say to the hon. member, with respect to the law — 
two points, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the law. I believe when 
the hon. member was deputy premier and attorney general, he 
brought in the only retroactive expropriation law in the history 
of Canada because he had to have the Cornwall Centre, Mr. 
Speaker. The only one to bring retroactivity and broke his own 
law. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the PCBs. He can laugh 
about the law in PCBs, Mr. Speaker. It was that government 
that put 10 feet of cement over the PCB spills in the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, and covered it up for two years. He better 
be laughing today, Mr. Speaker, because the people of 
Saskatchewan won’t let him laugh when they get a chance to 
choose the next time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Share Offering for PCS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier, and it deals with his recent trip to Asia where he went 
about asking the governments of those countries to, in fact, buy 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Upon returning to the 
province, he has since then been doing damage control and 
saying that he’s going to keep the share offering in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder, in light of that fact, can you square that with a 
statement made in The Wall Street Journal by your previous 
cabinet minister, Paul Schoenhals, and I want to quote: 
 

Paul Schoenhals, the potash company chairman, admits the 
government won’t be able to sell 800 million to 400 
million worth of shares anticipated in the initial offering in 
Saskatchewan alone. It’s too big to do just locally. 
 

I wonder in light of that, Mr. Premier, can you tell us what 
portion of the shares will be sold outside of Saskatchewan when 
the Bill is introduced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will be tabled 
tomorrow; it will be introduced tomorrow — first reading — so 
you’ll be able to see it in detail. What I’ll say to the hon. 
member is that we plan to diversify this province and diversify 
the potash industry and the potash corporation to create jobs 
and to broaden our economy, Mr. Speaker. And yes, we will 
offer opportunities for people outside the province of 
Saskatchewan to invest and you’re going to see a very tiny 
amount that any one individual or corporation can have, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ll add to the hon. member, if you talk about 
firms that are major consumers of ours, that are the potash 
buyers — and I’m sure when you were in opposition you must 
have met with them when they came into the province of 
Saskatchewan from Japan or from Korea or from India or from 
China, Mr. Speaker. These are private firms that buy  

potash and distribute it to the farmers in those particular 
countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me point out to the hon. member, if our major 
customers can help diversify the Saskatchewan economy 
because they have a small investment here, it is similar to the 
fact that if you and your family were on holidays and you’re 
going to come downtown at the end of a long day, Mr. Speaker, 
and you’re going to fill up your tank with gas, Mr. Speaker, and 
you happen to have a co-op membership — just assume you 
had a co-op membership — guess where you’re going to buy 
your gasoline, Mr. Speaker? You’re going to stop at the local 
co-op and fill it up because you’re going to look after yourself. 
The same thing applies to potash, Mr. Speaker. And they know 
it and the people of Saskatchewan know it. Diversification 
helps build Saskatchewan rural and urban. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the students here probably 
thought they were going to miss story time this afternoon, but I 
can tell you that they’re not going to miss it at all. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Premier, that . . . I have a story here 
from The Financial Post, and I want to quote to you from that 
story. It says: 
 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the government, 
also have chosen the leading underwriters. Sources say the 
finalist to handle what will be a $400 million-plus issue are 
Wood Gundy, Merrill Lynch and Credit Suisse. The 
inclusion of the Swiss firm indicates the government is 
prepared to have a wide international distribution. 
 

Can you tell me how much of the share offering in fact will be 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan? Can you answer that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation will be 
introduced tomorrow and he’ll be able to read it in detail. I will 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the lion’s share of it will be in 
Saskatchewan, and Canadians indeed will be offered the 
opportunity, as will people world-wide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you can find out how much for the people of Canada and 
the people of Saskatchewan, tomorrow. And you can debate it 
for as long as you like, Mr. Speaker. We will be diversifying the 
economy, and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, as we said before the 
session opened, we’ll hear howling and screaming against 
diversification, but we plan to diversify Saskatchewan and 
make it stronger, despite the fact that many people over there 
wouldn’t like to see it happen. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — That same article in The Financial Post, Mr. 
Premier, says that the shares will be offered at a price designed 
to reward investors very quickly. And I think that you’d agree 
that the most common interpretation of that idea is that the 
shares would be undervalued so that the purchasers will be able 
to unload them fast for a quick profit, and that’s right out of 
Oliver Letwin’s manual on  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

777 
 

how to sell off Crown assets. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, is: what kind of controls will you 
have in place to ensure that the small investor in Saskatchewan, 
if he or she is to sell those shares to get the quick profit, that 
those shares are made to Saskatchewan investors only and that 
control of the corporation will stay in Saskatchewan? Or will 
we have here another situation like Saskoil, where very quickly 
control of the company passes outside of the province of 
Saskatchewan altogether? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I can answer it by 
referring to the NDP’s document in their board of directors 
meeting in 1982 when they talked about their share offerings. 
And it says, Mr. Speaker, this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well you were there, sir, and you passed it, and you 
acknowledged. And he said and he agreed that the shares would 
be listed on the Canadian stock exchanges to provide the 
required liquidity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he goes back . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Of what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, and he says what. Let me go back 
and go through it. It goes: potash, aspen, heavy oil, ammonia, 
iron ore reduction, uranium mines, and natural gas, Mr. 
Speaker. Come on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well let them look at their faces. I want 
the media and the children and the seniors to look at their faces. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll go back to it. They agreed it would be a good 
idea that the shares would be listed on Canadian stock 
exchanges — for what reason? To provide the required 
liquidity, Mr. Speaker. Now what does that mean? What does 
that mean? Mr. Speaker, that means that they had already 
decided to sell shares in potash and uranium. Imagine, from the 
minister from the great north-west. They were going to sell 
shares in uranium. I don’t know if they told you or not, but they 
were . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s what that means, Mr. Speaker. 
Now they’re going to close them up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to remind the hon. member that I 
believe we’re getting into debate, and I don’t think it’s in the 
best interests of the House that we do so. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I take it from that outburst, Mr. Speaker, that 
there will be nothing at all in the legislation to ensure that 
subsequent purchasers are from Saskatchewan at all. I take it 
that question won’t be addressed. 
 
Let me come at the subject from a slightly different perspective, 
Mr. Premier. One easy way to accomplish the same thing is to 
undervalue the value of the corporation, something that has 
already been suggested  

in the media and elsewhere. And this claim of undervaluation is 
being made by Dr. John Douglas of Alabama who is a man that 
your government has relied upon in the past, glowingly referred 
to . . . your . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Dr. John Douglas is your expert on potash, 
and he said this, as quoted in the Leader-Post for March 14, 
1989: 
 

Contacted at his consulting business in Florence, Ala., 
Douglas described the government’s estimated value of 
PCS as “way undervalued.” 
 
“One billion is not half of its value, said Douglas.” And 
then quoting further, “It’s way to hell and gone too low.” 
 

Now, Mr. Premier, he says that you’re undervaluing PCS 
(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) at least a billion dollars 
in order to make a quick sale. And I put it to you, Mr. Premier, 
that this is precisely the case. Isn’t that where your privatization 
mania is taking this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we could only hope, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We can only 
hope, for the sake of the children in the audience and the 
children and the young people across the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the men and women in towns 
and villages, that indeed this corporation is that successful and 
worth that amount because the people of Saskatchewan, by the 
hundreds of thousands, will not only have a say, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ll have the opportunity for a share in this company which 
will be a national and international company with its 
headquarters here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you’re right and if the man that you mentioned is right, 
that this company will grow and expand, then every one of 
these young people will have an opportunity that they’ve never 
had before, Mr. Speaker, to take advantage of diversification 
and growth and building and processing and manufacturing that 
they’ve never had in the history of this province before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Victims of Crime. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

778 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a number 
of my colleagues have spoken already on this Bill, and we are 
going to have many other points that we want to make, so I join 
this debate as one of the 26 speakers on this side of the House 
to speak regarding Bill 1, which is the Act to establish the 
Public Participation Program. 
 
This program has been going on already for a year, Mr. 
Speaker, but we now have the opportunity to discuss it here in 
the House. And while we all represent, on this side of the 
House, our party positions and many points will be similar, we 
also have an opportunity when we speak like this in the House 
to speak a bit personally and speak in terms of who we 
represent in the legislature, our constituents, and also from our 
own personal experiences. And that’s what I want to do in part 
when I speak on this Bill today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening to what’s been said about 
public participation, or privatization as it’s more rightly called, 
and some things that have been said lately, and I think we’ve 
had examples of it right here in question period today, have 
alarmed me, perhaps most deeply, and that is what I see as the 
sell-out of this government; the sell-out to out-of-province and 
out-of-country investors. That to me is a very serious and very 
destructive move on the part of the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And I know, Mr. Speaker, that it hurts very 
much the seniors in this province and, as the critic for seniors, 
I’ve made this point before and I will make it again, that they 
are watching what they have worked so hard and so long to 
build up in this province, being bulldozed to bits by the 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker; being jackhammered into 
oblivion because the government opposite has no respect for the 
history of this province, for the programs and the services that 
had been built up over the years. And because they have no 
respect for the history of this province, they are jackhammering 
into oblivion the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And it hurts older people; it hurts people like 
myself who’ve been living and working in this province for 
some time to see that happen, because we were hoping to leave 
more to our children than what this government will leave us 
with. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said that we speak personally, and I speak 
personally as someone who come to Saskatchewan in 1972 to 
join the public library in Saskatoon, and to  

work as a public servant for many years in Saskatchewan before 
having the honour to be elected to represent that downtown area 
in the legislature. 
 
My mother comes from a farming background in Manitoba and 
is very much a prairie woman. My father was American and 
came from North Carolina, and I’ve been brought up partly in 
the United States and partly in Canada. I have my sister living 
in Florida and I have connections, both relatives and friends, 
with the Americans. 
 
I have no criticism at all of American people as such. They are 
just as fine and good as any working people in Canada or any 
other part of the world. But I have a real interest and knowledge 
about the way the Americans do business, the Yankee trader 
syndrome. The fact that they come from an economy that 
believes very much in this so-called free enterprise which turns 
out not to be free; it turns out to be a way of increasing wealth 
among a few people and making other people impoverished. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, because I have that background and that 
understanding and that experience, I want to discuss in detail 
what the minister of privatization said when he was supporting 
this Bill in the House when he introduced it in second reading 
— some things that I found quite startling and quite 
unacceptable. 
 
I said I came to Saskatchewan in 1972. I came here with the 
New Democratic government in power, and I really appreciated 
as a public servant in the public library, and as a single parent, 
mother, living on a fairly good income, considering other 
people’s incomes, but still having to struggle to afford housing 
and food and clothing for myself and my daughter; I really 
appreciated what the New Democrat government had put in 
place in this province, valued it very much, and watched in the 
1970s as the government developed the ownership of resources 
and services here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I was 
very supportive of those moves, Mr. Speaker. And because I 
know how much that means to myself and to the people of this 
province, I was really upset to hear the minister of privatization, 
the minister from Indian Head-Wolseley, talk about, first of all, 
the great expertise in this province, the fine Saskatchewan 
people that live and work here, the wonderful things that people 
have been able to do in this province, and how the privatization 
program that he was bringing in was going to be just another 
wonderful development along the way. 
 
And what did he use as the very first example, Mr. Speaker, of 
the value of Saskatchewan expertise and ability to do things on 
their own? The very first thing that he used as an example, Mr. 
Speaker, was selling out the Prince Albert pulp mill to the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington. That was 
the first example he used. No faith in the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to run that pulp mill and to survive 
through bad times and good times in the economy and to come 
out with a good investment for the people of Saskatchewan with 
a company that would work for the people of Saskatchewan. Oh 
no, his example of what was good for the people of 
Saskatchewan was to give that thing away — give that pulp mill 
away to Tacoma, Washington, to an American multinational. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

779 
 

Another example that he gave, Mr. Speaker, when he talked 
about contracting out under this privatization program, as an 
example of the benefits of privatization, would be that 
Saskatchewan people could get contracts in Saskatchewan to 
mow the ditches in the highways. And I heard him say that, Mr. 
Speaker, and I must admit that I was really quite shocked to 
hear that example of what could be for the people of 
Saskatchewan once this government had given away their pulp 
mill to an American multinational. They can be left digging the 
ditches of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier has spoken at a PC gathering in Moose Jaw and 
told his followers there, the people that are willing to sell out 
this province, that what he wants for this province is cheap land 
and cheap labour, and that’s what he’s going to offer the 
investors, Mr. Speaker. And I find the reality of those 
statements absolutely horrifying, Mr. Speaker, for what the 
people in this province have built up over the years and what 
they’re losing now. 
 
And it struck me when I was questioning the minister of 
privatization in question period the other day about what was 
going to happen to Carling O’Keefe brewing industry in 
Saskatoon Centre. There’s a large factory there, as you all 
know, and it’s going out of business, it’s going to fold, and 
Carling O’Keefe has merged with Molson’s, now become 
Molson’s Australian — another investment from out of the 
country — and that the brewery workers are being put out of 
work; they’re losing their good paying jobs. They will no longer 
be able to afford the mortgages on their homes, and they won’t 
get a good wage. They’re looking at Mickey Mouse retraining 
programs that will put them into jobs at minimum wage, if there 
are any jobs at all, and there have been no job creation 
programs in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what the minister of privatization told me when I 
questioned him about those brewery workers and what the plans 
were in terms of ensuring them jobs when this brewery goes 
under, what he said to me was that they’re looking at ways of 
turning, perhaps, Carling O’Keefe into a distribution centre for 
American beer, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they have in mind for 
the brewery workers of Saskatchewan — to distribute American 
beer, and yes, he admitted that they would do that on lower 
salaries, which ties in with the cheap labour. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it hit me the other day when I was thinking 
about what’s going on in the province. It suddenly hit me with 
an understanding at the gut level, which sometimes happens to 
us, I think. We hear things intellectually and we learn them on 
one level, and all of a sudden something happens and it hits 
home with a big punch, right? Well, that’s what’s happened to 
me with this privatization issue, and it was all tied in of course 
with the debate on free trade, and I was very much opposed to 
free trade and worked hard in the federal election to defeat the 
minister in Clark’s Crossing, the member for Clark’s Crossing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I must say I was so delighted, and so were so 
many of the older people in Saskatoon Centre  

constituency who came out to vote in that election, because that 
was an election against free trade and, by gosh, we won big in 
Clark’s Crossing, which is part of Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Because the older people know what I’m talking 
about, Mr. Speaker. They have worked through the decades in 
this province. It’s a province with a harsh climate and a harsh 
economy. We’ve had to work hard in this province and have 
done so, and the free trade deal was also part of the sell-out to 
the Americans and the give-away of our resources in Canada to 
the Americans. And I’ve quoted some other examples here that 
the minister of privatization, who’s supporting this Bill, has 
brought forward in the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I say about the kind of gut level 
understanding that I’ve had just lately. I suddenly realized what 
people mean when they talk about the comprador class in 
society. Now that’s a term that’s foreign to us. It’s a term that 
we’re not used to using. It’s a term that comes from Chinese 
history. It was originally a term used for Chinese agents who 
were paid by foreign investors to help control the Chinese 
employees in foreign firms, and also to help sell out Chinese 
resources to foreign investors in the centuries earlier, in the 19th 
century. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that term applies to the government opposite. 
I suddenly realized, Mr. Speaker, when I heard the minister of 
privatization speaking about the fact that we had to sell our pulp 
mill to the Americans in order to run it properly, that we have to 
have our brewery workers distributing American beer, that 
we’re all gung-ho on free trade, that we’re gung-ho on selling 
our resources in the potash corporation to another country, to a 
foreign investor, the government opposite is saying all these 
things. 
 
The government opposite has put an American in charge of the 
potash corporation for some time now to help us . . . to help 
them sell out the potash corporation. That is, Mr. Speaker, the 
comprador class in action. We are seeing it right here in front of 
our very eyes. The comprador class. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Ms. Smart: — I looked it up in the Webster’s Third 
International Dictionary before I came in here to speak. Mr. 
Speaker, a comprador is one held to be an agent of foreign 
domination or exploitation, and I can’t think of a better term for 
this government than to say they’re compradors. 
 
This is foreign domination and exploitation, from out of 
province and from out of country, coming into Saskatchewan, 
and we’re going to be left as cheap labour mowing the ditches 
and distributing American beer. Nothing left, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing left for the people of Saskatchewan from their long 
heritage and their long struggle. 
 
And the government opposite should be deeply ashamed  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

780 
 

of itself for doing this to the people of Saskatchewan. And the 
people of Saskatchewan should rise up. And I say to the people 
of Saskatchewan, particularly the seniors: get organized and 
fight back on this. Get organized and fight back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — You’ve done it before in Saskatchewan; you’ve 
lived through the Dirty Thirties. You know this is a burden that 
you have to pick up as you’re older, to do it again. 
 
But if the province needed the senior citizens any time in its 
history, it sure needs them now. If it needs the working people 
at any time in its history, it sure needs them now. It sure needs 
the younger people who are leaving this province in great 
droves now, Mr. Speaker. It needs them here right now to fight 
for what this province has been in the past and what it can be in 
the future, Mr. Speaker. It can be a whole lot better than what 
we’ve got now with this government, let me tell you, Mr. 
Speaker. I feel very strongly about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the potash corporation Bill comes through tomorrow, it’s 
going to be absolutely devastating. That was a natural resource 
that belongs here in this province, belongs to the people. But the 
Government of Saskatchewan is badly confused in trying to sell 
off the potash corporation, and I want to make some points 
about this in particular. 
 
The Premier first started offering to sell our potash resources to 
just about every country in the Far East, when he had that trip to 
the Far East, and every time he spoke during his trip his plans 
for the potash corporation changed. He started off by telling 
Saskatchewan people he would be willing to sell part, or all, of 
PCS to foreign countries in order to pay down the corporation’s 
$800 million debt. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the first problem is that the Premier of this 
province misrepresented the truth in terms of that debt of the 
potash corporation. It’s just a bit over a hundred million, and 
the corporation is expected to make a profit of more than $50 
million for 1988, Mr. Speaker. And so it’s a very good resource 
to stay here in the province and not to be sold off or given away 
to a foreign company. 
 
And the Premier didn’t explain how selling controlling interest 
in PCS to the Chinese or the Indian governments would mean 
public participation for Saskatchewan people. He’s changed his 
story. He said he had no intention of selling off more than 15 
per cent of the corporation to foreign nations, but shortly after 
that he offered 20 per cent of the corporation to the Indian 
government alone, and apparently offered to subsidize the sale 
with some sort of 10-year holiday on their investment. Now if 
that isn’t comprador, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what is. 
 
Upon his return to Saskatchewan, the Premier tells 
Saskatchewan people that there has been no decision on how 
much of PCS will be sold. Then he tells us that 20 to 25 per 
cent could be sold to foreign investors, 40 per cent  

sold in Canadian share offerings, and 50 per cent retained by 
the Government of Saskatchewan. And those numbers have 
totalled 110 or 115 per cent, which only shows that the Premier 
isn’t thinking any more clearly at home than he did while he 
was on his travels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that Saskatchewan people will not support 
the sale of their potash resources to foreign interests. And I 
have the feeling, as I’ve been talking to people around the 
province, that this move is becoming more and more unpopular 
as people see more and more clearly what the government is up 
to. 
 
It’s very much like the free trade deal, Mr. Speaker. It started 
out with a lot of hype about what it was going to do and how 
wonderful it was going to be, and as people looked underneath 
and began to realize what it really meant, the people in 
Saskatchewan fought back, and they fought back strongly. They 
fought back to the point where we had 10 MPs from this 
province go to Ottawa. They went to Ottawa on the vote against 
the free trade deal, one of the most important votes in the 
history of this country, and I’m very proud that the people of 
Saskatchewan voted against that deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — The people of Saskatchewan have fought long 
and hard for control of our resources in this province. They 
don’t want to give them up solely on the basis of this 
government’s faulty economic theories. The people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know the government’s plan for 
PCS, or if in fact there is a plan. And now is the time for 
straight answers. Now is the time. Now is the time to peel away 
the smoke and mirrors and get down to the business of what the 
government really intends. 
 
And I know that it’s been discussed already in question period, 
that what the government intends is this kind of share offering 
that’s offered at a low price to a great many people in 
Saskatchewan to buy them up, if they can, and then sell them 
off at a profit. And like the Saskoil shares, we will see the 
control of that resource go out of province in no time at all. 
Saskoil is now owned 75 per cent outside of this province. 
 
And I think my colleague, the member for Nutana, made a good 
point when she was the critic for privatization, when she said 
that the PC share sales don’t make economic sense. She said, 
plans by the PC government to have major share offerings in 
four Crown corporations in 1989 make no economic sense, as 
there is not enough investors in the province to make it work. 
 
The plan calls for the sale this year of 15 per cent of the 
province’s equity in the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation, worth $47 million; 60 per cent of the equity in the 
general insurance side of Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
worth about another 21 million; 100 per cent of the equity in 
SaskEnergy, worth 310 million; and 100 per cent of the equity 
in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, worth 1.147 billion. 
And that adds up to new share issues totalling $1.525 billion 
this year alone. And, Mr. Speaker, in all of Canada in 1988, the 
total value of all new share  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

781 
 

issues was just 2.5 billion. The Government of Saskatchewan is 
proposing to put up for sale, share offerings totalling some 60 
per cent of all the share offerings in the entire country last year. 
 
In 1986 shareholders in Saskatchewan and Manitoba combined 
totalled 6 per cent of all shareholders in Canada. In those two 
provinces, 14 per cent of adults owned one or more shares in a 
company. Yet these are the people that the PC government want 
you to believe will purchase shares amounting to 60 per cent of 
what was sold in all of Canada in 1988. 
 
What this means is that Saskatchewan people are not going to 
buy up the shares in privatized Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations. What we are going to see is a large portion of 
ownership going to people in other Canadian provinces or, 
more likely, in other countries. And this is what the PC 
government terms as public participation by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, obviously one of the points to be made very 
clearly is that the brewery workers who’ve just been put out of 
work, the workers from SED Systems, the 400 highway 
workers who were laid off when the highway equipment went 
down to the United States and to other parts of the country . . . I 
went to that auction sale, by the way, Mr. Speaker, when the 
highway equipment was sold off, and I saw the licence plates of 
the cars coming up from the States — North Dakota, Montana, 
and many other states — as well as from Alberta and Manitoba, 
to haul our highway equipment away from this province and put 
400 people out of work here. And the people from the Saskoil, 
25 per cent of those employees were laid off; employees of the 
potash corporation have already been laid off. 
 
How do those people afford shares in the province, Mr. 
Speaker? They don’t. They’ve paid for those resources already 
and they own them, as all of us do. Everyone has an ownership 
in the potash corporation in Saskatchewan right now, everyone 
who’s a resident here. That’s real public participation, Mr. 
Speaker. What the government is doing is privatization and 
piratization of our resources. What the government is doing, 
Mr. Speaker, is functioning as compradors, as I’ve said. They 
are giving away so many of the resources, so much of the 
heritage, and so much of the future of this province. 
 
Privatization is now in trouble in Great Britain. Services are 
falling apart; services are more expensive than they used to be. 
 
The privatization issue is one that’s going to be debated around 
the world. The government is tying in with an ideology that’s 
old and tired, and an ideology that the people here resisted and 
rose above a long time ago. Privatization, the PC vision, is not 
the future, Mr. Speaker, it’s a vision from the past. It’s 
something from a long time ago that has been proven not to 
work, not to give people the control in their resources that they 
should have and deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister for privatization has failed the test in 
the objectives that he laid out a year ago. And I know my 
colleagues have made this point, but I want to  

make it as well because it involves some of the very basic 
issues that people in this province are concerned about. In 
March of 1986, when the PC privatization minister, Graham 
Taylor, published what he called the objectives and guide-lines 
of the PC privatization strategy, he stated that the privatization 
policy had the objective of ensuring that the people of 
Saskatchewan receive full benefit from the use of public assets 
to increase employment and create economic and investment 
opportunities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already mentioned that the privatization 
of the highway maintenance work meant the loss of 400 jobs in 
this province; that within six months of the privatization of 
Saskoil, 25 per cent of its work force were laid off. Within a 
year of the privatization of SED Systems, the new owner, Fleet 
Aerospace of Ontario, had laid off 70 SED workers in 
Saskatoon. The privatization of the children’s dental plan meant 
that more than 400 dental workers were fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, privatization isn’t working in terms of increased 
employment. It is not working at all. It hasn’t worked in any 
other country in terms of increased employment unless, of 
course, the people of that country are prepared to grovel on their 
knees and to work for absolutely the lowest possible wage that 
the company can squeeze out of them. 
 
And when I hear the Premier of this province boast about being 
able to provide cheap land and cheap labour, I fear for the 
working people of this province, and I fear for the farmers of 
this province. Both those groups of people are in great jeopardy 
with this privatization scheme and with the policies of this 
government. 
 
The minister of privatization said that his policies would 
increase opportunities for personal and employee ownership. 
The opportunities for individual ownership are demonstrated by 
the privatization of Sask Minerals which now is owned by two 
non-Saskatchewan companies, one from Ontario and one from 
Quebec. 
 
I mentioned already the privatization of PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company), meaning that all of its assets were sold to 
Weyerhaeuser, and not one share of the Weyerhaeuser Canada 
is owned in Saskatchewan. The PC government privatized the 
assets of SaskPower, selling a drag-line and a coal-mine to 
Manalta Coal of Alberta. 
 
I’ve already mentioned, as well, that Saskoil shares are now 
owned privately outside of Saskatchewan. And now they’re 
bringing in the Bill to sell off the potash corporation. PC 
privatization is not creating opportunities for individual 
ownership, it’s selling out Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to also take this opportunity to reflect how shocked 
I was one night when I was speaking and I heard one of the 
members opposite shout out that people could afford these share 
offerings even if they were on minimum wage because they 
could have that taken off their wage package. 
 
And that is just as appalling to me as saying that the brewery 
workers can get a lower paid job distributing  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

782 
 

American beer; to say that the farmers can get work mowing the 
ditches of Saskatchewan; to say that the example of our 
expertise in Saskatchewan is to sell off our pulp mill to 
American investors. It’s shocking to see those kinds of 
examples, because obviously the member opposite had no 
understanding — and I think it was the member for Regina 
Wascana that said that — no understanding of what it’s like to 
live on minimum wage, no understanding of how much money 
you actually have to buy the essentials that you need in this 
province, let alone get shares and participate in investing. That 
is not a possibility for the majority of people in Saskatchewan. 
They are being left out of this ridiculous sell-out and give-away 
of the resources of Saskatchewan by the group, Mr. Speaker, 
that I call the comprador class in Saskatchewan. 
 
That term, as I’ve said, means something to me now. I’ve seen 
it demonstrated. I’ve seen it made real. I’ve heard it from the 
minister of privatization as he spoke to this Bill. I understand 
what it means to see your own fellow Canadians, your own 
people, people in their own province, devastating their 
province, selling out to foreign domination and exploitation. 
 
Someone must be lining their pockets. Someone must be 
making it nice for a few people to do this. Someone must be 
getting paid quite a bit to go along with this, because it is a 
complete devastation of this community and this province. And 
they say they’re doing it because the forces of the world market 
are so strong no one can control them. Perhaps the payments are 
so high that they’re being controlled completely. 
 
(1500) 
 
Privatization is the wrong way to go, Mr. Speaker. This Bill is 
the wrong thing to do. The programs that have been in place for 
the last year are absolutely unacceptable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I know this, as I’ve said, that older people are 
upset by it. I’m upset by it. 
 
I came to this province in 1972 to put years of work, along with 
all my colleagues and my friends, into the development of this 
province through some very good years when we had the 
resources to get access to things like our potash, to control our 
potash and our other resources, come from a history of 
ownership of utilities here in the province. 
 
When I came from Ontario, Bell Canada controlled the utilities 
there and the telephones, and the cost was a lot more expensive 
than what we had here with SaskTel. And I came very quickly, 
after moving to this province, to have a deep respect for the 
people who put this system in place, a deep respect. I wasn’t 
born here. I was brought up by a prairie woman, but I was not 
born in this province. Some of the members opposite were born 
here. Some of the members opposite have lived here all their 
lives and they don’t value what they’ve got. They’re prepared to 
sell it away. They’re prepared to let it be exploited and to let it 
go, prepared to be dominated by forces outside of this province 
instead of standing up to them and taking some control over 
their own lives. 
 
Shame on those cowards opposite. Shame on those  

people opposite to do that. Shame on them for developing what 
really is a comprador class in Saskatchewan, and a class of 
people that have to be fought against by every resource that we 
can muster. 
 
And so I ask the people who are listening today, and I ask my 
colleagues — I know they will — that we join hands and we 
fight this issue all the way, so that we can restore Saskatchewan 
to the glory that it was. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I take part today in Bill No. 1, the public participation 
program Bill. 
 
I want to discuss with the Assembly today just what public 
participation means to Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan. 
Really it’s just another word for privatization. We take a look at 
this government bringing in a Bill now on public participation. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I tell you that public participation in 
Saskatchewan started as soon as a Conservative government got 
elected in 1982. 
 
They started off, and now they’re just continuing that rampage 
of our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It started off . . . One of 
the first items up for participation or privatization, of course, 
was the coal mines in Saskatchewan. It started off by selling off 
the drag-line for 30-some-million dollars to Manalta Coal up in 
Calgary. Then they followed that by selling off the coal mine. 
 
And we just have to take a look at what that really meant to 
Saskatchewan and what it meant to Manalta Coal up in Calgary. 
It was an asset that was owned by the citizens of Saskatchewan, 
the drag-line and the deposit of the coal. And not only did the 
Conservative government come in and sell that drag-line and 
then sell the coal mine, they provided the money for that group 
to buy it. They signed the promissory notes for Manalta Coal. 
Then they turned around and leased back the drag-line and the 
coal for another 30 years. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I could have purchased 
the drag-line and I could have purchased the coal mine with 
those terms. The government puts up the money, gives you a 
30-year guarantee that they’re going to use your drag-line to 
produce Saskatchewan’s coal to produce energy for the 
province. That’s how public participation started in this 
province under the Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 
was a bad deal. And then they just followed suit. Next to come 
was the Highways department. And all of a sudden then you 
could see what was taking place. It was a government that were 
imposing their ideologies on the citizens of Saskatchewan and 
on the backs of the citizens of Saskatchewan. It didn’t matter 
what they did; it didn’t matter how many families or how many 
individuals they destroyed, as long as they could carry out the 
ideologies  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

783 
 

that they believed in. 
 
Their ideologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that they wanted to 
tear down everything that the socialist governments of the NDP 
and CCF had built up in this province. They wanted to tear 
down the security that we had, and they wanted to tear down the 
4 per cent unemployment that we had in this province and that 
we enjoyed. They wanted to tear down the balanced budgets 
that we’d always seen in this province, in a province that was 
run properly and a province that gave security to its employees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — What kind of security, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, do you suppose were given to the Department of 
Highways workers, over 400 Department of Highways workers 
who lost their jobs? What do you think it did to those families 
and those individuals? No warning. And they started off with a 
bang. 
 
The former minister of Highways stood up in the House, 
without any notice, and announced that 225 Highways workers 
would be laid off — no forewarning at all. This is what they did 
to those individuals. And there was individuals who had 15, 20, 
25 years seniority, who had worked, had bought homes, had 
raised families, were in the process of raising families. And 
here they thought that they were secure; they thought that their 
children were secure. They thought that they would be able to 
provide the proper education for those children. And what 
happened? Their dreams were shattered with one stroke of the 
pen. That was 225 in one shot. And then that continued. 
 
And you take a look at what it has done to the Department of 
Highways. And sure the ideology of the Conservative 
government was that well, Department of Highways shouldn’t 
be in the road construction business anyway. That was for the 
private sector. But I want to point out to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the Department of Highways constructed only 10 
per cent or less of the highways in this province. The other 90 
per cent, or above, was constructed by the private dirt movers 
such as South Construction, and Evans Construction, and crews 
like this. 
 
And I tell you, since this Conservative government has got in 
and they’ve destroyed the Highway department, and you can 
see what’s happened to our highways — they’re deteriorating. 
 
You can drive out to Ipsco where Kramer Tractor sells 
Caterpillar tractors, and when the NDP was in government, that 
yard at this time of the year would be full of new equipment, all 
destined to go out to projects all over this province. That’s not 
happening now. That’s not happening. Even the Highways 
equipment that was sold, that’s not even in the province. It’s not 
here. It went to south of the border and to other parts of Canada. 
 
That department, as I indicated, only built about 10 per cent of 
our highways, but they carried out an important function. They 
looked after the maintenance of our highways. They had a 
bridge crew, they had a  

construction crew, they had a maintenance crew, they had an 
engineering crew. And that was an important department. And 
that’s why you see today when they got rid of the engineers. 
And where did all those engineers go? 
 
Well they’re gone. They lost their jobs, so who’s doing the 
engineering of our highways in Saskatchewan? Who’s out there 
putting the stakes up that tells the construction crews and the 
operators how much dirt to cut and how much to fill? They’re 
not Saskatchewan engineers. You’ll take a look and you’ll see 
that they’re consultants from Alberta, and they’re even driving 
trucks with Alberta licence plates on. That’s who’s doing the 
work. 
 
You have taken the jobs away from the individuals who had 
worked all their lives to contribute to an important department 
in our province, the Department of Highways, and what do we 
have? We just literally destroyed those families. And they said, 
well, you can become a part of public participation. We’re 
going to give you an opportunity to leave these positions and go 
out into the private sector and take part and be a major 
contributor to public participation. 
 
We know that that’s not happening now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We just have to take a look at what’s happening to the 
highways in this province and the road system. It’s deteriorating 
and will continue to deteriorate under this policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we have to take a serious look at what 
has happened to the Department of Highways and such assets 
that we have now lost, and we’re never going to get those back. 
We’ve sold them for less than $6 million — $40 million worth 
of equipment. Now if we have to replace that, it’s going to cost 
the treasury a lot of money. 
 
And it continued. This was just a start: Manalta Coal, then they 
moved to Highways, so it just continued. 
 
Then they decided they were going to privatize the public 
campsites — campsites that I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and your family and your friends and relations and your 
constituents have used on many occasions, and they were 
always there. They were always well maintained by crews that 
were working for Parks, Recreation and Culture. They’ve 
prided themselves in keeping those campsites clean, well 
stocked with wood, water, and you could come in there any 
time of the day or night and it was always there. And now what 
did they do? They decided, well we’ll privatize those. They 
didn’t sell them; they gave them away. 
 
I can think in my constituency where many of those were turned 
over to Conservative hacks, if you want to call them. One 
individual, the president of the Conservative Party in my 
constituency; another beautiful campsite, and a large one, 
Besnard Lake, to Red’s Camps. And I believe his wife at that 
time was the president of the Conservative Party in 
Cumberland, or the vice-president, but most certainly an 
important part of that Conservative executive up there. 
 
They were leasing out the public campsites to their  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

784 
 

friends in so-called private sector or public participation. 
 
And many of those individuals who used those campsites over 
and over, year after year, all of a sudden came there at 11 
o’clock at night, as they’d been doing it for 20 years, and they 
thought that they had a place to stay, and the campsite was there 
and the wood was there and everything was there and no 
charge. They pull in and what do they find? They find a gate. 
They find an individual there who wants to collect from them. 
 
These were public campsites and they’re gone. You’re taking 
them out to the private sector. And let me tell you, the citizens 
of Saskatchewan, the senior citizens, the boy scouts and the girl 
guides who used those campsites, they know what’s taking 
place and they’re concerned about it, and well they should be. 
 
I want to now turn to another amalgamation and . . . which is 
part of public participation and will end up in privatization, and 
that is the Crown corporation, Eldorado Nuclear (Ltd.), and the 
federal Crown and the provincial Crown corporation, SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). That 
amalgamation, which was done to create the largest uranium 
company in the world and was to secure jobs and finances for 
this province, well I say — and I said at the time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — that this amalgamation was a dangerous precedent 
that was being set. 
 
At no time should the uranium industry or nuclear energy of 
any sort ever be in the hands of the private sector. Never, ever 
should we allow a resource such as uranium to get into the 
hands of the private sector. Because first and foremost, we have 
to look at environmental safety, and health and safety to our 
workers. And I say, I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that once 
the amalgamation took over between Eldorado and SMDC and 
now it’s going to be privatized, then it gets out into the private 
sector, and first and foremost is going to be profit. And you just 
watch. 
 
(1515) 
 
And it’s already starting to take shape, already been 
announcements that there’s been major lay-offs in that industry. 
There’s going to be another major lay-off up on Rabbit Lake for 
six months this summer. 
 
But I think what the people of Saskatoon have to really be 
cautious of, of this amalgamation, is the amalgamation of all 
SMDC assets and Eldorado Nuclear’s assets and creating one 
head office in Saskatoon. Because we know that Eldorado 
Nuclear has a head office, Rabbit Lake has a head office, Key 
Lake has a head office, Cigar Lake has a head office, Amok 
Cluff Mining has a head office. 
 
But all of a sudden we’re going to see an amalgamation and a 
privatization and profit-orientated company coming in and 
saying: well, we’ll shut down these offices because SMDC own 
50 per cent of Cigar Lake and they own 50 per cent of Key 
Lake, they own 20 per cent of Amok, and here you’re going to 
have lay-offs in the head offices in Saskatoon. And instead of 
having all these head offices, you’re going to have one major 
head office. And I say to the citizens of Saskatoon that they’re 
going to have  

to watch this very closely because you’re going to see, I predict, 
more lay-offs as they amalgamate, create one company, which 
they’ve already done, called Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy 
Corporation), and then privatize. 
 
And I sincerely hope that some of the members on the other 
side will take an approach and stop the privatization of this 
company because privatization of the uranium industry is 
something that should never, ever take place. And I most 
certainly am opposed to it. I can’t speak for my colleagues, but 
I’m sure that they would be opposed to any, any such deal to 
privatize that industry. 
 
And I say to some of the members over there to stand up and to 
fight against this privatization. This is what’s taking place; this 
is public participation, Conservative style. And public 
participation, Conservative style, means lost revenues, it means 
lost jobs, it means lost protection for our workers, it means lost 
protection for the environment and things that we feel are very 
important. But a Conservative government who is going to 
privatize really are not concerned about that. 
 
I want to now turn to another major privatization that has taken 
place in the province in public participation, and that is 
Weyerhaeuser. What really took place there again, Mr. Speaker, 
is that a large pulp company from the United States, from 
Seattle, Washington, comes in and get a hold of the assets of the 
Prince Albert Pulp Company and the Big River saw mill and the 
chemical plant at Saskatoon, assets I would think in excess of a 
billion dollars. And then not only that, they give them 8 million 
acres of our prime forest land. They have access to 8 million 
acres of Saskatchewan’s prime forest land. And they have 
access to it. 
 
And here’s what’s really happening. They came in with no 
money down. The provincial government guarantees the 
money, give them 30 years to pay it back at eight and a half per 
cent. And I know that you and I, Mr. Speaker, most certainly 
can’t go out and borrow any amount of money and be 
guaranteed eight and a half per cent interest on that loan. But it 
was available there, guaranteed by the taxpayers of this 
province for Weyerhaeuser. 
 
They also received an inventory, a large inventory. And not 
only that, they knew full well what was taking place, and the 
government opposite knew full well what was taking place in 
the wood industry. 
 
All the predictions have come out and indicated that the forest 
industry is going to be a bright spot in our economy in 
Saskatchewan and in the rest of the world. The wood industry 
has 25 years of good years ahead of it. They knew what they 
were getting into. They knew that they had a golden egg when 
they came in here. And let me tell you, they took advantage of 
it. 
 
So they came in, and what are they doing? Well the first thing 
that is done, they get their roads built for them, automatically. 
That was just automatic that the government would build the 
roads. And then they impose some of their own values on the 
workers in this province. For instance, if you want to go and 
work at Weyerhaeuser  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

785 
 

and you fill out your application, and they have a question that 
asks if you have a grade 12 education, and if you haven’t got a 
grade 12 education, Mr. Speaker, then you are not eligible to 
work at Weyerhaeuser. And I say, Mr. Speaker, they are 
imposing their values on the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I have a very large number of my 
constituents, Mr. Speaker, that don’t have a grade 12 education. 
But a lot of them that don’t have a grade 12 education have a 
trade — they’re electricians, they’re plumbers, they’re 
carpenters — but that doesn’t apply when you apply for a job at 
Weyerhaeuser. You have to use the rules that they use in the 
States, and that is that you have a grade 12 education or your 
application is turned down. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, they’re now starting to administer 
Saskatchewan’s Forest Act; they’re starting to administer 
Saskatchewan’s Forest Act. If I wanted to go out and cut 
firewood in their forest management lease, then I have to get a 
licence and pay a royalty to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
They talk about reforestation. They’re talking about planting 
three million trees this year. Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that when the NDP was in we were putting new trees in the 
bush to the tune of eight million trees a year, not three million, 
and we administered that. And we raised those trees in our 
nurseries and what has this government done? They’ve come in 
and they’ve already shut down two satellite nurseries in this 
province, and those individuals who worked on those satellite 
nurseries have been laid off and they have lost their jobs. 
 
Can you imagine a foreign corporation coming in here, Mr. 
Speaker, and administering our Forest Act? Well, let me give 
you an example of how it operates. You have a post cutting 
operation up in Pinehouse, and they want to cut posts and sell 
them; they haul them down to Prince Albert to the post dealers 
and the treatment plants. So in order to cut those posts, they 
have to apply to Weyerhaeuser in order to get a lease to cut 
those posts because they live within the forest management 
least agreement of Weyerhaeuser’s. So . . . and they will give 
them 40,000 posts, and that’s all. Each licence allows them to 
cut 40,000, and then they have to pay a royalty up front to 
Weyerhaeuser for reforestation. They have to pay up front 
before they’re allowed to go into the bush and cut a post down, 
a royalty to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Not only that, not only that, Mr. Speaker, I want to give you 
another example of just how they’re administering our Forest 
Act and how they’ve come in and taken over. Narcees Marasty 
who is an 82-year-old gentleman who lives in Sled Lake, 
Saskatchewan, not far from Dore Lake and not far north-west of 
Big River, lived there all his life, and has always used wood out 
of the bush for his fires to do his cooking and heat his home. 
Always done that; went out in the bush, cleaned out the forest, 
and always done a good job. 
 
He went in last year, was told that before he started to cut his 
firewood, you better come in because you got to get a  

permit. So he went into Dore Lake to the conservation officer’s 
headquarters, thinking that he would get a permit to cut 
firewood. And this is what he got: okay, he can go out and cut 
his firewood, but he had to pay a permit fee of $1; he had to pay 
a total to the provincial government of $5 to cut his firewood. 
 
But then underneath, there’s another thing here, Weyerhaeuser 
reforestation dues, 10 cords of firewood, $1.20 a cord, another 
$12 to be paid directly to Weyerhaeuser. And what is it paid 
for? Reforestation. 
 
We’re paying, our senior citizens and everybody else in this 
province are paying, for the reforestation of our forests that they 
are taking out and making profits on. They don’t even have to 
do the reforestation. It’s . . . really it’s unbelievable that they 
can get away with these things. 
 
Another thing is the highways bans. They are allowed, 
Weyerhaeuser, to take their trucks that haul pulp and sawdust or 
shavings, or anything that they want, on a year-round basis on 
our highways — on a year-round basis. They don’t even have to 
get an overload permit in the spring when bans are put on all the 
rest of the highways. Bans are put on the highways that they use 
by other individual truckers, but Weyerhaeuser is exempt. They 
can use those highways, and they can smash them up all they 
want when the frost comes out, and they don’t even have to get 
an overload permit; they are exempt from that. And I think that 
this is not fair. 
 
And this is going to come back, this is going to come back to 
haunt this government across here. All these things are building 
up, and the individuals out in Saskatchewan are talking and they 
believe that this government’s life is short. And I believe that 
myself. 
 
Then we have the Premier. He goes to Ottawa and he gets into 
the first ministers’ meetings and he talks about regionalism and 
how tough things are in regions of the country, and that we have 
to go in and we have to try and solve the problems in the 
regions of our province. 
 
I want to give you an example of regionalism, Conservative 
style, and I want to take you up into my constituency and my 
neighbouring constituency of Meadow Lake. Last summer the 
Conservative government, the Premier and the ministers, were 
all up in Meadow Lake in July, I believe, June or July, and they 
had a massive picnic, a massive barbecue. I even had 
individuals who are working up in the North were told that they 
should come down to that barbecue, and they were on payroll, 
and that has taken place. 
 
And what did they announce in this big barbecue? Well they 
announced about a hundred million dollars worth of capital 
projects to be built in the Meadow Lake area. All the raw 
material was coming out of Athabasca constituency, but all the 
capital projects were coming into Meadow Lake. So everybody 
in Meadow Lake was waiting for this big capital project and 
who was going to build it. But it was going to be built by a firm 
in Alberta . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, the member says 
it still is. Well the folks up in Meadow Lake are still waiting too 
for that $80 million mill. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

786 
 

So what do they do? They go all summer, they go all winter, 
and there’s nothing done. Now all of a sudden they hold another 
meeting, and they take a bunch more individuals and they go on 
another trip to Alberta. And then they come back and they make 
another announcement. They say that the $80 million mill that 
they were going to put in Meadow Lake, well, we’ve decided 
that it would fit in better over in Hudson Bay, so it’s going to go 
to Hudson Bay, and we’re going to build another one in 
Meadow Lake and this is going to be public participation at its 
greatest. The money’s going to come from the provincial 
government. And who is going to build it? Well, not Nortek 
Energy, no, but it’s going to be another outfit from Alberta, and 
I believe it’s called the Millar company. 
 
So we’re getting . . . we’re into the third year of the term of the 
Conservative government, so they think, well, that $80 million 
pulp mill, that’s not going to get the member from Meadow 
Lake re-elected. So they decide, we’ll move that over to 
Hudson Bay where the member from Hudson Bay is probably 
not going to run again — and I suggest the member from 
Meadow Lake probably won’t run either — but we’ll build a 
$250 million pulp mill in Meadow Lake. 
 
So here we have, within a span of about eight months, two 
announcements, two pulp mills, one for 80 million, now another 
one for 250 million — all Alberta firms. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you’re against them both. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — No, I’m not opposed to it. But I think that 
the individuals in Saskatchewan could also build these here 
pulp mills that you’re talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We don’t have to go out to Whitecourt, 
Alberta and get Millar Western. We don’t have to provide the 
money for Millar Western out in Alberta to come in and build a 
pulp mill. We’ve got timber; we’ve got human resources. We 
have the capabilities in this province like we have demonstrated 
when we were in government. We could build saw mills and we 
could build pulp mills. We could harvest our forest and we 
could turn those profits into security for the rest of the province. 
 
But there’s no security in this. Millar Western, they were asked 
a question: what are you going to do with your effluent? And 
the company said, well we don’t really know how to handle it, 
but if we can’t do it right, then we won’t be doing it. So I don’t 
know about this $250 million pulp mill; it may not come in. 
 
Then they sort of suggest that, well I think the $11 million 
chopstick mill is still on stream. But they’re not sure of that, not 
sure. 
 
But that’s not what they said when they were holding that 
massive barbecue in Meadow Lake last summer. They had 
everybody there. The whole cabinet was there, and they had 
steaks and hamburgers and they had a real party.  

And there was no problem; it was coming in. But that, I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that just may not happen — and all 
government guarantees, all government guarantees. 
 
That is public participation; that is Tory style. That is Tory 
promises. And so far we’ve seen quite a shift in that promise; 
we’ve seen quite a shift, Mr. Speaker. That $80 million mill has 
been switched over; I don’t know why, but it’s gone to Hudson 
Bay. And I suspect Hudson Bay hasn’t seen anything yet that 
. . . any construction on that. 
 
And what does all this privatization and public participation 
mean to the province? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Lost jobs. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That’s right — lost jobs; you better believe 
it. And I mentioned some of them, and I will get into more of 
them as I go on. 
 
But before they sold off Manalta Coal and the coal-mine, which 
was their first privatization venture, we had an unemployment 
rate in this province of 4 per cent. We had a budget that had 
$139 million to the good. Now we see what privatization and 
public participation has done. Now we have a total debt in this 
province of approximately $4 billion — $4 billion on our 
operating debts in accumulated debt since 1982, since 
privatization started. 
 
We have a total debt in the province — and this is long-term 
debt — of $13 billion. That’s what we get from privatization 
and public participation. 
 
We’re now paying a million dollars a day or more on the debt 
that has been accumulated since privatization and the 
Conservative government took over this province. We are 
paying a million dollars a day on interest charges alone. And 
just think what we could do with that money. Just think what a 
couple of days of that would do to one of our communities in 
northern Saskatchewan. Well, it would build saw mills, it could 
build hospitals, it could build highways, it could build roads. 
There’s so many things that could be done with that money, that 
interest that we’re paying to the big money-lenders of the 
world. And we keep going down and down and down. 
Unemployment is running rampant. 
 
We had another big celebration in this province two years ago. 
We had a celebration to celebrate the millionth person in this 
province, when we had a million population. I tell you that we 
don’t have a million people now. We don’t have a million 
people in this province now. It is under a million and we are 
losing — in February alone, 7,000 people had to leave this 
province to look for work. 
 
And who is being hurt by this privatization and public 
participation? I tell you, it’s the citizens of Saskatchewan and 
especially our young people, Mr. Speaker, young people with 
no futures in this province. Young people are telling me, I’ve 
just got to go to British Columbia, or, I’ve got to go to Alberta. 
And a big majority of them are going to B.C., and there’s good 
reason because the folks in B.C. are pretty happy right now 
because they see on the horizon that they are going to have a 
New Democratic  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

787 
 

government back in B.C. And you just mark my word, in the 
next year or so there will be a New Democratic government and 
things are already starting to get ahead in B.C. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Because when business see that there is a 
light at the end of the tunnel, they will start moving; they’ll 
move towards that light. And I say, in B.C. it’s going to happen, 
and I say that the light at the end of the tunnel is getting brighter 
and brighter in Saskatchewan also. That is what’s going to 
happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Population. Just imagine, they have a party 
because we reached the millionth person. Well I’ll tell you there 
was no fanfare when the millionth person left this province to 
go and look for work. And it’s going down and down and will 
continue to go down as this province has a Conservative 
government with a philosophy and an ideology to destroy 
everything that was built up, and to privatize, and public 
participation. It is going to go the other direction. 
 
As I indicated, privatization — the highway department, high 
unemployment — a policy that pits the rich against the poor. As 
the Tory hand-outs continue, Mr. Speaker, they continue to the 
Weyerhaeusers and the Pocklingtons and the Manalta Coals, 
and the list goes on. 
 
We see what they done to the 400 dental nurses, Mr. Speaker. 
Four hundred young women who had dedicated their lives and 
had trained for years to provide a service to the children of this 
province, and these were dedicated young women. And what 
happened? You just cut the rug right from under their feet. You 
literally destroyed those young women. You fired 400 — over 
400 — dental nurses in this province and took away a service 
that was needed, and now it’s coming back to haunt you as 
individuals tell you that. 
 
Northern development — privatization. I’ll tell you, my 
constituents are not involved in public participation. The type of 
public participation that we see in northern Saskatchewan is 
government buildings and government agencies moving from 
northern Saskatchewan down to Meadow Lake. 
 
And I want to give you a good example of a department that has 
been moved, a department that should be in there to create 
activities, economic activities in the North, an economic 
development branch. And we had one. They had an economic 
development branch in Buffalo Narrows. And where is it now? 
It’s in Meadow Lake. They take the economic development 
branch office and they move it from northern Saskatchewan to 
Meadow Lake. 
 
So my constituents come and say: where is that economic 
development branch office? I said, “Well, I don’t know. It’s in 
Meadow Lake; it must be in the government building.” So then 
I go and I try to find out what government building is the 
economic development branch office in — this is the northern 
development . . .  

economic development branch. So I go and check in the 
government buildings; it’s not there. So then I make a phone 
call and I say: well where is your office? Well, they said, it’s in 
the plumbing shop; it’s in the plumbing shop in Meadow Lake. 
In the plumbing shop, I said, what are you talking about? He 
said, well they’ve moved our office down to Meadow Lake and 
we’re situated in Ron’s Plumbing and Heating building where 
he runs his plumbing shop out of. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the members 
over there, that there has to be a stop to this. You have a 
minister and a member from Meadow Lake who’s out to 
destroy everything that was put in there by DNS (department of 
northern Saskatchewan). He was always opposed to DNS. He 
always referred to it as the buckskin curtain, and he wanted to 
tear that down, and not only has he torn it down, but he’s 
destroying northern citizens while he’s doing it. 
 
And here we see they get so bold. First they move the fisheries, 
they move the fisheries branch from Buffalo Narrows down to 
Meadow Lake. You just tell me, Mr. Speaker, where there’s any 
commercial fishing taking place in Meadow Lake. Not a bit, but 
they moved the head office down there. 
 
We had the supervisor of resources in Buffalo Narrows. Where 
did he move? Moved him down to Meadow Lake. And now 
they take the last thing that we had that could keep northern 
Saskatchewan going, the economic development branch office, 
they move it down to Meadow Lake and they put it in one of his 
. . . Ron’s Plumbing and Heating shop. And I believe that they 
are both members of your party, sir, or the member from 
Meadow Lake, and I think that maybe one of them is on his 
executive. 
 
And I say that that’s not fair. When the Premier talks about 
regionalism and we have to solve those regional problems, and 
here what you do, you have a minister who is creating regional 
problems by doing this. And it has to come to a stop. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, these policies are just driving the citizens 
out of this province. They’re driving our young men and 
women out to other provinces, and they are an important part of 
our society. And if we don’t have those young men and women 
from this province in here, taking over the jobs, training, and 
keeping our society going, well we’re going to be in real 
trouble. We’re going to be down to 900,000 people. And that 
won’t be long if this out-migration continues. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the members opposite, that 
you don’t have a mandate to carry out this type of privatization 
and destruction that we see taking place in this province — you 
don’t have that mandate. There’s absolutely no way that this 
should continue. You have never went around the province in 
1986 saying you were going to do this. 
 
You were going to eliminate, you were going to eliminate the 
sales tax. You eliminated the gas tax and then you put another 
one on. You’ve increased the sales tax. And this, I say, Mr. 
Speaker, is not the way that a government should  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

788 
 

operate. 
 
I say that what should take place in this province is a provincial 
election. I say that this government, the Conservative 
government, are afraid of an election. Because in the last year 
there were 17 electoral tests in this province, Mr. Speaker, 17 
electoral tests, and out of those 17 electoral tests the New 
Democratic Party won 12 and the Conservatives won five. We 
won 10 federal seats and we won two by-elections. The 
Conservative government won four federal seats, and one 
by-election they squeaked in on. 
 
So I say that they don’t have the mandate, and the citizens of 
Saskatchewan spoke loud and clear on privatization and public 
participation in the last federal election and in the last three 
by-elections we had in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I think it’s time for the back-benchers 
or the private members on that side to stand up, to stand up and 
tell the 21 to 23 members that are never going to seek 
re-election in this province again — there’s at least 21 there that 
will never seek re-election in this province again, and yet they 
are controlling the government. They are the ones who are 
making the decisions. They are ones who are destroying this 
province, and they are going to destroy the political lives of 
individuals who just got in for their first term on that side. And 
I think it’s time for them to stand up. 
 
And I say in my closing remarks, Mr. Speaker, and I ask those 
members to stand up, and I say, don’t allow, don’t allow the 
senior members, don’t allow the senior members to destroy 
yourselves and your careers and to destroy the province of 
Saskatchewan while they’re doing it. I say, stand up and fight 
back. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate today, I do so knowing 
full well that this will be one of the most crucial debates in the 
current session of the legislature, and perhaps in the life of the 
legislative history, Mr. Speaker. And I note that no government 
members are speaking in this debate, and I’m not at all 
surprised, because the Bill doesn’t make any sense. 
 
The policy course being proposed, Mr. Speaker, by this 
government is one that is designed, as has been pointed out by 
my colleagues, to make fundamental changes to the economic 
and social life in the province of Saskatchewan. In saying this, I 
am not stating anything that the members opposite would 
disagree with. They know that this is the precise course they are 
following, and they know that it is the direction that goes, as my 
colleague said just a few moments ago, goes beyond the 
mandate that this government currently enjoys from the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

Over the past seven years, Mr. Speaker, our citizens have 
witnessed a government embarking upon a policy of 
privatization, irregardless of whether or not it makes any 
economic sense or social sense. It’s a blind, ideological, blinker 
approach that this government’s been using. Initially, as again 
has been pointed out by my colleagues, this policy was to fire 
— indiscriminately to fire, I might add — public employees, 
only surpassed, Mr. Speaker, by the Lyon PC government in 
Manitoba in the 1970s. No other government that I know of has 
been so cruel and harsh in the way it’s treated public 
employees. 
 
Then we witnessed the fire sale auction of highway equipment. 
First they removed the gas tax, then they fired the highway 
workers, then they sold the equipment. Now there is no money, 
there’s no employees, and no equipment to fix the roads. Now 
that’s foresight, Mr. Speaker. That’s Tory planning, that’s Tory 
management. And of course everybody knows in the province 
of Saskatchewan the state of our highway system. 
 
Then we had the sweetheart deal with Manalta Coal. Another 
give-away. In mid-1986 this government proceeded to give 
away the Prince Albert pulp mill to Weyerhaeuser of 
Washington, a foreign interest, another foreign interest, just like 
the plan is with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And 
of course there were a lot of other rumours, rumours we now 
know to be true, Mr. Speaker. All the rumours to sell SGI, 
SaskPower . . . well they try and deceive us by changing the 
name, but to the people of Saskatchewan it’s still SaskPower. 
The rumours to sell SaskTel. You name the corporation, the 
Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, it’s on the list. Promises made 
by this government. Promises made by the Deputy Premier, 
when he split SaskPower, that it wouldn’t be sold off. Promises 
are made by this government to be broken. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I didn’t say that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Yes you did say that, sir. A promise made by 
this government, Mr. Speaker, is a promise that’s broken and 
nowhere is this more exemplified by the Premier of the 
province who should know better and who we should expect to 
have more integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a private citizen in this province during the 
1982 to 1986 period, these developments, as they were 
unfolding, disturbed me a great deal. They disturbed my family. 
They disturbed my neighbours. They disturbed my community, 
as was certainly reflected in the Eastview by-election, Mr. 
Speaker. The actions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your family all voted for me. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well listen, I could tell the Deputy Premier 
that my family didn’t all vote for him. Some of them did, but 
they certainly all didn’t, and they won’t again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Things have changed down in Carnduff. You 
haven’t been there for a while. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions of this government didn’t make  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

789 
 

any sense. They don’t make any sense now. During those years, 
though, when I was a private citizen, what I saw was there was 
no game plan, there was no sense of an integrated approach or 
an integrated strategy to public policy development. There was 
no clear policy direction. What we saw is exactly what the 
people of Saskatchewan got, Mr. Speaker — haphazard, 
ill-conceived policy actions in a policy vacuum. 
 
Today, however, this is only partially true. The policy of the PC 
government is more clear, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for the 
people of Saskatchewan. However this policy is dangerous, it’s 
ill-conceived, and it’s at least 70 to 100 years out of date. 
 
I don’t know what history book the government members have 
been reading, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you this — it is not the 
history of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people. Neither, 
Mr. Speaker, is it a book that deals with the reality and the 
interdependence of people, the creation of wealth, or the 
redistribution of wealth within our province. 
 
It is, however, a book that deals with how to redistribute wealth 
into the hands of the multinationals through the oil tax holiday, 
the 2 per cent tax break that the big corporation just got while 
the rest of us got more tax increases. But it’s a book that looks 
at how foreign governments can own increasing amounts of our 
assets. And they’re reading a book that tells them how to 
remove economic power from ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
That’s exactly what we’re concerned about, the loss of 
economic control of our destiny, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that it is clear to you, as it is to every 
other member in this House and indeed to all residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan, that just because a government 
establishes a policy doesn’t mean that that’s a good policy. It 
doesn’t make that an appropriate policy necessarily; it doesn’t 
make that a fair policy; it doesn’t make a good policy for this 
province. It doesn’t necessarily make it a good policy for the 
province. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the situation we’re dealing with today, a 
policy that is fundamentally wrong for people; a policy that is 
fundamentally wrong for our provincial economy; a policy that 
is fundamentally wrong for Saskatchewan, and it isn’t working, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policy of this government, the actions of this 
PC government over the past seven years provide ample 
evidence of the direction that they have adopted. Clearly that 
direction is one of piratization, as some members have referred 
to, at the expense of the well-being of Saskatchewan citizens 
and Saskatchewan families that this government likes to talk to 
so much about as to how they’re supporting. Clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, the Tory direction is one of a blind, naive, right-wing 
ideology that has about as much credibility as the tooth fairy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the PC privatization policy mean for 
Saskatchewan? Well what does . . . what the privatization 
policy does not mean is a stronger provincial economy. What it 
does mean in this case is less and less control by the people of 
the province over their  

economic and social well-being, as many of my colleagues have 
so ably pointed out. 
 
One thing that this privatization policy does not mean is the 
creation of wealth in our province. What it does mean is the 
redirection of wealth outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
One thing that privatization does not mean in Saskatchewan is 
control over Saskatchewan resources by Saskatchewan people. 
What it does mean is a growing corporate concentration of 
economic and social decision making outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
One thing that privatization does not mean is job creation. 
Saskatchewan experience with the PCs is ample evidence of 
this. But what privatization does mean, Mr. Speaker, is a 
reduction of jobs and a transfer of future opportunities to places 
outside of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this PC Government has become so tied to an 
off-the-wall, right-wing ideological view that it has become 
blind to the realities of Saskatchewan, the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, and the principles of economic and social 
health and wealth, so that it fails to see the future that the 
province can enjoy in the Canadian and the world economy. 
 
This government has become so tied to a right-wing agenda, 
imported from the United States and Britain, that it fails to 
understand that creation of wealth and the distribution of wealth 
in our society does not happen when the primary concern of 
government is to meet the needs of the Weyerhaeusers, of 
Manalta Coal, of Pocklington, of George Hill and Paul 
Schoenhals and Remai and other corporate buddies of this 
government. 
 
Where, Mr. Speaker, has the blindness of this PC government 
and their privatization philosophy and actions taken 
Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Down the drain. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — That’s right, down the drain, as my colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre says. Well it’s taken us another way, it’s 
taken us backwards, backwards into the 19th century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I happen to believe that a major role of 
government is to allow and to facilitate leadership of its citizens 
and to provide leadership to the people of the province — 
leadership into the future, not regressive leadership into some 
mythical past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I see it, there are two aspects, there are two 
parts to privatization, as I see it and as we see it on this side of 
the House. The first part, as has been pointed out by my 
colleagues today, deals with the sale of assets owned by the 
people of Saskatchewan. These assets vary from the equipment 
of the Department of Highways to our natural resources and to 
the intellectual property of Crown corporations such as SaskTel. 
 
The policy of the government to indiscriminately sell these 
assets is not only wrong and shortsighted, it lacks endorsement 
of the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, when the federal 
government embarked on the free trade  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

790 
 

negotiations with the United States, the Prime Minister said, 
and I think quite rightly, that the people of Canada would have 
the opportunity of expressing their opinion before the 
agreement took effect. And I give him credit for saying that and 
for doing that. The Prime Minister did this because he, like the 
people of Canada, understood that the proposed agreement 
represented a major and a fundamental change in the role of 
government, in the role of the economy of the country, and in 
the nature of the Canadian society. 
 
Surely the same principle applies here. Frankly, the policy 
being proposed by this government is a radical shift for the 
province and is well beyond the mandate of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the privatization program of this government 
necessitates an election to let the people of Saskatchewan 
decide which kind of future they want. Let the people decide if 
they want a foreign country to own our natural resources, to 
own our birthright, to take away our ability to direct our 
economic future, to take away our ability to create new wealth 
and redistribute wealth and services to the people of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to sell and to give away the people’s ownership in 
potash, in forestry, in land, in oil, and in sodium sulphate, or 
any other of our resources to a consumer of the product, to a 
multinational corporation, or to a foreign power without the say 
of the owners of that resource, is a travesty of democratic rights 
and freedoms of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The government manages these resources in trust, Mr. Speaker, 
and I suggest to you that that trust is being broken when, 
through the actions of this PC government, the people of 
Saskatchewan no longer have effective influence and control 
over their economy. We have before us, Mr. Speaker, a policy 
to be enshrined in legislation that says, in effect, that the 
well-being of the people of Saskatchewan is best determined by 
those who don’t live here. And this doesn’t make any sense to 
those of us on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, or to the 
people of the province. 
 
This province was built on the belief that people do and should 
control, as much as possible, their own economic destiny. 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, a policy that sets out to destroy what the 
people of this province have fought for and stood for and 
created, demands the approval of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province deserve the 
right to have a government willing to accept the responsibilities 
of power, to act in the interests of the province, and in the 
interest of this province alone, in the Canadian context. Clearly 
this Bill and this policy direction is an abrogation of this 
government’s responsibilities. 
 
(1600) 
 
This policy direction that the Tories are going in is a transfer of 
power and democratic rights of the people to the boardrooms of 
Calgary and Toronto, New York and Chicago. This policy 
direction represents a transfer of  

power and democratic rights of the people of Saskatchewan to 
the governments of China, India, Brazil, or whoever else the 
Premier decides to offer bargain basement deals for our natural 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of the actions of this government has to do 
with the well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. The actions 
of this government has nothing to do with liberalized free trade, 
world trade. The actions of this government has nothing to do 
with enhancing the export position of Saskatchewan firms. The 
actions of this government has nothing to do with creating new 
jobs. They’re losing new jobs faster than the people of 
Saskatchewan could ever have imagined. 
 
The actions of this government, Mr. Speaker, has nothing to do 
with creating wealth in Saskatchewan. My goodness, in seven 
short years we’ve become over $12 billion in debt, thanks to 
Tory policies. 
 
The actions of this government has nothing to do with the 
enhancement of family life in Saskatchewan. The actions of this 
government — yes, destroyed family life for many people in 
Saskatchewan. Many others are getting out before that happens, 
to opportunities elsewhere. 
 
But the actions of this government, this PC government, 
through the leadership of this Premier, has everything to do 
with the concentration of corporate wealth at the expense of the 
well-being of the people of the province and our citizens. By 
the way, many of them are giving up hope in the PC 
government and are leaving. As has been pointed out by my 
colleague earlier, 6,260 people left this province, an 
out-migration of this province, in February alone. Now we’re 
expecting the statistics to come out, possibly tomorrow, on 
March, and there’s no reason to believe that the statistics are 
going to be any different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not so long ago that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan marched to Ottawa to force the federal 
government to exercise its power and responsibilities to protect 
and encourage the prairie agricultural economy. The march was 
premised on the belief that governments should act in the best 
interests of people. That fundamental belief held by the people 
of this province has not changed and is evident today in the 
growing opposition to the direction this government is 
proposing to follow. 
 
In a recent small-business survey that I did in Saskatoon 
Eastview, 85 per cent of the respondents — these are 
small-business people — 85 per cent of the respondents, Mr. 
Speaker, do clearly not want to privatize the utility Crown 
corporations. Over half the people in this survey, over half the 
small-business people, do not want to privatize other 
corporations like the potash corporation. 
 
These are small-business people that this government says are 
friends of theirs. Well I can tell you something, Mr. Speaker, 
small-business people are not supporting this government any 
more, not in Saskatoon Eastview, because they feel let down 
and they feel betrayed by this government, and so they should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons cited by this government for the 
sale of the commonly owned assets of the people  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

791 
 

of Saskatchewan is to draw down the provincial debt — a debt 
created by this government, a debt created by fiscal 
irresponsibilities of members opposite, a debt load which is 
reason alone to vote this government out of office. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a principle at stake here, and that 
principle is consultation with, and approval of, the shareholders 
of the assets held in trust by this government, before this policy 
is implemented any further. Those shareholders, Mr. Speaker, 
are clearly the voters of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did this government seek approval for its deal 
with Manalta Coal? No, they didn’t. 
 
Did this government seek approval for the sale of Sask 
Minerals? No, they didn’t. Not only that, they wouldn’t even 
provide the details on the terms of the sale. So they make these 
deals without the approval of the people of Saskatchewan and 
then they won’t . . . in secret, and then they won’t even share 
the information. 
 
How about Saskoil. Did they seek approval for the sale of 
Saskoil, Mr. Speaker? The answer is no. 
 
Did the government seek approval for the sale of SaskCOMP? 
Again, the answer is no. 
 
Is the government prepared to seek approval for the sale of 
SaskPower? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll see. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — My colleague says, we’ll see, but not if they 
follow their usual pattern, they won’t. And I can tell the Premier 
very clearly, if he proceeds with his sale of Saskoil, just that 
one Crown corporation, he is long gone. 
 
Is this government prepared to seek approval for the sale of 
Saskatchewan potash? It doesn’t appear so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is the government prepared to seek approval for the sale of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance)? It doesn’t appear so. 
 
And as they proceed to sell the assets, Mr. Speaker, what do the 
people get? Well let’s take a look at what the people of 
Saskatchewan get as this government continues into its 
mandate. 
 
They certainly get higher taxes. This government has been very 
imaginative there. I don’t think there is any possible thing that 
cannot be taxed. I think they’ve been very creative and very 
innovative, and there’s simply no new ways left to tax the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What else have the people of Saskatchewan got? Well, they’ve 
got a higher provincial debt. We saw yesterday, and of course in 
the budget . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can thank Devine for that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — And yes, we can thank the Premier for this, but 
the third highest expenditure in the budget is servicing the 
provincial debt. Their federal friends in  

Ottawa who operate the same way, that’s the highest cost, the 
highest budget item in the federal debt. They’ve got this 
government beat. In four years they’ve doubled the national 
debt. These are the managers. So much for Tory management. 
 
Well what else have the people of Saskatchewan got as we 
proceeded to privatize? Well they’ve got fewer services for 
people, incredible cuts and slashes by this government. Again, 
cuts that would never have been imaginable, never would have 
been imagined four and five years ago. 
 
You also got fewer jobs. I find it interesting that the Premier 
and the Deputy Premier are so concerned about the 40 jobs in 
Estevan, as we are, but they certainly have no concern for the 
400 highway workers, the 140 Kelsey instructors, the 400 
dental technicians. And then if they were so concerned about 
the construction workers in Estevan, why didn’t they commit 
yesterday that they would provide them with compensation? 
Again, there’s rhetoric on the one hand and there’s action on the 
other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what else have the people of Saskatchewan got from the 
Tory style privatization? Well as I said, fewer jobs — 1,000 
fewer jobs just in the budget of a couple of weeks ago, which to 
young people . . . which was the third year in a row that we’ve 
cut jobs to young people going to post-secondary education. No 
wonder young people are forced to leave the province. 
 
Well we’ve also, with privatization, got fewer business 
opportunities. Another legacy of this government is another 
record of last year, which topped the record of the year before, 
in terms of small-business bankruptcies. I wouldn’t be surprised 
if the record is topped again this year because small-business 
people aren’t getting support from this government. 
Small-business people in Saskatoon Eastview, which is a very 
large riding, do not feel supported by this government, and they 
certainly do not support this government. 
 
Well, the people of Saskatchewan, what else did they get? Well, 
they got very few opportunities, but they do have the 
satisfaction of knowing, I suppose, that they got taken to the 
cleaners by this government, and that’s some consolation. Little 
wonder that the people of the province are upset. 
 
This Bill does nothing, Mr. Speaker, to create jobs. The throne 
speech and the budget speech did nothing to create jobs, but this 
privatization direction does nothing to increase wages to a level 
that people can live on; it does nothing to provide better 
working conditions for people; it does nothing to stabilize and 
diversify and expand the provincial economy. 
 
These are hollow buzz-words that the Premier continues to use, 
and he used them again today, hollow buzz-words by a 
desperate Premier who’s on his way out, Mr. Speaker. In fact, 
the Tory privatization ideology and action, in fact, restricts the 
economy; it restricts the economy to just a few participants, to a 
few winners and many, many losers, because this is the legacy 
of Tory governments world-wide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

792 
 

Well-to-do people line their pockets; corporations line their 
pockets; corporate wealth is concentrated and the masses live in 
poverty. This is the situation in Britain today; Britain has got 
more poor people than it has every had. It’s the situation in the 
United States — 40 million Americans have no health coverage 
because they can’t afford the insurance. The United States has 
more poor people today than they have ever had. Now we want 
to follow . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They have a democratic government. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, they have a democratic government. 
They have a democratic government which allows more poor 
people than they’ve ever had. I mean that’s some sense of 
democracy; that’s some real sense of democracy! 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Morse is quite 
brilliant. He’ll want to enter into the debate here . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, I hope the member of Morse enters the 
debate. He’s got a lot to say from his seat, so I’m sure he’ll 
want to speak and impart that wisdom to the rest of the people 
who are watching throughout the province. 
 
But with all these poor people in Britain and the United States 
— and this is public information; this is not NDP information 
— why would we want to follow that kind of trend with failed 
economic policies? Privatization hasn’t worked there. It has 
never worked. It’s not working world-wide, and it won’t work 
here. It isn’t working here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This approach restricts the economy to a dependence on outside 
economic forces in a manner that this province has not accepted 
in over 40 years, Mr. Speaker. This policy of privatization is 
like the free trade agreement, supported so strongly by members 
opposite. It’s designed to do one thing, to create an exploitive, 
unfair, and harmful economic system, just like in the United 
States and Britain. 
 
The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, like to talk about freedom, 
getting governments off the backs of individuals. What 
freedom, Mr. Speaker, is there for individuals in this province if 
the control and the power over their lives is taken away from 
them? Well that’s some freedom. 
 
Psychologists know, Mr. Speaker, that the greatest stress in 
people is a loss of control over their own lives. It’s been well 
established. What freedom is there when people no longer have 
a voice in the important decisions over their economic future? 
What freedom is there for people when through the government 
they elect they no longer have the power to make decisions in 
the interests of this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, selling off the assets of the province is only one 
side of the privatization policies of this government. The other 
side of it, of course, is the elimination of services, again which 
this government has done in a way that could not be imagined 
by Saskatchewan people. And  

nowhere is the cold, callous, and unfeeling aspects of 
privatization more evident than in the services lost to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
In this instance, the approach of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, of this PC government, has been twofold. First, 
is to turn services over to the private sector, such as was done in 
the case of the school dental program. This resulted in no 
savings to the province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it resulted in an 
increased cost to the taxpayers, and it provided a much lower 
level of service to families. The Minister of Health is sitting 
there; he knows that. The dental program utilization rate was 
over 90 per cent, and now we’re down to about 60 per cent, 
with some parts of the province having no access to no dental 
services at all. Why on earth would a government make this 
kind of a decision to cut needed services and supports to . . . and 
preventive services to children and families. 
 
The second aspect to this is what I call forced privatization. 
Since down-sizing of the government is a primary principle of 
the policy of privatization, the services eliminated or the needs 
of people that are unfilled are now transferred to the community 
at large. This transfer does not involve any exchange of money. 
It does not reduce the size of government and it does not lower 
taxes. In fact, this transfer to the community, Mr. Speaker, 
simply places the needs into the hands of whichever charity is 
able or willing to lend a hand. 
 
Unfortunately, however, these organizations lack the resources 
to do the job adequately. And now when they try to develop the 
minimum financial resources necessary to try and provide a 
minimum level of service, the government penalizes them 
through a new tax. The only profit from this scheme, Mr. 
Speaker, accrues to this government as it imposed the tax, 
supposedly to pay for services it refuses to provide, on those 
individual community organizations who are attempting to fill 
the void left by this government’s failure in social policies. 
 
What crazy logic, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the effects of the 
privatization of services to Saskatchewan families has been felt 
by all. No family has been left untouched. 
 
The long-term effects will be particularly hard indeed. The 
effects are economic, and we have already seen many of them, 
as members today have referred to and as I’ve referred to some 
of them. Higher taxes. We’re the highest-taxed province in the 
country of Canada, Mr. Speaker. Higher unemployment. For the 
first time since stats were recorded, a couple of months ago our 
unemployment level is higher than the national average. 
 
Now that’s not performance. It would only . . . it would be 
worse except record numbers of people are leaving the province 
and aren’t being counted. In addition to that, it would be worse, 
but many people who are unemployed are not captured in the 
statistics. 
 
Well what are some of the other economic effects by this 
privatization approach? Fewer jobs, reduced power for our 
government in the economy. Well, the effects of privatization 
are not only economic, Mr. Speaker, they’re  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

793 
 

also social. Disruption and hardship for our families because 
jobs are scarce has reflected in this province in greater stress in 
urban Saskatchewan and on the family farm and in the North. It 
is reflected in increased physical and sexual abuse, in increased 
alcohol and drug abuse and, I might say, very sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, in the level of suicide in the province. These are all 
desperation moves by people trying to survive under this 
government’s regime. 
 
There are some additional social effects, Mr. Speaker. What 
we’ve seen in the province, not only in dental care and to the 
prescription drug program, but through home care and in our 
hospitals and nursing homes — decreased health services. And 
my colleague from Saskatoon Centre talked about seniors being 
absolutely angry and sick because of the many years that it took 
them to build up the economic and social structures in this 
province, and they see this government wiping them out in a 
matter of two or three years. 
 
And many, many seniors live in Saskatoon Eastview, and 
they’re calling me all the time about speaking on their behalf, 
holding this government to account for the destruction of the 
health care system in this province, a system that many of those 
people increasingly either have to rely on or may have to rely 
on. And they resent the fact that the Premier of this province 
has inferred that they’re drug abusers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what else, of course, are some of the impacts we’ve seen? 
Less money for education. You know this government likes to 
talk about the value of education and preparing our young 
people to take on the world, but what have they done? Well 
they decreased the number of summer jobs for students; they’ve 
underfunded universities so badly that computer equipment is 
antiquated and libraries can’t keep up; and they’ve shifted the 
burden of education to the student, Mr. Speaker, and in fact so 
students can’t afford the tuition fees; they can’t get a summer 
job; they’ve placed restrictions on bursary programs and student 
loan programs, and they simply can’t access post-secondary 
education. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a question of credibility with this 
government. They talk about education and the value of 
education and the value of preparing our young people for the 
future, then don’t provide them with the supports to allow them 
to be prepared. 
 
Well other disruptions for families and social impacts — we see 
privatized adoption services, the province abrogating its 
responsibility in the adoptions area. We see this government, 
this Minister of Social Services, supported by this Premier, 
introducing a Bill that looks at profit-oriented child care. Mr. 
Speaker, as I look at this list, I can’t help but be struck by the 
fact that these policy initiatives do not represent a positive 
policy thrust for Saskatchewan people. No sane person could 
conclude otherwise. 
 
What the list does represent is a list of problems that this 
government has created for the people and the families as they 
attempt to create some mythical past. This Premier, this devoted 
spokesman for families and for youth, could  

not have placed, he simply could not have placed more stress 
and more hardship on families, on Saskatchewan families, if he 
had consciously attempted to do so. 
 
Well what are some alternatives, Mr. Speaker? Obviously 
we’ve got to go in a new direction. The people of Saskatchewan 
are an optimistic people, they’re hopeful people, and there must 
always be hope, Mr. Speaker, for a better day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, that the policy of privatization is 
not a good policy for the people of Saskatchewan, and I have 
outlined some of my reasons for saying this. A significant part 
of my argument rests on the belief that the creation of wealth 
and the distribution of wealth and the fulfilment of the needs of 
individuals and families in our society rests with the ability of 
government, acting with and in the interests of a provincial 
community of people, to ensure that economic opportunities do 
exist and that the principles of justice and compassion and 
fairness and equality are abided by. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this cannot happen where the policy of 
government is to solely satisfy only one sector of our economy 
and of our society. The people of Saskatchewan represent many 
varied interests, Mr. Speaker. They represent different needs 
and dreams. 
 
For our province to work effectively and to ensure that these 
interests, needs, and dreams are satisfied as much as possible, 
government policy must take these things into account and 
balance them equitably. The people of Saskatchewan expect 
and they deserve just such a policy in both economic activities 
in health care, in education, and in social programs. 
 
Such a policy cannot be followed if government is not willing 
to intervene in the economy or to ensure that people have the 
ability and the opportunity to participate in the economy and in 
the society as full, truly full and equal partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at the situation faced by this province 
today, it is clear that the primary goal of any government must 
be the creation of health and wealth, not the policy of wealth 
transfer followed by the members opposite. And clearly the 
lessons to be learned by the actions of this government, and the 
efforts of governments before it, is that the creation of wealth 
and opportunities and the assurance of high quality adequate 
services to people rests with the encouragement of the three 
sectors in our provincial economy. 
 
What are these sectors, Mr. Speaker? Well there’s the 
co-operative sector that served this province well. Over 25 per 
cent of the business volume in this province today is done by 
co-ops, Mr. Speaker. So you’ve got to promote and encourage 
the co-operative sector. Well this government phased out the 
department of co-ops, so that’s their commitment to the 
co-operative sector. 
 
The private sector, the second sector of our provincial economy 
that’s historically played an important role, Mr. Speaker. But 
not the Pocklingtons and the Weyerhaeusers and the 
megaprojects; it’s the small-business people, the small private 
entrepreneurs who are the family businesses  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

794 
 

who are the backbone of the private sector economy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the third sector, the third engine of this economic growth, 
Mr. Speaker — it’s been proven in this province over 40 years 
— has been the public sector; and some balancing of these three 
sectors. 
 
If the Premier is serious about diversification . . . This isn’t a 
new concept. We were well on the way to diversifying well 
before 1982. And in fact what’s happened in northern 
Saskatchewan — I lived there for two years, 1975 and ’76 and 
part of ’77 — is that the economic infrastructure in northern 
Saskatchewan in terms of small business was there under DNS. 
In terms of the economic development branch, and economic 
development branches in communities throughout the North 
working with local people, local governments to put in place the 
infrastructure for northern economic development, and that of 
course has been pulled out by this government. So they’ve 
totally forgotten, they’ve totally forgotten the small-business 
sector. They put all their eggs in the one basket: big 
privatization, corporate wealth, megaprojects, public sector is 
the enemy — the small-business sector may not be the enemy, 
but they’re certainly not feeling supported, but they’re certainly 
forgotten by this government — and of course co-ops who feel 
let down by this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Deserted. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — And deserted of course too. 
 
So each of these sectors, Mr. Speaker, has a long and proven 
record and history in this province. This is why senior citizens 
are so upset. It took many years to build up these family 
businesses, small family businesses and co-operatives and the 
wheat pool and the co-op stores and the other co-operative 
sectors in this province. It took many years to build those up. 
And they see, at best, benign neglect in that sector by this 
government. But each of these three sectors has made 
significant contributions to the economic and social life in 
Saskatchewan. To deny the role of any one of these sectors in 
the future is to deny a future to our families, to our children, and 
to our children’s future. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world, as we know, is full of economic 
theories, and I suppose the Premier’s economic theory of “never 
say whoa in a mud hole” has some limited applications 
somewhere, certainly not in Saskatchewan, but I suppose it has 
application somewhere. No economic theories work properly in 
isolation from each other. They can work if they are applied in 
the context of the values, the needs and the objectives of the 
society at large. That is the common sense approach. 
 
We heard the Premier talking today in question period about the 
common sense approach. The people in Saskatoon Eastview see 
him as having no common sense, and so the common sense 
approach, it certainly has not been demonstrated by the way this 
government has operated, as we see down in Estevan, as we 
saw in the dental program. Well you have an idea, you ram it  

through and worry about the process later, and then you blame 
somebody else. That’s not a common sense approach; it’s not 
even an approach with integrity. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the common sense approach — there is just 
no doubt about this; there is no other way, Mr. Speaker — 
means a mixed economy. It means a recognition of its reality, a 
recognition of its value, and a recognition of its potential. None 
of these things are possible, however, if government denies its 
basic role to provide for the needs and the wishes of all 
members — of all members of our society, not just to corporate 
friends. 
 
And this is precisely what the privatization policies of this 
government do. The policies of this government, they deny the 
basic role of government to provide for the needs and 
aspirations of all members in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, it is the wrong policy for Saskatchewan. 
 
Privatization is the wrong policy for the economy of 
Saskatchewan; privatization is the wrong policy for the people 
of Saskatchewan. It is a policy that attempts to recreate a past 
that was rejected by the people in this province many years ago 
and will be rejected again. 
 
Privatization is a policy that this government, simply put, has 
no mandate to implement. It is a policy that will defeat this 
government. The sooner the better, Mr. Speaker, say the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would just like to say that the people 
of Saskatchewan . . . Well the members are happy that I’m 
closing; I hope that they have some intelligent comments to 
make. The Saskatchewan people do not accept the PC vision of 
privatization, Mr. Speaker, for all the reasons that I outlined in 
my comments. 
 
Once again the Premier of this province who doesn’t stand up 
for Saskatchewan on the national scene, but once again our 
Premier is on the wrong side of the issue, and he will pay the 
electoral price for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot and I do not accept this Bill and we will 
fight it to the end, Mr. Speaker; be sure about that. The people 
of Saskatchewan can be sure about that. We make that 
commitment today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
haven’t seen a member of the government side of the House 
wanting to raise and speak in this debate. Mr. Speaker, I find 
that interesting that we’ve debated all afternoon and there hasn’t 
been a Progressive Conservative member of the legislature who 
wants to speak to this. 
 
And no wonder, Mr. Speaker; no wonder members opposite 
don’t want to rise and defend this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because 
this little Bill which is only six pages is the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
that authorizes the selling out of this province, the selling off of 
this province, the selling off of the heritage that the pioneers of 
Saskatchewan worked for  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

795 
 

decades to build and that this bunch of members opposite, the 
government, Mr. Speaker, want to destroy that heritage in a 
matter of a decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — They want to take what people in 
Saskatchewan have spent 80 years building, and they want to 
destroy it in eight years, Mr. Speaker. And I say that all 
members of this legislature will look back after the next 
election, and members on that side of the House will regret their 
decision, Mr. Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to defeat this government over Bill 1, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that when people understand the real agenda of this 
Bill, which is an agenda of privatization and ensuring that the 
benefits from that privatization go to the friends of the PC 
Party, they will defeat the PC Party in the next election, Mr. 
Speaker. I have no doubt about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this privatization process, 
this blanket privatization process that Bill 1 authorizes has in 
effect been under way now for some time in this province. Bill 
1 will accelerate that process, Mr. Speaker, and it will allow the 
government of the day not to have to come back to the 
legislature with the frequency it’s had to in the past to receive 
approval for its privatization process. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the process has been under way for some 
time, and the fact that it has, Mr. Speaker, allows the people of 
Saskatchewan to judge what the benefits of this process have 
been to date, because in the last few years we’ve seen this 
government make a decision to sell off Sask Minerals; to sell 
off Saskoil; to sell off SaskCOMP, our computer company; to 
sell off their shares in SED Systems, our high-tech company in 
Saskatoon; to sell off the Prince Albert Pulp Company; and to 
sell off part of our resources to Manalta Coal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen a number of those kind of sell-offs, and what the 
people of Saskatchewan have been asking themselves, I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, in the last little while is, what have they gotten 
from all these sales that the government has made? Because 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, the government has sold hundreds of 
millions of dollars of assets — assets that the people of 
Saskatchewan had fully paid for. And one would think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan would have seen 
some benefits from those sales, and I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to 
consider, what have the Saskatchewan people gotten from this 
sale of hundreds of millions of dollars of assets? 
 
Has the Premier managed, in the course of selling off these 
hundreds of millions of dollars of assets, to reduce the debt of 
the province of Saskatchewan? No, Mr. Speaker, despite the 
fact that privatization is proceeding at a record pace, the 
Minister of Finance had to come in, Mr. Speaker, this year and 
ask the people of Saskatchewan to go in debt another $230 
million just to provide for basic government services, despite 
the fact that hundreds of millions of dollars of assets in this 
province are being sold. Even with those sales, Mr.  

Speaker, this government is incapable of balancing their books. 
 
Have the people of Saskatchewan been able to look forward to 
lower taxes as a result of this government selling off all these 
companies, Mr. Speaker? Not a chance. I live in a relatively 
affluent constituency in this province. Lots of my neighbours 
are making in the range of 40,000, $45,000 a year. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re paying the third highest level of income tax anywhere in 
Canada. They haven’t seen any of the benefits of this 
government selling off its assets. It hasn’t reduced their taxes. 
 
And most people in this province, Mr. Speaker — and there are 
many in this province who make far less than $40,000 a year — 
have seen no benefits at all. Their taxes have consistently risen, 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time that this government has 
proceeded to sell off all the assets that they owned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that just means that with less assets in place, 
generating less revenues in the future, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan won’t be able to look forward to lower taxes. On 
the contrary, they will have nothing to look forward to than 
higher taxes from this government, Mr. Speaker. Because if you 
sell off your assets and you’re not generating any revenues from 
those assets by which you can finance public services like 
health and education, then it just stands to reason that in the 
future you will have to pay even higher taxes still for those 
public services, Mr. Speaker. And that’s going to be one of the 
results of this government’s privatization actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, have we seen any benefits in terms of new jobs 
created from this privatization process? Hardly, Mr. Speaker. 
On the contrary, we have seen, Mr. Speaker, a loss of jobs, a 
loss of jobs in line government departments, to begin with, 
where employees were laid off, where presumably services 
were to be contracted out to the private sector, and then those 
services were never delivered in a way that they met the needs 
of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we see an example of that, of course, in Highways. I 
remember, Mr. Speaker, that that was one of the first 
departments that was privatized. And the member for Wilkie 
who was the minister of Highways at the time and is no longer 
in this House, Mr. Jim Garner, was fond of saying, Mr. Speaker, 
that he was going to provide an opportunity for the employees 
in the Department of Highways to go out and work in the 
private sector. He laid off 167 employees in 1983 and 247 
employees in 1984, and almost none of those employees got 
jobs in the private sector with private highway contractors, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He privatized the highway work, and ever since he did so, 
highways in this province have deteriorated to the point where 
you can’t even drive from Saskatoon to Regina any more on the 
most significant highway system in this province without 
having your car or the bus hit at least 20 or 30 bumps to the 
mile, Mr. Speaker. I can’t even write on the bus any more when 
I travel down because there are so many pot-holes along the 
way that it’s impossible to write a letter. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

796 
 

An Hon. Member: — It’s an adventure up there. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Yes, my colleague, the member from Moose 
Jaw North says that writing on the bus is kind of like an 
adventure. You never know when your pen is going to leave the 
page, Mr. Speaker, there are so many bumps along the highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record in terms of this government and its 
privatization to date has been one of lost jobs, lost control over 
our economy, a decline in services. And I want to speak for a 
moment about the decline in services. 
 
I mentioned highways and how they’ve deteriorated, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen a similar decline, as some of my 
colleagues have mentioned, with respect to services provided to 
the public in the area of health care. It was only a few years ago 
that we had a first-class dental care system in rural 
Saskatchewan for children, Mr. Speaker; the best in the world, 
unprecedented anywhere in North America. And governments 
from all across the world were coming to Saskatchewan, 
looking to Saskatchewan as a model for how high quality dental 
care could be delivered to children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since that service was privatized, we’ve seen a 
significant decline in the rate of usership for dental services, 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan by families. It’s been very 
inconvenient for farm families and families in small 
communities where there is no dentist to have to take half a day 
or even a full day off work and arrange for the transport of their 
children into the nearest centre with a dentist, which is often a 
drive of over an hour, and often involves, Mr. Speaker, a long 
wait in the town while their children are having their dental care 
taken care of. 
 
So we’ve seen a significant drop, not surprisingly, in the 
usership of dental care as a result of that, Mr. Speaker. And 
clearly no one benefitted from that, other than perhaps a few 
dentists in private practice in the province of Saskatchewan who 
have seen their practice increase as a result of the children who 
were being serviced in the schools now having to look to them 
for service. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that this Assembly and the legislation 
that is under debate in this Assembly today demonstrates just 
how far this government is prepared to go in terms of 
sacrificing services to the people of Saskatchewan in exchange 
for being able to implement its privatization ideology. And I 
speak, Mr. Speaker, of the adoption legislation which is 
currently before this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just can’t believe that this government wants to 
privatize infant adoption services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I just can’t believe it. And the reason I say that, 
Mr. Speaker, is that this government’s agenda is to set up two 
or three private adoption agencies in this province and in effect 
have almost all infant adoptions in this province handled 
through those private agencies. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not hard to tell where those private 
agencies are going to be. They are going to be located in 
Saskatoon and in Regina, and if we’re very lucky, we’ll  

maybe see one in Prince Albert. 
 
Now what will that mean to somebody in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker? There’s only about 100 infant adoptions a year in 
the province, bearing in mind, Mr. Speaker . . . only about a 
hundred in the province. And right now anybody who wants to 
adopt a child can walk into their local branch of the Department 
of Social Services and they can indicate that they are interested 
in becoming a prospective adoptive parent. And they will be 
subject to the regular home interviews and other examinations 
to make sure that they are a fit parent, and they will have to wait 
probably for some eight years, Mr. Speaker, before they will be 
in line to adopt an infant. It’s a long wait, and that’s because 
there are a lot more people who want to adopt a child than there 
are infants available for adoption in any one year. 
 
Now what this government wants to do, Mr. Speaker, is it wants 
to change the rules under which adoption takes place in this 
province, and it, Mr. Speaker, wants to make sure that the 
adoption service is primarily available in the large urban 
centres. It’s going to be people in Saskatoon and Regina and 
Prince Albert who are going to be the first to get on the waiting 
lists of the private centres. And the person, Mr. Speaker, who 
lives along the U.S.-Saskatchewan border or who lives in La 
Ronge is going to find that it is several months before they 
make their way into Regina or Saskatoon to get onto the waiting 
lists of one of the private agencies. And they will have to drive 
into Saskatoon or Regina to access that service, Mr. Speaker. 
And clearly the people in rural Saskatchewan, the people in 
rural Saskatchewan who would like to adopt a child, will be at a 
major disadvantage because they will find that when they 
register on those waiting lists, Mr. Speaker, they will be well 
down the waiting list in contrast to somebody in an urban centre 
who registered early. 
 
The inequity in this adoption legislation and the unfairness in 
the way that it will treat prospective adoptive parents, 
demonstrates this government’s privatization agenda, Mr. 
Speaker. The privatization of adoption services are not for the 
well-being of adoptive children, and they’re not for the 
well-being of most adoptive parents, Mr. Speaker, they are only 
for the well-being of a few prospective adoptive parents who 
would like to, Mr. Speaker, as is the case in Saskatoon where 
we have people who’ve adopted a child and have waited for less 
than a year to do so. It’s to the advantage of a few adoptive 
parents. And for every adoptive parent who only has to wait a 
year to adopt a child, someone else in Saskatchewan who wants 
to adopt a child will have to wait 12 or 13 years, Mr. Speaker, 
instead of the average waiting list of eight because, Mr. 
Speaker, what the system that this government is creating is one 
of inequity. And I use that, Mr. Speaker, as a little example of 
what privatization of services is doing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that a little example or a little 
exaggeration. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The member for Weyburn says: or is it a little 
exaggeration. The member for Weyburn will find it interesting 
when he tells the people of Weyburn that they  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

797 
 

can no longer walk into the local branch of the Department of 
Social Services and make arrangements to adopt an infant, that 
the people from Weyburn will have to drive up to Regina to 
register at the private agency in Regina before they can adopt a 
child. 
 
We’ll wait and see, when the Minister of Social Services 
announces the details of his plan, how the people of Weyburn 
will like that service, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that they won’t, 
and that’s just one example of how services have deteriorated 
when they’re privatized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the other 
privatization initiatives that this government has chosen to take, 
but before I do, I want to comment for a moment about why we 
on this side of the House believe that public ownership of the 
resources and of some of the services in this province is 
important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw public ownership as simply one part of a three part 
initiative, Mr. Speaker, to expand jobs and build the economy 
of Saskatchewan. Public ownership was to go hand in hand with 
co-operative ownership, with joint ventures between the public 
sector and the private sector, and with private sector ownership, 
Mr. Speaker — a threefold initiative in terms of building the 
economy of Saskatchewan. And what we see this government 
wanting to do, Mr. Speaker, is to destroy one of those engines, 
to kill the public sector engine of the economy completely. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we saw public ownership as being an 
important vehicle for controlling our own destiny in this 
province over our economic affairs. And rather than having key 
sectors of the economy owned by foreign, non-Canadian firms, 
rather than having the forest sector of this economy in 
Saskatchewan controlled by Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington, or rather than having the potash sector owned 
partially by the Chinese, as our Premier would have it, or 
owned, as it used to be, Mr. Speaker, primarily by large 
American multinationals, our vision, Mr. Speaker, was that the 
potash sector could be owned in large part by the people of 
Saskatchewan and controlled here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We saw, Mr. Speaker, initiatives like the nationalization of 
potash and the initiative that was taken to own a small part of 
the oil sector in our economy as being a way of insuring that the 
profits from oil and the profits from potash would go for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I remind members opposite that the initiative on potash, to 
nationalize potash, was taken when the private potash 
companies refused to pay their fair share of taxes to the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We were, as a government, 
unable to collect the taxes that were owed to the people of 
Saskatchewan by the private potash companies because they 
refused to pay them, Mr. Speaker. And it was when they 
refused to pay them that we decided that we would no longer 
tolerate that, that those profits belonged to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and we took a bold initiative, Mr. Speaker, and 
we nationalized part of the potash industry in this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that potash industry in the years when we 
were in government, in the period from 1978 to 1981,  

Mr. Speaker, in those four years alone, those potash companies, 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, owned by the people 
of Saskatchewan, made $78 million in 1979, Mr. Speaker; $168 
million in 1980, Mr. Speaker; $181 million in profit in 1981, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in those three years alone, in those three years 
alone the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made more than 
$400 million for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
more than $400 million. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in those three years alone the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan’s profits came close to paying for 
all the assets that were purchased by the New Democratic Party 
government of the day when potash was nationalized, Mr. 
Speaker. In just three years alone, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s something that the members of the government 
opposite don’t like to admit. That record of profit, Mr. Speaker, 
is not something that the members of the government opposite 
like to admit. 
 
Now what this government has done since, Mr. Speaker, is it 
has chosen to siphon off the equity in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan for its own purposes. It has siphoned it off to the 
point where it has put the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
more than $800 million in debt, Mr. Speaker. And now it wants 
to propose, as a result of the debt that it has created, that it 
needs to sell PCS off to somehow pay for that debt burden, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s an example of the kind of waste and 
economic mismanagement that we’ve consistently seen from 
the government opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the original purpose of PCS, as was the case 
with many other of the resource industries that we chose to 
partially nationalize, was that those profits would go for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan, for the benefit of 
operating government services like health and education, and 
reducing the cost thereof to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had also seen public ownership as a vehicle for 
creating jobs in this province; as a vehicle for, for instance in 
the case of PCS, ensuring that the head office jobs and the jobs 
in research, instead of being down in Texas, Mr. Speaker, 
would be based in my home city of Saskatoon. And 600 jobs 
were created in Saskatoon when PCS was nationalized, Mr. 
Speaker, jobs that would otherwise never have been in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were some of the reasons why we wanted to 
see resources like potash in public hands. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
wanted to ensure not only that the resource would be owned by 
the people of Saskatchewan, but that the next generation of 
Saskatchewan children would have the benefits of being able to 
earn profits from the operation of corporations like PCS without 
there being any debts associated with that. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that they have truly sold out 
the heritage of the next generation of Saskatchewan children in 
their proposal now to sell off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, if they had not come to 
government, in a matter of another four or five years there 
would have been no  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

798 
 

debts owing on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan at all. 
There would have been no debts owing, and the next generation 
of Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, children like my own 
— I’ve two boys right now, Mr. Speaker, who are one and three 
— and my vision originally, Mr. Speaker, was that my children 
and all other children in this province, when they turned 18 
years of age, they would have inherited a resource in the area of 
potash with no debts and an equity of 2 to $3 billion on which 
they could have earned profits of over $100 million a year, Mr. 
Speaker, and this government has taken that opportunity away 
from them. That is what this government has done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — That’s the record of this government, and it’s 
a record, Mr. Speaker, that is unequalled in terms of shame by 
any other government in this dominion, Mr. Speaker, by any 
other government in this dominion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of our other visions in terms of public 
ownership was a vision that not only would the people of 
Saskatchewan control the resource, but that we would then be 
able to use that control to better the lives of the communities 
where those resource companies operated in, and to benefit the 
occupational health and safety of the employees who worked in 
those companies, and, Mr. Speaker, to increasingly provide an 
opportunity for Saskatchewan residents to exercise a real say in 
how those companies were to operate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We envisioned, Mr. Speaker, for instance, the opportunity for 
those Crown corporations to hold annual meetings in local 
communities where they could be held to account by the local 
people for how the corporation was being run. We envisioned, 
Mr. Speaker, an opportunity for employees who worked in 
companies like Sask Minerals or the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to have real control over the occupational health 
and safety conditions in their work place. And that was 
beginning in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan before 
the government changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, we saw an opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, for companies like this to create new wealth and new 
jobs for people all across this province. And what this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is attempting to do is to make sure that that vision that 
we had as a government, and that the people of Saskatchewan 
shared, can now never come to pass. Because what this 
government wants to do is take the unprecedented step in the 
next 18 months, Mr. Speaker, of selling off one and one-half 
billion dollars of assets that the people of this province have 
paid for. They will sell them off probably at no more than 50 
per cent of what they are worth, Mr. Speaker. They will go 
mostly to residents who live outside this province, Mr. Speaker. 
They want to turn the control of Saskatchewan back over to 
their multinational friends in the United States and in other 
parts of this dominion, Mr. Speaker. We will have no part of 
this, Mr. Speaker, and I will adjourn the debate on this motion. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


