





























































Hansard: July 25, 1989


July 25, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 29 — Forestry in the Meadow Lake Area 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I made a few opening remarks just before we broke for supper 
and to meet with the Duke and Duchess, and at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving a motion: 
 
That this Assembly commends the government, the town of Meadow Lake, and the associated Indian 
bands for their decision to return to the people of Meadow Lake and area the forestry industry with 
which they can build a secure and prosperous future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move this resolution. I’m proud of the initiative 
taken by the town of Meadow Lake and the native Indian bands of the area. These people saw a need for 
economic development in their community, and when the opportunity arose they had the good sense and 
courage to undertake the challenge. 
 
I’m of course referring to their purchase of the Crown-owned saw mill in Meadow Lake which used to 
be part of the Prince Albert Pulp Company, otherwise known as PAPCO, of which most was sold to 
Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. Under the deal signed with the provincial government, NorSask Forest 
Products Inc., known more commonly as Meadow Lake saw mill, was purchased by the Meadow Lake 
District Chiefs Investment Company, and by Techfor Services Ltd. Each group owns 50 per cent of that 
company. 
 
The Meadow Lake Chiefs Investment Company is in turn owned by 20 local Indian bands, which 
comprise the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. These 20 bands to jointly identify and participate in 
investment opportunities use MLDC (Meadow Lake District Chiefs) Investment Company Ltd. 
 
The Indian bands of the area established this company in 1983. A year later, in 1984, they established a 
business development branch to provide a number of services to the area. These include such things as 
debt and equity financing for Indian business in the Meadow Lake district. They offer training and 
consulting services to Indian owned and operated business in the district, as well as offer supplement 
services to existing private and public sector financial services. 
 
I know I’m going into a little bit of detail in regard to the MLDC Investment Company, but it’s such an 
important organization for the district, an organization that is helping build and secure a prosperous 
future for Meadow Lake and the surrounding area, a group involved in projects such as the purchase of 
the Meadow Lake saw mill, a true public participation initiative. 
 
The second group I mentioned a moment ago is also special and an integral factor in this initiative. That 
group comprises Techfor Services Limited. Techfor Services Limited is owned by current employees of 
the Meadow Lake saw mill. All employees of the saw mill were offered the opportunity to purchase 
shares in Technfor Services. 
 
Under this plan, Mr. Speaker, the workers of this saw mill become more than just employees working 
for wages. They become shareholders with the right to voice their opinion about how they feel the 
company should conduct its business. They have gained a financial interest in the company. When it 
loses money, they lose money. 



 
But let’s look at the flip side. When the company makes money, they also make money. This co-
operative collection of people realizes that together they can make the mill work. They know they can 
make it work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the positive factors working for them is the vast quantity of aspen that grows in the area. Aspen 
is a primary wood supply utilized by the mills. Aspen, Mr. Speaker, is considered to be the weed of the 
forest. 
 
One of the other most important factors working in their favour is their initiative and their drive to see 
their community grow and prosper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake saw mill sale was expected to lead to even further economic 
development and diversification when it was initiated. And it has. As a result of the purchase of the saw 
mill, a $236 million pulp mill is being built by Nortek of Edmonton. 
 
As well, an $11 million chopstick factory is to be built by King Murphy Lavalin. The pulp mill alone is 
expected to employ approximately 80 people, Mr. Speaker, as many as 170 additional people could be 
employed in woodcutting and hauling, not to mention reforestation. 
 
The approximate amount of employees projected for the chopstick factory is 100. This factory will be 
selling their product to Japan. Mr. Speaker, imagine that. A large proportion of Japan’s chopsticks will 
be produced here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Look at the job creation expected in Meadow Lake, job creation that will result in a spin-off of the 
purchase of the Meadow Lake saw mill by former employees and to local Indian bands. Mr. Speaker, 
imagine the economic growth in this community that will be stimulated by wages alone. These 
employees will live in or near to Meadow Lake; buying even the bare necessities would stimulate the 
economy significantly in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sale of the Meadow Lake saw mill to the people of Meadow Lake and the Indian bands 
is a no-lose situation. At the individual level, people will become much more economically independent. 
 
At the community level, not only will the pride in the community increase but the community will grow 
and prosper. 
 
Let me speak for a moment on the Nortek pulp mill. It is expected to become extremely competitive in 
the industry. The Nortek Energy Corporation has been engaged in researching the steam explosion 
process for several years. The pulp mill located in Meadow Lake will be using this extremely efficient 
method of processing aspen hardwood. It will waste less than half of the wood than a regular mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the financial records of Nortek Energy Corporation, of which Nortek Forestry is a 
subsidiary, are any indication of what can be expected from the pulp mill, things are looking really 
promising. Nortek Energy Corporation has revenues of $18.2 million and 536,000 in profit in 1987. This 
can only spell success for the people of Meadow Lake and the native Indian bands involved in this 
initiative. 
 
By undertaking this initiative, the people of Meadow Lake and the native Indian bands of the area, they 
know what it takes to be successful. These people want a chance, not only for themselves but for their 
families and for their community. The benefits of the project such as the one that the people of Meadow 
Lake and the concerned native Indian bands are endeavouring upon will be far reaching. 
 



Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the entire province will benefit from such an initiative. After all, the success of a 
province is not solely dependent on one or two communities, but on all of the communities of the 
province. And it is the will of the government, Mr. Speaker, to see that each and every community in 
Saskatchewan enjoy continuing and growing success. That is why we commend the people of Meadow 
Lake on their initiative to purchase the saw mill. 
 
The groups that purchased this saw mill are achieving something that not only this province, but this 
country and the world could stand to see more of. 
 
These people are showing us that it is possible for people of differing ways of life to live and work 
together in harmony and achieve something that will not only benefit them both but also benefit the 
community at large and the entire province. That, Mr. Speaker, is public participation. 
 
Look at what public participation initiatives are doing for the Meadow Lake area. It’s creating jobs and 
promoting the diversification and development of the province. The sale of the Meadow Lake saw mill 
is only one of the many success stories that exists because of public participation. 
 
Let me tell you about another, the sale of the former Crown Corporation PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser. Mr. 
Speaker, the positive transformation of this previously Crown-owned corporation has been outstanding. 
Just ask the people of P.A. Ask the people who live in the surrounding areas. They know Weyerhaeuser 
not only created jobs for the people of Saskatchewan but that it has also implemented training programs 
for existing employees of that industry. The transfer of the money-losing Prince Albert pulp mill to 
Weyerhaeuser resulted in 700 construction jobs and almost 200 new permanent jobs. Mr. Speaker, 
Weyerhaeuser’s construction of a world-class paper mill in Prince Albert brought a brand-new 
investment to this province. Eighty per cent of the construction and building materials were supplied by 
Saskatchewan contractors. The monthly income of the paper mill employees alone are contributing 
$500,000 a month directly into the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Look at Weyerhaeuser’s record. Since the sale of the company it has had sales of $298 million to the end 
of 1987 and earned for Weyerhaeuser Canada 15 million. 
 
But let’s also look at what it’s earned for the people of Saskatchewan — approximately $65 million, Mr. 
Speaker, 65 million. In addition to that, Weyerhaeuser invested $248 million in the new paper mill that I 
referred to earlier, making that paper mill the second largest in Canada. And certainly I’ve gone through 
it and looked at it and it is an impressive sight to . . . I don’t know how many members of the opposition 
have gone through there. I guess . . . I don’t even know if the members from Prince Albert have gone 
through it, but I’ve certainly been through the pulp mill many times and the paper mill at least once, and 
it is an impressive sight. 
 
I understand they’re looking at some more additions for Prince Albert. I’ve talked to many people out 
there at the mill as I was going through it and certainly they’re looking at expanding it further in the 
future. I understand that they’re even looking at a second pulp mill and a second paper line because now 
when they run softwood through the mill, they have to dry it so then they can run the hardwood through 
and then they have to re-wet the softwood to mix the soft and the hardwood together in order to run it 
through the paper machine. 
 
So I understand now they’re looking at running a second pulp line so that they’ll by able to run soft and 
hardwoods together so they won’t actually have to dry the one product before they make the other 
product, so they’ll be able to run it steady. And that’s certainly going to be another major project in 
Prince Albert. And that’s up and beyond the new sheeter that they’re building this summer. 
 



It was during that construction that a total of 700 jobs were created, not to mention the 175 permanent 
jobs that were added. And certainly there will be more jobs with the new construction on there this 
summer, and like I said, Weyerhaeuser is looking forward to adding on to that further. And they’ve 
added on since they’ve bought that plant. There’s a new chemical plant built there, the paper mill. 
 
(2015) 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the motion on? 
 
Mr. Muller: — The motion is on public participation. The Meadow Lake saw mill . . . This is just 
relating to what public participation and what private enterprise can certainly do for Saskatchewan. I’m 
glad the member for Moose Jaw got me to relate back to the motion what Weyerhaeuser is doing for the 
province of Saskatchewan, and certainly what Meadow Lake will do for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Weyerhaeuser is creating new economic growth in Prince Albert. As I said, Mr. Speaker, it is but 
another excellent example of the PC government’s plan to diversify the economy through public 
participation. 
 
I mean, what’s wrong with finishing our paper here in Saskatchewan rather than just making pulp and 
shipping it out? What’s wrong with making Xerox paper in Prince Albert instead of shipping out rolls of 
paper and shipping back in the copy paper? What’s wrong with doing these kinds of things? Why 
shouldn’t we finish our products here in Saskatchewan rather than ship them down to the States, have 
them finished, and then bring them back? 
 
I don’t . . . I can’t understand the philosophy of the people across the way that want to keep us as hewers 
of wood and drawers of water. I don’t know why they don’t want to finish their products here. They 
could never see that. 
 
But anyway, Weyerhaeuser is creating new economic growth in Prince Albert. As I said, Mr. Speaker, it 
is but another excellent example of a PC government’s plan to diversify the economy through public 
participation initiatives. 
 
We realize that a government’s job is to govern. Mind you, it hasn’t looked like that recently here 
because the opposition has been trying to block us with their walk-out. 
 
But anyway, to get back to the motion, Mr. Speaker, we are not here to be in the pulp industry or the 
potash industry or the uranium industry. We have no experience in those areas. And because we no 
longer are in those areas, our people are benefitting. 
 
Our government has no business owning a printing company. Because our government recognized this, 
the Saskatchewan government printing company was purchased by its employees. It was purchased by 
employee buy-in, same as the Meadow Lake saw mill . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Half? 
 
Mr. Muller: — Half — purchased half of that company because of Techfor Services; the employees 
purchased it through Techfor Services. We have given those employees, civil servants, the opportunity 
to become owners. 
 
The employees of the government printing company have purchased that company with 200 per cent 
participation. They were all eager and interested in getting involved in the printing company. They 



purchased the printing company’s inventory, its land, the building, and all the equipment. Mr. Speaker, 
the employees of that company invested $189,000 in common and preferred shares. 
 
Those employees now have the opportunity to expand their earnings as private contractors. They have 
greater control over service delivery. They now have an opportunity to share in company ownership and 
profits. And I . . . You know, the people across the way don’t like the word “profits,” and they certainly 
don’t like to see people making profits because then they lose control of it. But, Mr. Speaker, when 
employees invest in a company, they are the owners. 
 
I realize that I’ve gone off on a tangent here, but all the initiative I’ve mentioned here today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member for Quill Lakes and the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
Order, order. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Mr. Speaker, when employees invest in a company, they become owners. I realize that 
I’ve gone off on a tangent but all the initiative I’ve mentioned here today are excellent examples of 
public participation . . . can do for this province . . . what public participation has done for this province. 
 
The bottom line is that by transferring the ownership of Crown corporations to the people of 
Saskatchewan, we’ll expand our economic growth. We will develop our resources, we’ll be creating 
new jobs . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You read that once. You’ve got spots that started way up on the page. 
 
Mr. Muller: — No, I moved a page. The member for Regina Centre seems to be interested in getting into 
this debate, and I’m sure that he knows a lot about forestry, coming from Regina Centre. But we’ll wait 
till he gets off his seat to get into this debate rather than speaking from his seat which he usually does. 
 
We are encouraging new non-government investment in this province. Mr. Speaker, through public 
participation initiatives, real people like those of Meadow Lake are benefitting. They’ve taken control of 
the economic development of their community; they’re building and securing their future, the future of 
generations to come. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, to give the other members of the government and the opposition to get into this 
debate and certainly commend the people of Meadow Lake — and I’m sure that members from the 
opposition benches would even like to get up and commend the people from Meadow Lake for taking 
this initiative — I move: 
 

That this Assembly commends the government, the town of Meadow Lake, and the associated 
Indian bands, for their decision to return to the people of Meadow Lake and area the forestry 
industry with which they can build a secure and prosperous future. 
 

Moved by myself, seconded by the member for Redberry. 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to have the opportunity to debate this important motion 
today, and it’s a pleasure for two reasons: one, because in the past few weeks, it’s been actually brought 
home to us in this great province exactly how important our democratic right to freedom of speech and 
debate really is. It’s also given us insight as to how easily our democratic rights can be taken away from 
us when irresponsibility is demonstrated as opposed to a responsible government. Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
a very important lesson n the last week or so and it isn’t one for our government and certainly is one for 
the people of Saskatchewan that they will likely not forget. 
 



Another reason I’m so pleased to enter into this debate is the fact that the Meadow Lake saw mill, the 
epitome of what public participation really is, is the subject of tonight’s debate. It was almost over a year 
ago, on June 16, 1988, when our Public Participation minister, the hon. member from Wolseley, 
announced the sale of the Meadow Lake saw mill, planer, and Green Lake saw mill to NorSask Forest 
Products of Meadow Lake. The people who invested in this particular initiative were real people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
NorSask Forest Products Inc. is owned 50 per cent by the Meadow Lake District Chiefs Investment 
Company and 50 per cent by Techfor Services Limited, which just happens to be owned by the current 
employees of the Meadow Lake saw mill. The Meadow Lake District Chiefs investment corporation is 
owned equally by 20 Indian bands comprising of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. These bands, Mr. 
Speaker, are the Big C Band, the Canoe Lake Band, the Flying Dust Band, the Joseph Bighead Band, the 
Turnor Lake Band, the Buffalo River Band, the English River Band, the Island Lake Band, the Makwa 
Band, and the Waterhen Lake Band. The investment company is used by 10 bands to jointly identify and 
participate in investment opportunities. 
 
All the employees were offered the opportunity to purchase share in Techfor Services Limited — and 
I’m talking about unionized workers here, Mr. Speaker. There were 157 employees in all who 
participated in this venture; 134 of those people were union and 23 management. And do you know what 
their response was, Mr. Speaker? The shares were over-subscribed by more than 1,800 shares. And I 
think that says a great deal about the real people and what they really think about public participation. 
 
These people involved in this venture are the people who know the business. What does a government 
know about running a saw mill? It, the government, shouldn’t be involved in a saw mill any more than it 
should be involved in mining or resource development. That should be left to the experts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the people who run these businesses have not only their heart and soul but their money and their 
expertise invested in this business, there’s a pretty impressive bottom line, and that’s what public 
participation is about. It’s in action, and that’s what we believe in and what the government believes in. 
 
The actual sale agreement itself, Mr. Speaker, represents what public participation is all about. The 
NorSask forest management agreement guarantees full utilization of the forest resource and prompts 
reforestation in that area. This agreement also supports co-operative forest management programs 
involving northern Metis communities, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council band and the logging 
community. As well, there’s a long-term guarantee of wood supply to facilitate industry development 
and it facilitates negotiations with major and potential hardwood users. A very important part of this 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, is that it gives the northern communities of Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Cole 
Bay, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Jans Bay the first right to harvest in the Vermette Lake block, the first right to haul 
logs into the Vermette block, and the first right to carry on reforestation in this area. 
 
NorSask will consult with communities through a joint committee regarding plans for harvesting, 
logging, and reforestation with respect to the rights of the fishermen and the trappers in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the roads and transportation agreement, which is critical to the forest industry development 
in the Meadow Lake area, will be extremely beneficial to the people in the North. It provides for 
investments in the road infrastructure to permit year-round operation of safe, efficient, overweight 
trucks. It provides improved access to the northern community. It provides improved access to northern 
recreation and tourist destinations, leading to still more jobs in these communities. Most of the road 
construction and maintenance is to be carried out by Northerners and it offers potential for the creation 
of support services. I think you will begin to see a pattern here, Mr. Speaker, of the enormous spin-off 
benefits that public participation brings. And I’m going to list some more. 
 



In regard to the Meadow Lake saw mill specifically, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about how the 
private sector investment has changed the overall picture of this company. Operations commenced at the 
Meadow Lake saw mill in 1972. From 1972 to 1986, with the exception of the year that they were 
closed in 1980, the Meadow Lake saw mill recorded losses every year. Mr. Speaker, they only made one 
product and that was 2-by-4 studs. 
 
In 1987 when the Meadow Lake saw mill was separated from PAPCO, resulting from the Weyerhaeuser 
sale, there were several changes made: new management was put in place; a local advisory board of 
directors was appointed; cost-cutting and productivity measures were implemented, Mr. Speaker, for the 
first time in the mill’s history, in 1987 profits were recorded. 
 
The story of the Green Lake saw mill isn’t much different, Mr. Speaker. Prior to 1987, it was part of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. The reality of the Green Lake saw mill was limited 
production capacity and large quantities of waste product. When it was purchased by the Meadow Lake 
saw mill in September of 1987, it also showed a positive change. 
 
The integration of the Green Lake and the Meadow Lake saw mills has turned Green Lake saw mill into 
a profitable organization, an operation. Mr. Speaker, when we talk about those 157 employees, 10 Indian 
bands, how many people do you think are benefitting? And the benefitting has turned around to a 
profitable organization in the area. A great many, Mr. Speaker; not only profiting in terms of dollars, but 
also a feeling of working hard and seeing positive results of something they put their heart into. And 
that'’ what winning'’ all about. And through public participation initiatives, real people like these are 
winning. 
 
(2030) 
 
The Meadow Lake saw mill not only represents an important measure for employee ownership, but it’s a 
significant step forward for our native people. With the local Indian bands buying into an enterprise that 
directly affects their lives, local control and native economic development are enhanced. That’s pretty 
exciting stuff. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s the first time in our history they’re finally getting a break, getting a chance. 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Exactly. It’s exciting for every person that it’s affected by, and it’s exciting for us as a 
government to be able to offer these kinds of opportunities to the people of our province. Mr. Speaker, 
you can look at this government’s record and public participation initiatives and know that it’s working 
for the people of the province. It’s working too well, obviously, because the NDP tried to hijack the 
legislature over it. 
 
And if you look at real initiative, Mr. Speaker, for example, Weyerhaeuser, you’re looking at the 
transformation of a previously money-losing PAPCO, to the constantly expanding company that it is 
today. It mirrors the initiatives of Meadow Lake. 
 
Just a few weeks ago or so, our Premier went to Prince Albert for the grand opening of Weyerhaeuser’s 
new paper mill. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The people of Prince Albert, the employees of 
Weyerhaeuser, could not say enough kind words about Weyerhaeuser and what it has brought to their 
community. Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t say enough kind words about our Premier for giving him and 
them the opportunity to have this company in their community. 
 
WESTBRIDGE computers, Mr. Speaker, is another high public participation success story that shows 
the people of Meadow Lake and the way they were going are right. The company’s quick rate of growth 



has already created many new employment opportunities, and continued expansion promises 200 or so 
more jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since forming, WESTBRIDGE Corporation has earned $6 million in new revenue in out-
of-province contracts. Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, planned gas development activities resulting from the 
purchase of unutilized SaskPower natural gas reserves, and in 1988 and in ’89 will create new economic 
activity. One thousand new jobs are projected to develop. 
 
Any study of public participation in this province says that it is working, from the contracting out of 
services to bond and share offering of sales to employees. The NDP in Saskatchewan don’t want the 
people to know this, Mr. Speaker. They walked out on legislation that has never been introduced 
because they don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know the benefit that it holds for them, but they 
will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Any of our public participation initiatives will be bringing the same kinds of benefits to the people who 
invest in it, as did to the 10 Indian bands and the employees of the Meadow Lake saw mill. The Meadow 
Lake saw mill is public participation the Saskatchewan way. The employees in the communities have 
put life back in to the saw mill, created growth in their industry, and stabilized their economy. 
Developing these Crown assets has meant new jobs for the north-west, community involvement in a 
viable business, and a revitalized economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know what the conditions are as we move further north in Saskatchewan. I know 
firsthand how difficult farming has been in the last few years. And Mr. Speaker, it is these initiatives and 
initiatives like this that build our future. 
 
In the federal election, Mr. Speaker, we heard the NDP practise the politics of fear as they campaigned 
against the free trade agreement. They didn’t talk about room for expansion for the opportunities for 
new investment or increased job opportunities that free trade would bring. They played on the fear of 
emotionalism. 
 
The same thing happened in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election, Mr. Speaker. The members, they 
practised the politics of fear again. They couldn’t talk about agriculture in rural Saskatchewan because 
they didn’t have any agricultural policy. 
 
They couldn’t talk about rural development because they didn’t have any credibility there either. Mr. 
Speaker, they tried to take the emphasis off of issues and policy, trying to scare people with other ideas. 
 
They told the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that they were going to close every hospital in that 
riding. Well that sounds crazy, but they did it, and that’s the politics of fear. 
 
They take the edge right off of rationality and they play on people’s fears. And now, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re doing it again. They are trying to scare the people into believing that the only people that are 
capable of managing are governments and bureaucracies. 
 
Well they can’t go into Meadow Lake. The Saskatchewan and the Meadow Lake people will tell them, 
because they know it’s not true. They can’t go into Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, and tell the employees 
of Weyerhaeuser how awful public participation is. The people there know it too, it isn’t true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to stop any further public participation initiatives before too many people 
see how good it is. They only practise politics of fear so long. People start to see the kinds of things that 
are possible through public participation and they want to see more. 
 



Our minister for public participation had a meeting a few weeks ago while the members opposite here 
were out trying to petition the people through their fear tactics and at this meeting, Mr. Speaker, 400 
young people attended. These young people gave the Minister of Public Participation a standing ovation 
on a number of occasions. And why did they do that? 
 
Because they believe in what we’re doing and they believe in this province, and our province and our 
government gives the future leaders of our province hope. They believe that we have the resources to be 
anything that we want to be as long as the most important natural resource, our people, are willing to go 
for it. They believe, as the government does, that public participation is a key to the future. Just as public 
participation has meant so much to the community of Meadow Lake, so will widespread public 
participation mean to the entire province. 
 
And that is why it is such a pleasure for me to stand in the House tonight and second a motion by my 
hon. colleague from Shellbrook-Torch River. It is a reflection of what we have already been able to 
accomplish and while at the same time, it is a model for the future. It proves, Mr. Speaker, as will our 
many more public participation initiatives, that there is a bright future for Saskatchewan and a future 
that is in history making. 
 
And before I sit down I would like just to read and second a motion of the hon. member from 
Shellbrook-Torch River: 
 

That this Assembly commends the government, the town of Meadow Lake, and the associated 
Indian bands, for their decision to return to the people of Meadow Lake and area the forestry 
industry with which they can build a secure and prosperous future. 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to participate in the debate tonight on resolution 29 
that was moved by the member from Shellbrook-Torch River and seconded by the member from 
Redberry. I’d just like to start out by reading the motion, so that those out in viewer-land know what 
we’re debating here this evening. 
 
The resolution reads: 
 

That this Assembly commends the government, the town of Meadow Lake, and the associated 
Indian bands, for their decision to return to the people of Meadow Lake and area the forestry 
industry with which they can build a secure and prosperous future. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the resolution has some good merit to it. I think there are some things that are 
lacking in the resolution, and we may want to suggest some changes to the hon. member from 
Shellbrook-Torch River. The one thing I would point that’s sadly lacking, is the resolution does not 
commend the employees of the mill, who are a very important part because they in fact are owners, 
through Techfor, and they’re completely eliminated from the resolution. I don’t know why the hon. 
member would want to omit one part of the resolution that would be very important, and maybe it was 
an oversight on his part. 
 
I do want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that my remarks will be rather brief this evening. We didn’t expect 
either of the members, Shellbrook-Torch River or Redberry, to be up this evening speaking on these 
resolutions because we haven’t heard a lot from the government benches. And I’m happy to finally see 
that members of the government side are participating in debate in this Assembly. And so my remarks 
will be brief because I don’t have any prepared text but I am fairly knowledgeable about the Meadow 
Lake area and about the Meadow Lake saw mill and the events that surrounded the creation of that mill 
and the events that have taken place to this point in time, where the employees and the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council, in fact, are owners of the Meadow Lake saw mill. 



 
I see the member from Weyburn has talked to some of the chamber of commerce. I would want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that the chamber of commerce is not an owner of this saw mill, and I’d want to point that 
out to the hon. member. 
 
Anyway, in the brevity of my remarks I would say that the Meadow Lake saw mill was created when I 
actually lived in the town of Meadow Lake, and for a brief period of time I had the opportunity to work 
on the construction site when the Meadow Lake saw mill was being built. And at that time the people of 
the town of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, expected that there would be a great boom from Meadow Lake 
in the forestry industry because of the Meadow Lake saw mill being located in such a close proximity to 
the town. And many people from town and farmers from the surrounding area would have an 
opportunity, not only to work during the construction of the mill, but to work in the mill after it came 
into production. 
 
Now the mill hasn’t been in production for a number of years now. It’s had some problems over the 
history of the mill. I know that at one time when they would only be producing construction studs from 
the mill, they were limited in terms of the market they could capture. And I understand that there’s 
recently been some moves to get into more dimensional lumber to expand the market for the softwood 
that they turn out of the Meadow Lake saw mill. 
 
Nevertheless, the employees who are at the mill have been there for a long period of time, most of them. 
They member from Shellbrook-Torch River would know that the employees should be included as 
owners of the mill. He cited during his remarks, a number of times, I heard as the MLDC. I’d want him 
to know so that the record could stand corrected, there is no longer a MLDC. There is in fact an MLTC 
which stands for the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. And whoever prepared the remarks for the hon. 
member from Shellbrook-Torch River, if they happen to be listening or reviewing Hansard, they can 
correct that so they don’t mislead their own members when they’re preparing written statements in the 
House for them. 
 
The Meadow Lake saw mill likely is the only example . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, if 
the member from Weyburn wants to participate in the debate maybe he could stand up at some point. 
Otherwise you could ask him to keep his lips from vibrating over there this evening. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Perhaps all members could just allow the member to continue with his 
remarks and not interrupt him. The debate will proceed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — As I said initially, Mr. Speaker, there are some commendable things in the resolution. 
And one of the things that I think is commendable about the resolution is the recognition of the people in 
the Meadow Lake area to go ahead with some initiative and see their forestry operation work in that 
particular area. 
 
The other thing that the motion doesn’t actually say, but in fact is there, that there is public participation 
in the Meadow Lake saw mill. Now in the Meadow Lake saw mill, there is an example there of public 
participation that the government should recognize and use in other areas where they choose not to have 
public participation. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake saw mill is the only example I can think of that is public 
participation. All the other things that the government refers to as public participation in the province of 
Saskatchewan are not really public participation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nonsense. 
 



(2045) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You have the Minister of Public Participation says nonsense. Well I would ask him 
about Weyerhaeuser corporation; Weyerhaeuser Corporation, Mr. Speaker, based in Tacoma, 
Washington. What kind of public participation is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
At least if the Meadow Lake saw mill, when it went from the public sector to the private sector, you 
have the employees of the saw mill, you have the 10 Indian bands in the Meadow Lake area making up 
the Meadow Lake Tribal Council — that is public participation. The people in that area have a chance to 
participate. 
 
Weyerhaeuser Corporation. When Weyerhaeuser took over PAPCO the public had no opportunity to 
participate. What we have is the company came from Tacoma, Washington — the minister would know 
that very well — the company comes from Tacoma, Washington. They end up saying that, well we sold 
them PAPCO for $248 million, Mr. Speaker — $248 million. The government didn’t get a cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and what did they get? Weyerhaeuser Corporation got the pulp mill in Prince Albert. They 
got the saw mill at Bodmin just outside of Big River. They got the chemical company in Saskatoon and 
they got seven million acres of prime commercial forest in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The public in Saskatchewan were shafted, Mr. Speaker. There was no public participation in the 
PAPCO-Weyerhaeuser deal. And that’s why I can say tonight here, standing in this Assembly, that if we 
want to look at an example of public participation we can look at the Meadow Lake saw mill because 
the public are participating, but that’s where it stops. 
 
The government privatizes many, many things and they pull out one example, the meadow Lake saw 
mill, as a good example of public participation. And I say the Meadow Lake saw mill is a good example 
of public participation. If you’re going to move something from the public sector into the private sector 
there’s no better way to do it than to have the employees and local investors become the private sector 
owner of the operation. But this is the only example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve already gone through Weyerhaeuser. We can look at the sale of Sask Minerals. Sask Minerals is a 
Crown corporation, came into existence in the mid-1940s — I believe 1947 if I’m not mistaken. In 1947 
there was a company created, of public ownership, whereby they mined the sodium sulphate in the area 
of Chaplin. 
 
Now during the years that this company was in operation, Mr. Speaker, there was only one year that 
they suffered a loss. Right up until the time that the government sold off Sask Minerals, they only lost 
money one year. All the rest of the years from the mid-1940s up until the date of the sale, Mr. Speaker, 
this Crown corporation brought in very good returns for people in the province of Saskatchewan, raised 
money that could be put into health care, education — the standards of programs that people in 
Saskatchewan had come to expect. 
 
But was there public participation in Sask Minerals when the government chose to privatize it, Mr. 
Speaker? No, there was not. The employees were not given an opportunity to buy into it; the local area 
people, the residents, were not given an opportunity to buy into it. 
 
Who bought it? They find one company from the golden triangle, another one from the province of 
Quebec. They come in and all of a sudden they end up owning Sask Minerals. And there’s some dispute 
as to how much money was received. The minister says one amount; I think Crown investments 
corporation says another amount. But this is not an example of public participation, Mr. Speaker. 
 



The Meadow Lake saw mill is the only example that I could say there is some degree of public 
participation — public participation in terms of moving an entity from public ownership to private 
ownership. 
 
Now the government might have some examples they’d want to use — selling bonds or debentures or 
shares. Well that’s public participation, and that’s not necessarily bad. But what we’re talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, is different examples of public participation that has nothing to do with the complete turning 
over of an entity that is publicly owned to private ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the government has a dismal record in terms of public participation. In fact, 
there are many examples that we’ve seen within this Legislative Assembly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve given the hon. member an opportunity to bring out various examples 
to buttress his argument. It seems to me he’s going into a general discussion of public participation. That 
is not what the motion is about and I ask him to get back to the motion. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you for your great standard and fairness in the debate, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly would be a lot lesser calibre of debate if it wasn’t for you in the Chair of this Assembly, and I 
respect what you’ve just said in your intervention, sir. 
 
The Indian bands in the Meadow Lake area, Mr. Speaker, I notice that neither the member for 
Shellbrook-Torch River or the member for Redberry is very conversant about who the Indian bands 
were or what their role had been in leading up to the creation of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
So maybe it’s worth noting in the debate here this evening, Mr. Speaker, who the Meadow Lake Indian 
bands are that are mentioned in the motion. And I don’t think you’d call me to order on that, Mr. 
Speaker. It says right in here, it says the town of Meadow Lake and associated Indian bands. So I guess 
that would be all right to talk about those. And I see you nodding your head in the affirmative so I guess 
I’ll go through some of the Indian bands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First off we have the Flying Dust Indian Band. The Indian band is located adjacent to the town of 
Meadow Lake. And at the Flying Dust lands we have the head offices for the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council. And of course it’s been pointed out earlier in the debate here this evening, the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council is composed of 10 Indian bands within the area. And they have a very good organization. 
In fact I would venture to say that the Meadow Lake Tribal Council likely has the best organized and 
most progressive tribal council anywhere in Saskatchewan, if not anywhere in North America. And I say 
that without bragging about the Meadow Lake Tribal Council at all. 
 
They’re involved in many economic ventures; they’re involved in social planning; they’re involved in a 
wide range of activities to promote the good and the cause of Indian people and to establish an economic 
base whereby Indian people can have the dignity of starting businesses, maintaining businesses, and 
provide work for their own people. 
 
And they recognize this is a great need because the unemployment within Indian bands throughout 
Saskatchewan, but also in the Meadow Lake Tribal Council area — the unemployment rate is very, very 
high. And they see the need to have social development, economic development for the good of their 
own people, and it’s done by their own people for their own people, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly not 
because of the encouragement by this government in the Meadow Lake saw mill, because the Meadow 
Lake saw mill is only one part of that. 
 
If I was to take out part of the motion or the resolution of the member from Shellbrook-Torch River, it 
would be the part that commends the government, because I don’t think the government needs to be 



commended at all in the things they’ve done in terms of public participation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The second band that is contained within the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, Mr. Speaker, is the 
Sahgaiehcan Band which is at Loon Lake, and they’ve had economic activity there as well for a number 
of years. They operate the Makwa Lake Resort and they’ve operated that facility for a number of years. I 
believe it goes back to about 1972. 
 
Prior to 1971, 1972, in that area, the band had always leased out the resort to a private operator and had 
received a very small return. So in the early ’70s, in co-operation with both the federal and provincial 
governments, there was a training program put on, and a management program whereby the 
Sahgaiehcan Band in fact no longer leased the resort out. They didn’t renew the lease. They decided that 
they would operate the Makwa Lake Resort themselves, and they have operated it since that time until 
this present day. 
 
And this summer the band is still operating a successful resort operation, a very beautiful setting on 
Makwa Lake. And I would recommend that people in Saskatchewan, when they’re out on holidays and 
touring about the province, make a point of stopping by and seeing the Makwa Lake resort, and stopping 
in and talking to people at the resort. It’s a viable business operation, and I hope it continues for many, 
many years into the future. 
 
And I say that the Sahgaiehcan Band at Makwa Lake or Loon Lake . . . Makwa means loon in Cree. 
Sometimes the words get interchangeable. The town is called Loon Lake. The lake is Makwa Lake. But 
the two terms are interchangeable between the Cree and the English language, Mr. Speaker. But that 
particular band, the Sahgaiehcan Band, is another member of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
The other bands which are involved, I’d like to mention the Island Lake Band, Mr. Speaker. The Island 
Lake Band is located near Ministikwan Lake. This band has had relatively high unemployment for a 
number of years, and they have, I think, benefitted greatly by being members of the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council. And I think that the band members of the Island Lake Band would fully acknowledge 
that their association with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council has been a great deal of benefit to them. 
 
The Island Lake Band, Mr. Speaker, is located in two separate locations where there are people who live 
there. The Island Lake Band have some band members living at Moody Lake, which is a bit to the north 
of the main band, and the rest of the band members, the main body of the band live close to Ministikwan 
at the reserve lands that they have in that are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, if the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloyd wants to talk absurdities and foul language from his side of the House, I’d like 
you to hear that side of the House once in a while too and call them to order. Do you think you could 
possibly do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — On point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Speaker, I’d definitely like the member from The Battlefords to withdraw that 
statement. I definitely was not hollering any obscenity from this side of the House, and I don’t bring that 
type of a forum into this Legislature. And I think probably if the member cannot take the odd heckle as 
he would throw across to this side of the House when we are speaking, then I would suggest that he 
withdraw himself from this Assembly. But I do ask for that apology. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve heard the hon. member’s point of order. 
 



A point of order is in fact a dispute between two members, and whether the language was being used or 
not., of course, the Chair didn’t hear. However, I think possibly if hon. members would refrain from 
interrupting each other when they are speaking then these situations wouldn’t arise. 
 
At the same time, I would also like to point out that sometimes hon. members disagree with being 
interrupted when, in fact, sometimes they behave in the same way. So I think that hon. members should 
be reasonable with each other, and if they’re reasonable with each other we wouldn’t have these rather 
unnecessary situations develop. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, the member from The Battlefords is on record in this Assembly stating 
that I have thrown some obscenities — foul language — towards the member. There has been no foul 
language from my mouth, or from any other person’s mouth on this side of the legislature, and I ask you 
to ask him to withdraw that from the record and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I once more repeat that the hon. member’s statement is a dispute between two 
members. The Chair cannot ask the hon. member to withdraw what he did not hear. That’s not possible. 
 
However, I say this, as I repeated just a few moments ago, that if the hon. members on both sides of the 
House, when the member is speaking, would not continuously interrupt them, then we wouldn’t have 
these unnecessary, and in this case, rather unsavoury situation. And I think hon. members on both sides 
of the House should remember this so we don’t have these types of . . . the necessity for these points of 
order which, in fact, aren’t points of order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So the Island Lake Indian Band, Mr. Speaker, is the third band that I wanted to mention 
that makes up the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
Fourthly, there’s the Joseph Bighead Indian Band, and the Joseph Bighead Indian Band is located near 
Beacon Hill, Saskatchewan, between Goodsoil and Pierceland. And Joseph Bighead have had an 
economic activity in way of a farming operation that they had there for a number of years — sometimes 
controversial but nevertheless provided good economic opportunity. Again I would think that the 
members of the Joseph Bighead Band would acknowledge that they have also benefitted from their 
association with the other Indian bands in the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
(2100) 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we have some bands further to the North, and one of those bands that are further 
north of Meadow Lake is the Waterhen Indian Band. The Waterhen Indian Band is located on the shores 
of Waterhen Lake in northern Saskatchewan and they have been a very active part. Their chief there has 
been an active member promoting the cause of Indian rights and promoting activities for his band for 
many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also, in the North, have the Canoe Lake Band. The Canoe Lake Band have a saw mill. I’m not sure 
whether that saw mill is still operating at the present time or not, but the Canoe Lake Indian Band work 
in fairly close association with some of the Metis communities along Canoe Lake. You have 



communities such as Jans Bay and Cole Bay. Those two communities in particular, Mr. Speaker, are 
hoping that the developments that the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, as it particularly pertains to the 
Meadow Lake saw mill, have some benefit for them as well. 
 
And I know that these communities were disappointed recently when a tree planting contract was 
awarded. They had bid on it but the contract was not awarded to those communities. It was awarded to 
an outside firm. 
 
I would hope that in the future the decisions that are made about the Meadow Lake saw mill will look 
towards local benefit, to make sure that people in Saskatchewan and in the area of the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council get the fullest possible benefit for economic spin-off activities that would happen in the 
forestry industry. 
 
We also have the Buffalo River Band, Mr. Speaker, which is along the shores of Churchill Lake. The 
community is called Dillon, and the Buffalo River Band and their chief there have also been very active 
in the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
We have the English River Band, which is another band that belongs to MLTC, and they’re located at 
Patuanak, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is a very picturesque community. In fact the English River 
Band . . . it’s only been a few recent years where there’s been a road into the community, a road that was 
built during the time of the department of northern Saskatchewan. Up until that time of the road, Mr. 
Speaker, they only way to get out of the community of Patuanak was either by water or, in most cases, 
by air transportation, which could be very, very expensive. 
 
And I understand the English River Band now has some property closer to the community of Beauval, 
and that brings up another interesting . . . the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, I understand, have the 
residential school now, that for many, many years was run by, I believe, the Oblate priests in Northern 
Saskatchewan as an educational facility. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member certainly can discuss these Indian bands, however I 
think he should confine his remarks to the aspect of the bands which pertain to the motion. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I acknowledged you at first, and I deeply appreciate the ruling that 
you make in sitting me down in my place. But the resolution here deals with Indian bands, the Meadow 
Lake saw mill. And the members have talked . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I repeat to the hon. member that I’m quite aware of what the resolution 
says, and I don’t intend to debate with him what it does say. I am simply stating to the hon. member that 
any of his remarks about the Indian bands, he confine his remarks to the aspect of the bands which 
pertain to the motion. That’s reasonable and the normal way to debate. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The English River Band, Mr. Speaker, which is in the Patuanak area, part of the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council, have a great deal to do with the old residential school that was run by the 
Oblate fathers near Beauval. 
 
The other bands that make up the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, Mr. Speaker, would be the La Loche 
Indian Band at La Loche, Saskatchewan. That’s the ninth band I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, and as the 
member from Shellbrook-Torch River pointed out, there are 10 Indian bands that compose the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the final band that I guess I’d want to mention because it is made up of 10, would be the Turnor 
Lake Indian Band. 



 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have 10 bands comprising the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. I’ll just review 
those for you. There’s the Flying Dust Band at Meadow Lake, the Sahgaiehcan Band at Loon Lake, the 
Island Lake Band which is at two locations — Moody Lake and Ministikwan Lake. 
 
We have the Joseph Bighead Band at Beacon Hill between Goodsoil and Pierceland. We have the 
Waterhen Lake Indian Band which is on the shores of Waterhen Lake. We have the Canoe Lake Indian 
Band which is on the shores of Canoe Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have the Buffalo River Band at Dillon, Saskatchewan. We have the English River Band at Patuanak. 
We have the La Loche Indian Band at La Loche and the Turnor Lake Indian Band at Turnor Lake, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And those are the 10 bands that make up the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
I would point out also an inaccuracy that was mentioned by either the member from Redberry or it 
could’ve been the member from Shellbrook-Torch River, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the bands own 50 
per cent of the Meadow Lake saw mill and the employees own 50 per cent of the Meadow Lake saw 
mill. 
 
Well that’s not entirely factual, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s my understanding that 40 per cent is owned by 
the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 40 per cent is owned by the employees going under the name Techfor, 
I believe, and the other 20 per cent is held by the provincial government. And so it’s not a 50-50 
situation. 
 
The only 50-50 situation there is is that the shares held outside of the Government of Saskatchewan are 
50 per cent owned by the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and 50 per cent owned by the employees of the 
saw mill. But that doesn’t portray a full picture, Mr. Speaker, because there is another 20 per cent that is 
held by the province of Saskatchewan, and it’s my understanding that it’ll be held by the province of 
Saskatchewan until such time as the board, which has appointees from the employees, from the 
provincial government, also from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council . . . You have to have agreement of 
that board, which I am very pleased with, because the employees and the Meadow Lake Tribal Council 
can have some decision as to where that other 20 per cent that’s held by the government goes to. 
 
And I understand there are a few options; either the 20 per cent can be given as an incentive to get this 
chopstick factory going that we’ve heard so much about, so that the chopstick factory would feel that 
they had some security of supply of raw material from the saw mill; or they could use it to entice the 
owners of the pulp mill to come in; or, in fact, a third option would be to sell the shares in the Meadow 
Lake area or sell them publicly. I suppose a fourth option and fifth option would be to turn that 20 per 
cent over to the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and the employees so then there would be a truly 50-50 
per cent ownership of the Meadow Lake saw mill between the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and the 
employees of the saw mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pulp mill was mentioned in remarks by the member from Shellbrook-Torch River, and 
also the chopstick factory was mentioned. The chopstick factory is supposed to be employing 100 
people. I know that the people in Meadow Lake and area are anxiously awaiting the start-up of a 
chopstick factory or a pulp mill or an expansion of some kind to the saw mill because the business 
community in the Meadow Lake area is not thriving right now, just as many places in Saskatchewan 
business communities are not thriving. And they’re looking forward to promises that they hope are not 
empty promises that have come so often in the past from this government that we have here in 
Saskatchewan at the current time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want to see at least one of those projects come into reality, so that there’s either chopsticks being 
turned out or else there’s pulp being produced. And I understand that the people in Meadow Lake and 



the businesses in particular want to see those economic activities go ahead, to develop and enhance the 
forestry industry in the Meadow Lake area, and in that forestry block or the forestry lease, the forestry 
management lease that they have in place, so that they can in fact have more economic opportunity in 
the Meadow Lake area. 
 
As I say, many, many businesses in the Meadow Lake area are not doing as well as they’ve done in 
other years when the farm economy is not well and the promises of the government to build and 
diversify in the forestry sector are not coming about either. It paints a bleak picture for the town of 
Meadow Lake. So we on this side of the House truly do hope that these projects go ahead. 
 
Before I close, I would want to say that this is a good example of public participation, but the only 
example of public participation. I would like to in fact put on the record many of the blatant examples of 
give-aways and sell-offs of Saskatchewan’s property and assets and resources. But you’ve called me to 
order on that, and I suppose I won’t have the opportunity to get back into those particular privatization 
moves. 
 
The government prefers to call them public participation, but it’s not public participation. It’s a long way 
from it. And I think I made my point with Sask Minerals being purchased by companies from Ontario 
and Quebec, and PAPCO being . . . I would want to say purchased, but it wasn’t, it was given to them. It 
was given to Weyerhaeuser, a company from Tacoma, Washington, and I see no way in which that 
shows public participation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that there are a number of things in the resolution that I 
would agree with. I agree with commending the town of Meadow Lake, and I agree with commending 
the associated Indian bands, those 10 bands that I have pointed out here this evening. 
 
I think that the resolution is lacking because it does not include the other owner, Techfor, who are in fact 
the employees of the saw mill who are owners of 40 per cent of that particular asset. I would have a hard 
time commending the provincial government because I think they provided some hope for Meadow 
Lake that they’ve not delivered on yet. 
 
When I see the chopstick factory employing people in Meadow Lake and when I see the pulp mill 
turning out pulp . . . incidentally, the pulp mill is a particularly good idea because I understand instead of 
using the traditional softwoods for pulp, they’ll be using aspens or poplars, as it’s more commonly 
referred to. And that’s good because the forestry industry in Saskatchewan and elsewhere in western 
Canada, I dare say, has treated aspen as a garbage wood and quite often sprayed chemicals to kill off the 
broad-leaf trees to get at the good softwood trees. I think it’s commendable that the pulp mill, if it ever 
does come about in the Meadow Lake area, that it will be using aspen wood. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn this debate so that the member 
who introduced the motion and the seconder might think of the wisdom of including Techfor or the 
employees of the saw mill who are also a very important part of the resolution. I therefore beg leave to 
adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 31 — Membership in NATO 
 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to move the following resolution: 
 



That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of Canada its strong support for Canada’s 
continued membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 
 

This motion is being seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. And I do 
hope that the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly will give unanimous approval to this resolution. 
 
The North Atlantic Treaty was signed in Washington, D.C. on April 4, 1949. That’s how important this 
is, Mr. Speaker, and I hope the members opposite are listening very carefully and will endorse this 
resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re laughing. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — I don’t think they’ll . . . I don’t think . . . They surely wouldn’t be laughing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the 40 years that have passed, Canada has played a very important part in NATO. NATO is a valuable 
organization in the defence of freedom and the protection of peace. Canada was one of the original 
members of NATO because our nation was committed to preserving world peace after World War II. 
When the Second World War came to an end in 1945, the leaders of the western democracies felt that 
peace must be kept in Europe. 
 
Sir Winston Churchill envisioned an alliance of western allies — Canada, United States, and western 
European democracies — to protect peace and freedom. Out of this came the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1949 the Liberal External Affairs minister for Canada, Lester B. Pearson, in his speech 
to the House of Commons said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the past, alliances have been formed to meet emergencies and have been dissolved as 
emergencies vanished. It must not be so this time. Our North Atlantic union must have a deeper 
meaning and deeper roots. 
 

Lester Pearson was right, Mr. Speaker. And 40 years later NATO is a strong organization because of the 
vision of peace loving leaders like Lester Pearson. 
 
In the spring of 1949, 40 years ago, the Liberal prime minister of Canada, the Rt. Hon. Louis St. 
Laurent, told the House of Commons, and I also quote him, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is far more than an old-fashioned military alliance. It is 
based on our common determination to strengthen our free institutions and to promote conditions 
of stability. 
 

Forty years ago the Parliament of Canada ratified the North Atlantic Treaty, making our country one of 
the founding nations of NATO. By joining NATO in 1949, our country was willing to take a leadership 
role in the protection of world peace. 
 
Our membership in NATO is considered to be one of the bright pages in Canadian history. Over the past 
40 years, NATO has contributed greatly to the peace and security of the world. In 1949 when Canada 
joined NATO, it was not a political issue; it was a matter of national and international importance. 
 



Mr. Speaker, during World War II thousands of Canadians died to defend freedom, including military 
personnel from Saskatchewan who died in that combat. Those Canadians gave their lives during the 
Second World War; those Canadians gave their lives in that world war to defend that intangible we call 
freedom. Over in Europe the military cemeteries have hundreds of grave sites of young Canadians who 
now are a silent reminder of the sacrifice to defend peace. 
 
Today there is an element in Canada of well meaning but naïve people who would have our nation 
disarmed and withdraw from NATO. The New Democratic belongs to that element. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a booklet published by the Canadian centre for arms control, the federal leader of the 
NDP, Ed Broadbent, stated the NDP position on NATO. And I would like to quote that position, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Broadbent said: 
 

The NDP has lost confidence in NATO and seeks Canada’s withdrawal from the alliance. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when that statement went across Canada that is why the NDP did so poorly in the last 
federal election. The people that heard that statement, Mr. Speaker, would not support them . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The members opposite are saying a few comments that I guess some of the 
people out West didn’t hear that statement, but the people that heard that statement and understood it did 
not vote for them. It’s more of their . . . just like, Mr. Speaker, like their mediscare. 
 
All of desire lasting world peace. The NDP, Mr. Speaker, should desire lasting world peace, but they 
don’t if they want to have Canada pull out of NATO. I remind this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that it was a 
well-meaning peace advocate, Neville Chamberlain, who in 1939 took Hitler’s word that there would be 
no war. Mr. Speaker, NATO was founded to protect peace, to ensure peace and stability through strife. 
 
In 19 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from North Battleford, he’s always got so many 
remarks to make. He’s the one in public accounts, Mr. Speaker, that said, we in public accounts are like 
the Chinese army: the only thing that we haven’t got is guns or we’d shoot. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I don’t know if that relates to the topic under discussion. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, but when he speaks over there, I guess I couldn’t help but 
think of that terrible, terrible statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NATO was founded to protect peace, to ensure peace and stability through strife. Forty 
years after the founding of NATO, Canada’s will for world peace is second to none in the world. NATO 
is a strong assurance to keep peace. 
 
Throughout the 40-year history of NATO, the goal has been to maintain freedom and security and the 
free world. Nothing could be more important, Mr. Speaker, just absolutely nothing. As we mark the 40th 
anniversary of the founding of NATO, I believe it is time for us to make a clear distinction between fact 
and fiction; between legitimate concerns and sensationalism. Mr. Speaker, I believe that Sir Winston 
Churchill and the founders of NATO believe that peace will never be achieved by tearing apart and 
disarming. 
 
That is why, like most Canadians, I support the strong role for Canada in NATO. And I’m proud, Mr. 
Speaker, to support that role. Peace will never be maintained through weakness. A strong defence 
alliance like NATO is a message to the world that NATO is a protector of freedom. An abiding faith in 
freedom has always been the basis for a NATO policy. NATO is an ongoing reminder that freedom must 
not constantly be protected. 
 



Mr. Speaker, there are those who burn American flags in peace demonstrations . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who did that? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — The NDP in Manitoba did, Mr. Speaker. There are those who would weaken our 
national defence systems, and there are those who believe that peace can only happen through constant 
shows of weakness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Elphinstone is talking about the Ku Klux Klan. I would just as soon 
think that it might have been his family burning the flags, not mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am one who believes in real peace, the kind . . . 
 
The Speaker — Order, order. I think the hon. member shouldn’t make remarks of a personal nature to 
other hon. members in the House. We spoke about that earlier tonight and if hon. members would just 
adhere to that, our debate would go more smoothly. I’m bringing that to the hon. members’ attention. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize to the member for saying such a statement. 
 
I am one who believes in this peace, the kind of real peace that we’ve had because of an organization 
like NATO. Real peace means building up of freedom and liberty as shining examples of the world. In 
these complex and troubled times around the globe, now more than ever there is a need for NATO. 
 
And during the past 40 years Canada can be proud of its contribution to NATO. In the Speech from the 
Throne opening the fourth session of the 21st Parliament of Canada on January 30, 1959, the throne 
speech stated, and I again quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Progress has been made in the organization of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. You will 
be asked to authorize Canadian participation as part of our program for national defence and 
security. 
 

Then as now, Canada took a strong leadership role in the North Atlantic alliance. 
 
Canada’s participation in NATO right from the start was one of leadership and not one of politics, like 
the NDP would like to have it, Mr. Speaker; they want to have politics into people’s lives. In 1955 
External Affairs Minister Pearson, on behalf of the Government of Canada, and I again quote: 
 

As far as we are concerned, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization remains the focal point for 
the development of closer co-operation with other peoples of the Atlantic community. As such, it 
remains a foundation of Canadian foreign policy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, NATO was a foundation of Canadian policy under Liberal prime minister . . . prime 
ministers like Louis St. Laurent and Lester Pearson. They don’t want to hear what I’m going to say right 
now, Mr. Speaker; they don’t want to hear what’s coming. 
 
And I’ll repeat, Mr. Speaker, NATO was a foundation of Canadian policies under Liberal prime 
ministers such as Louis St. Laurent and Lester Pearson, and under Conservative prime ministers John 
Diefenbaker and also Joe Clark and our current Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney. Mr. Speaker, as you 
must have noticed, I didn’t mention any NDP prime ministers, and there will never be in this country of 
Canada an NDP prime minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Muirhead: — Public opinion will show that the majority of Canadians, including the people of 
Saskatchewan, do believe that NATO is a foundation of Canadian foreign policy. The majority of 
Canadians would not agree and do not agree with the NDP policy of taking Canada out of NATO. And 
I’ll be challenging anyone on that side of the House who will stand up and agree with Broadbent. I’d 
like to have that statement across the province of Saskatchewan that the members opposite will stand on 
their feet and say, let’s pull Canada out of NATO. 
 
Prime Minister John Diefenbaker strongly supported NATO. Mr. Diefenbaker knew the value of world 
peace and freedom. In a speech that Mr. Diefenbaker gave to the United Nations, Mr. Speaker, it was in 
1961, he took a courageous stand for Canada in defending the right for independence of Ukrainians and 
other enslaved peoples. 
 
Cardinal Joseyf Slipj, pronounced “slippy”, of the Ukrainian Catholic church was imprisoned for 18 
years in a Soviet prison camp. The Ukrainian Catholic cardinal said that in 1961 the word of John 
Diefenbaker’s historic speech to the United Nations defending freedom reached him and others in that 
prison camp. 
 
Some years later the Ukrainian cardinal came to Parliament Hill in Ottawa to praise John Diefenbaker’s 
leadership in helping achieving his release from the prison camp and also to thank Diefenbaker for his 
historic defence of freedom of speech to the United Nations. The Ukrainian people of Saskatchewan 
know the value of freedom. Mr. Speaker, they know the value of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 
 
At every national conference of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada during the past 40 years 
there has been continuous support for NATO. The same cannot be said for the NDP. They have the 
leftist radicals. The NDP have the leftist radicals like Svend Robinson, and like the member for Regina 
Rosemont, the member for Saskatoon University, who would take Canada out of NATO . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . They don’t need to ask me who wrote that; I said that. 
 
And if it bothers them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If it bothers them, Mr. Speaker, who . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. members will have the opportunity to enter the debate. The member 
for Arm River now has the floor. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — And, Mr. Speaker, if it bothers the members opposite who wrote this, I wrote this over 
a month ago, and I’ve been waiting here anxiously to give it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prime Minister Mulroney and the PC government, I’m sure they speak for the majority of 
Canadians who believe that to maintain and enhance our credibility in promoting world peace we must 
fulfil our commitment to NATO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our membership in NATO must be above politics, just as Canada’s membership in the 
Commonwealth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What do you want to do, throw down our arms and join the commonwealth of the 
U.S.S.R. and all the other communist . . . 
 



The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m once more going to call the members to order on both sides of the 
House. The member for Arm River has the floor. Perhaps hon. members may agree or disagree with 
him. They will have their opportunity to express their views. As I said earlier, constant interruptions by 
members do not add to the dignity of speech in the House, and all hon. members realize that. Let us 
allow the member for Arm River to continue. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It thrills me, Mr. Speaker, when we have quiet days around 
here and there’s very little noise back and forth in the debate. And when I sometimes speak to rise in this 
House, it bothers the members opposite, and that thrills me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe it is important for the Saskatchewan legislature to express its support for NATO, Mr. Speaker, 
very, very important. I’m asking them, the members opposite, not to sit over there and scorn what I’m 
saying about NATO. I’m not saying anything about them. I’m saying that Mr. Broadbent, the NDP in 
Canada said that we would pull Canada out of the NATO. I’m not saying that the members sitting over 
here tonight would do that. I’m asking them to stand up and support this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, like every member in this Chamber here, I’m sure they do; I’m sure they must agree with 
me — value world peace. It’s important that we have world peace. They know what happens when we 
have wars. We’ve had some major wars in this world in our lifetime — World War I and II and Korea 
— and we lost many, many Canadian soldiers that give their life, and they sit over there and scorn and 
laugh as I talk about protection for our country and for our world and for the people in it. It’s important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respect the efforts made by U.S. President Ronald Reagan and Soviet General Secretary 
Mikhail Gorbachev in building world peace. They’re doing the best thing they can right now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to unfortunately have to interrupt the hon. member for Arm River who is 
attempting to give his speech. But however, hon. members are not co-operating with him, and this is the 
fourth time now that I have had to rise, and unfortunately the same hon. members keep talking. Let’s 
allow the member for Arm River to continue. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat that. I respect the efforts made by President Ronald Reagan 
and Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in building world peace. I respect the leadership of our 
Prime Minister and External Affairs Minister Joe Clark in support of peaceful ventures. The other day 
U.S. President George Bush made a strong statement on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of NATO. 
President Bush stated that NATO had been instrumental in keeping peace in western Europe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, peace in the world is important to all of us, indeed to the people of Saskatchewan. Stability 
around the globe is just as important to Saskatchewan people as it is to those who live in Europe. The 
Royal Canadian Legion halls throughout Saskatchewan are symbols of the commitment to freedom 
made by the citizens of this province. Mr. Pearson was the only Canadian leader to ever win the Nobel 
Peace Prize. In his speech to the Parliament of Canada on January 25, 1963, Pearson said: 
 

Like everybody else in this Chamber, I hate nuclear weapons as much as I loathe the necessity of 
having them at all, and the possibility that weapons of any kind may have to be used in nuclear 
war. 
 

I’m sure all members of this Assembly would agree with that. Forty years NATO has been a strong 
defence in the link of the world, a protector of peace. NATO has been and continues to be a nuclear-
armed defence alliance which would dare not be otherwise as long as it is confronted by the nuclear-



armed potential opponent. I am sure all members of this Assembly welcome the reduction in arms 
agreed to by Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev. It is a step, Mr. Speaker, in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NATO has made, and is making, constructive contribution to the process of world peace. 
We must not ever look at the fact that Europe remains divided between free nations and communist 
nations. The Berlin Wall is a symbol to all of the world of the difference between freedom and 
communism. I recall that Ronald Reagan once asked the question: how many people climbed the Berlin 
Wall to escape to communist East Germany? We all know how many died trying to escape to real 
freedom in the NATO nation of West Germany. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I genuinely believe the motion I have introduced in this legislature is very relevant to 
Saskatchewan and to the people of our province. Many thousands of our early Saskatchewan pioneers 
fled tyranny in eastern Europe to come to a new homeland here in Saskatchewan, people from the 
Ukraine, Poland, and Hungary. Many of us can remember the 1950s when the Soviets invaded Hungary. 
Many Hungarian people came to Saskatchewan for a new life of freedom. The families of our pioneers 
defended freedom and peace in World War I, World War II, and in Korea. 
 
Saskatchewan men and women have served with distinction in the armed forces of Canada, and even 
today serve in peace keeping roles in Cyprus and Europe . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know why the member from Humboldt is so upset about what I am speaking about. 
 
The withdrawal of the Canadian forces from Europe would hurt our respected reputation on the world 
scene. Our role in NATO is based on the conviction that it is in Canada’s interest to make a responsible 
contribution to peace and freedom in the world. Forty years after the founding of NATO, Canada 
continues to play an important role in peace keeping. Our progressive involvement in this international 
body during four decades has always been in accord with the desire of Canadians to see Canada have a 
constructive role in world affairs, and I do believe that we have a key contribution by our membership in 
NATO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada cannot afford to become a fortress or an isolated nation as the NDP would have us 
do. Canada has a large stake in the world, perhaps not so much in the military way, but in culture and 
economic terms, Mr. Speaker. We are a trading nation, and trade is very important to Canadians. The 
members opposite don’t believe that trade is important to Canada as the members do on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. They believe in control. They believe, Mr. Speaker, in controlling and keeping 
things in a small little area in Saskatchewan and not trade with the rest of Canada, let alone the United 
States. 
 
Prime minister Trudeau, back in 1969, Mr. Speaker, had a review of NATO. Many of us people here in 
Saskatchewan that didn’t have respect for Mr. Trudeau as prime minister of this country had great 
respect for his review on NATO, but we don’t for the members that support Mr. Broadbent. And he 
found that the majority of Canadians wanted Canada, wanted Canada to be a strong part of NATO, so 
much that Trudeau called a press conference on April 3, 1969, and he made the following statement. 
Trudeau said: 
 

Canada will continue to be a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and co-operate 
closely with United States within NORAD (North American Air Defence). 
 

It is quite clear that Trudeau recognized the Canadian public has a strong belief in NATO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure public opinion for NATO is just as strong today, 40 years after the founding of 
NATO, as it was at any time in that 40 years. In 40 years, NATO has restored confidence to the western 
world and renewed the long-term commitment of western nations to world peace. 



 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that a socialist government was in office in England in 1949 when 
NATO was founded. The Labour foreign minister, Ernest Bevin, was the leading person in the 
establishment of NATO. 
 
I should note that in recent years one of the key reasons the Labour Party in England has lost at the polls 
is because of their turning against NATO. In 1949 the socialist government of England saw the value of 
NATO, and they were right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canada was also a leader in the founding of NATO. In his book, The Birth of NATO, Sir Nicholas 
Henderson praises the leadership of Canada in the founding of NATO. Canada played a historic role in 
founding NATO. 
 
Now as we mark the 40th anniversary of NATO, Mr. Speaker, I do believe it is appropriate for the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan to express our support for NATO in the form of 
a resolution. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sit down, Gerry. How long is this? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — When I’m through, Mr. Speaker, and sit down, I’m challenging the member from 
Elphinstone to stand up — he says he agrees with my resolution here and is against Mr. Broadbent. I 
challenge him to do that. Instead, he wants Canada to pull out of NATO. 
 
The other day, Mr. Speaker, In The Globe and Mail, there was a quote that I want to read, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Since NATO’s creation, over 40 years, Europe has enjoyed its longest era of peace recorded in 
world history. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is most impressive accomplishment and is a glowing endorsement for NATO. The 16 
NATO nations continue to keep peace in the world at this very time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite sound to me like they’re disappointingly saying that they are against what we 
Canadians want to do, is stay part of NATO. 
 
Today the world moves towards arms reductions. NATO is a strong position to work for mutual arms 
reductions by NATO and the Warsaw Pact nations. NATO can take on a meaningful peace-keeper role 
in ever-changing global society. The Soviet’s leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, has many convinced that his 
peace efforts are sincere. As a result, NATO can still be relevant in these changing times by being the 
best hope for continued peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NATO’s importance should not be diminished by its success. There’s another quote in The 
Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker: 
 

It remains the surest means of an adequate and appropriate response to changes in Soviet 
attitudes if today’s promises of peace should be allowed by threats of war tomorrow, and it, 
NATO, remains a vital link between democratic nations seeking a freer and more peaceful world. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with The Globe and Mail, and the members opposite should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NATO is really still young at 40 years, only 40 years in existence, and has done a 
tremendous job of world peace. When I think of the outstanding contribution of the Saskatchewan 



people, many who died overseas . . . They even scoff and laugh, Mr. Speaker, when I’m talking about 
the veterans that died and gave their life for this country. 
 
When I think of the thousands of pioneer homesteaders who came to Saskatchewan for freedom; when I 
think of the pride Lester Pearson brought to Canada when he won the Nobel peace prize; when I think of 
Canada’s international reputation as a peace loving nation, I simply have to wonder why the NDP would 
want to take Canada out of NATO and shame our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition in this Assembly is of Ukrainian heritage, and I’m sure the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale knows how much the Ukrainian people value freedom. 
 
An Hon. Member: — “Ukrainian” — accent is on the second syllable. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — It bothers them, Mr. Speaker, when I mention their leader being of Ukrainian . . . 
 
Today, I would ask the Leader of the Opposition and all members of the Legislative Assembly to join 
with me in giving unanimous support to this resolution in support of NATO, for in doing so we shall be 
giving our support to the principles of world peace, the defence of freedom, and the very democratic 
ideals and institutions that we cherish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s role in NATO is now just as important as it ever was. Canadian policy should 
express the same confidence in NATO as we did in the founding. Lasting peace was the ultimate goal of 
NATO, and in that goal it has been an outstanding success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Diefenbaker once said that freedom is never static, and as we look towards the last 
decade of this century I do believe Canada cannot be static in the pursuit of world peace. That is why 
our role in NATO is so important. 
 
As the member from Arm River, on behalf of my constituents, I would ask this Assembly to pass this 
resolution I have introduced which reads — I’ll read it again: 
 

That this Assembly communicate to the Parliament of Canada its strong support for Canada’s 
continued membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 
 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is being seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I must admit that I was very discouraged from 
watching members opposite react as the member, and my colleague from arm River, was bringing to the 
legislature’s attention the reason why he is moving this resolution. 
 
It gives me pride, sir, to stand in this Assembly and speak to such a resolution. I want to indicate to you 
that disarming NATO is like disarming freedom. It’s taking freedom from our very democracy. 
 
I want to indicate to you where I’m going to go with this. The NDP opposite here have been making 
very much fun, very much fun of the interruption of democracy and of disarming Canada from their role 
in NATO. When I look at NATO, sir, I look at the fact that we are supporting our veterans here in 
Canada and Saskatchewan. I believe that they have done a very admirable job in standing up for what 



they believed in. And when I see members of the NDP take this lightly, it really makes me mad, sir, to 
have to watch the carry-on of the NDP opposite in making fun of our veterans and what NATO is and 
what they have fought for in this country. 
 
I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that people in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before the member gets there, I would ask him not to involve people in 
the galleries. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — All right, people that may be watching and viewing on TV then, sir, that have been 
listening to the member from Arm River, I am sure, sir, that they totally agree with the member from 
Arm River as he was putting forth his reasons why he was moving this resolution on the floor of this 
legislature. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that when I look at the contribution that NATO has given the world in 
fighting for freedom and in a peaceful type of fight and a peaceful struggle, that is the type of peaceful 
structure that we’re trying to set up world-wide. 
 
And I can see, sir, that members of the NDP don’t agree with that because their democratic type of 
symbolic gestures are shown very apparent here in the floor of this legislature, as they are being very 
disruptive and being very radical. And I want to indicate to you, sir, that there’s no need for that kind of 
interruption in the freedoms of democracy. And that’s what the NDP have been trying to do. They’ve 
been trying to chip away at that very fundamental right. And that fundamental right of NATO and 
freedom . . . I would say to you is just appalling to have that kind of a notion going on in throughout this 
country. And the leader of the NDP, federal NDP party, are very close tie with the NDP Party here in 
Saskatchewan — in fact, sir, the heart and soul of the NDP is here in Saskatchewan. It is the only . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Members opposite, members of the NDP applaud to that, but they’d better listen. 
They’d better listen, because I will tell you, sir, that this is the only province that they have any least bit 
of toe-hold left in. And I want to say that all the radicals of the NDP have moved to this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like to ask the hon. member to remain on the motion under debate. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I know that, sir. I know that, sir; I appreciate that. I just want to say that with . . . The 
point that I was trying to make, sir, is that the NDP Party, the only strength they have here is from 
Saskatchewan that could be possibly opposed to NATO at any given time. Their strength is here, and 
that opposition to the strength of opposing NATO is here in Saskatchewan by the NDP opposite. And 
I’ll tell you, sir, that when it comes to freedom-loving people in Europe who have lived under the threat 
of the forces in eastern Europe for over 40 years, sir, there is a need for the support of NATO. 
 
And I want to say that members opposite can make fun, but this is serious. I challenge any one of you 
people to stand in your place and talk opposite to this, because it is serious. I want to say that the 
freedom that people have enjoyed in this country, and the freedom in the U.S., freedom in the western 
European countries — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that type of freedom is the type of freedom we want 
to see go world-wide. We want to see that people have freedom of choice, sir, freedom of choice so that 
the women and the children can move . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m going to ask the hon. members to allow the member for Cut Knife-
Lloydminster to continue his remarks. I believe that he has the right to do that without being interrupted 
on a rather constant basis, and I would ask co-operation of the members. 



 
Mr. Hopfner: — The freedom of choice to belong to peace-loving nations. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that when we look at what has gone on in China, for instance, and other places in the world where war is 
now going on and there’s a disruption that we don’t want to see anywhere in the world, we want to 
oppose that kind of regime and that kind of fighting, and we want to try and bring that . . . and work 
towards that peace, and so that in our environmental society throughout the world we can enjoy a clean-
living, free-moving society. 
 
And I think members opposite, they probably in their own selves may be afraid to speak in that regard 
and move away from party lines. But I ask the NDP not to stick to the party line. I ask the NDP to join 
with us in sending this message world-wide. I don’t believe it’s just a message for us as Canadians to 
keep reminding ourselves only that this is a very important issue, but I believe that this is important for 
us to send a message from this legislature, from this floor, House, as a united group, and send it a very 
strong signal to the rest of the world that we are in unification with regards to such a resolution. 
 
I think when members opposite, if they really look at the heart and soul of Saskatchewan free-loving 
people here, I would tend to think that many of you, if you stated your party position, the NDP Party 
position out in your ridings, you would find a lot of opposition. And I would tend to think that these are 
the reasons why the NDP are slowly dissipating from the province of Saskatchewan, is basically because 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s an awfully slow disappearance, Mike. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — No, that support is, that support is dwindling, and I want to say because people in 
Saskatchewan know that there’s a type of radicalist movement towards such thing as disarming NATO. 
 
And, sir, I want to tell you that there is a lot of debate that could carry on with this particular type of a . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . .Well no, there is a lot to do and say in regards to this particular resolution. 
And I’d like to remind the member from Regina, and I want to say to you that if you for one would like 
to go into your riding and explain to your constituents that you’re opposed to NATO, well then, that’s 
fine. 
 
But I want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve gone a long way with NATO, and we would want to try 
to invite more and more countries into joining NATO, because it’s just one more organization and one 
more effort in organizing a true peace throughout the world. I think when we regard NATO as 40 years 
old, we should say, well done — a well 40 years — because we have not had a war to be concerned 
about since the Second World War and the Korea war. 
 
And I want to say that is just a tremendous record that we as Canadians and North Americans and others 
can brag about that particular feat, sir. I would tend to think that is why our veterans feel so strong and 
so proud that they’ve given us something . . . they’ve given us something to believe in. They’ve shown 
us that there is a better way in life than to have to go to the front lines and fight and lose young men and 
women in bloodshed that’s not necessary. 
 
I think if you look at the people in Saskatchewan and you look at the support throughout Saskatchewan, 
sir, I think you will find that there is that strength here for the particular resolution. I ask all members of 
this Assembly to definitely take the time to think this resolution through. I invite the NDP to think this 
resolution through. I ask us to not only leave it stop here, but I ask the media throughout this province to 
take a strong hold on this particular resolution and spread this kind of message throughout the province 
and send a strong signal throughout our country and into others. I think the media have a great role to 
play with the strengths of such a resolution and to send a strong message. 
 



I want to indicate that a lot of people, a lot of people tend to look at the media for some way, shape, or 
form a direction a d a way of being able to see what is happening throughout and to see that the province 
is properly . . . if things are going on properly. Well I would tend to say to the media that they should 
take a good look at the NDP opposition in this province, the NDP opposition that is opposed to peace, is 
opposed to NATO, is opposed to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Let’s allow the hon. member to conclude. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — . . . that is opposed to a free democratic society. They seem to be thriving on that type 
of radicalism. I want to say that NATO believes in those particular types of democracies that breed 
freedom throughout. And I know, I know members opposite have a hard time digesting that because of 
their radical beliefs. 
 
But I want to also say that through this legislature we can show how order can breed a type of a 
satisfactory resolve for problems, that through proper debate through Assembly instead of walkouts and 
strikes, etc. 
 
I want to say that the NDP are very used to this kind of way of reacting to various resolutions. And I 
also will indicate, sir, that members opposite just do not have to sit there and make fun of the members 
opposite from Arm River as he was trying to talk through his . . . get through his speech. And in all 
honesty, and through . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the hon. members come to order. It being 10 o’clock, the House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 


