






















































March 13, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 13, 1989 
 

67 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to rise tonight to participate in this debate. It may prove 
to be a very historic debate. It may be the last debate, the 
opportunity to debate a throne speech, before a provincial 
election — a provincial election that, I think, will see a return of 
a New Democratic Party government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to begin at the outset to 
congratulate Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, for her 
participation in the throne speech, and for her delivery. I might 
say, as a personal aside, that my stepson, Brad, was very thrilled 
to meet Her Honour in the ceremonies afterwards, and was very 
impressed with her interest in his education and her interest in 
education of children generally. I very much appreciated that, as 
did he. 
 
I want to congratulate, as well, the mover from the government 
side, the newly elected member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
It’s one thing for, I think, a member to rise in his place along 
with a number of other rookies because one might be more 
tolerant of any stumbles, of any mistakes that might be made. 
But if you’re a rookie, as he is, with people who are more or 
less experienced now in this House, it surely must be a tougher 
job and I congratulate him for doing his job well, and having 
performed, I think, rather well in his address. 
 
I would add to that, Mr. Speaker, that I do not rise to 
congratulate him, or for that matter the government, on the 
content of the throne speech, or congratulate him on the content 
of his remarks in large part. 
 
The major reason for that is the lack of any government 
responsiveness to a major issue facing many of my constituents, 
and that issue is the question of the Saskatchewan economy, 
and more particularly for many of them the lack of 
employment, the lack of jobs, the lack of any hope for jobs. 
These are tough times for many people in Saskatchewan. Jobs 
are scarce; they’re hard to find. The latest unemployment 
figures, which show an unemployment rate of 9.l per cent, I 
believe it is, in Saskatchewan, only confirm what many people 
already know through painful personal experience. 
 
The numbers are more than numbers. They reflect real human 
tragedy in our province, and real human tragedy in my 
constituency of Regina Victoria. And the people of Regina 
Victoria also know that the unemployment situation would be 
much worse for them and for the people of Saskatchewan, that 
it would be much higher,  

were it not for the thousands who have already left the province 
in search of jobs in other provinces. 
 
This is nothing new to me. I think most members of the 
Legislative Assembly get calls from people who, because of 
their situation, are desperate to find employment. And they’ll 
call my office and they’ll call the office of my colleague, my 
seat mate from Saskatoon Centre, or the government members, 
and they say, can you help me to find a job? And lately, the 
only advice that one can give them, after exploring the 
alternatives in Saskatchewan, is to encourage them to look for 
jobs in other provinces because the opportunities are simply not 
here in Saskatchewan. They have to go to Ontario, they have to 
go further east to find jobs; they have to go down the road, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would say that it’s just not only the lack of jobs that’s 
troubling people. Many more are concerned about the lack of 
good jobs, that is to say jobs with some measure of security and 
jobs with decent pay. And the people in my constituency are no 
different than the people anywhere. Their needs and aspirations 
are no different. Like people everywhere, they want and need 
jobs to provide for the basics of food, shelter, clothing, and 
transportation for themselves and their families. And they will, 
if need be, rely on unemployment insurance or welfare to 
provide those basics, but like most people they’d prefer to fend 
for themselves. And I might add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, 
that government assistance is widely seen by my constituents as 
an invitation to be categorized as a subspecies of the human 
race by the current Minister of Social Services, and the 
government — a subspecies not entitled to any dignity or any 
respect, but a subspecies which is the object of great suspicion 
and harassment. And I would just say that that is quite a 
difference, quite a difference for those of my constituents that 
are on welfare as opposed to the biggest welfare bum of them 
all, Peter Pocklington, who doesn’t seem to get that measure of 
treatment from the government opposite. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, the people in my area, like people 
anywhere, prefer to work and fend for themselves and their 
families; and like people anywhere, my constituents want more 
than simply subsistence. They have hopes and dreams for better 
days ahead. I find that young people, when I talk to them, wish 
for good paying jobs, secure jobs, jobs that will allow them to 
plan for a future family, but very many are now denied that. 
 
People hope for the day that their employment income is 
adequate enough and secure enough so that they can afford a 
better car, or locate a better home for themselves and their 
family. Many people are deeply concerned that they will not be 
able to provide the kinds of things that they think are necessary 
for their children. They’re troubled by the fact, as an example, 
that a university education is something that is becoming 
increasingly harder to realize. 
 
You know, the blue collar workers in my constituency, and 
there are very many of them, have always sustained a belief that 
in this country of Canada, that in this province of 
Saskatchewan, their children could always aspire to, and obtain, 
a university education. Those were the days. I  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

68 
 

might say that many of my constituents come from countries 
other than Canada. They are immigrants and they know from 
experience that, in the countries they left, that a university 
education in many instances is something that only the elite can 
aspire to, something that only the elite can take advantage of. 
And they truly believed that Canada was something different, 
that Saskatchewan was something different, that here you have 
a universal accessibility. And it’s something that they loved 
about this country and something that they prided themselves in 
whenever they talked about Canada, whenever they talked 
about Saskatchewan. But that is changing. 
 
The PC government has made it that much harder to achieve a 
university education. You need a lot of money to get through 
university, and money is in shorter supply these days for many 
of the people I represent. And they do not feel that things will 
improve, improve with the current PC government. The throne 
speech does not address itself to my constituents and their daily 
lives, and it certainly does not kindle any thoughts for a better 
tomorrow. 
 
You know, it’s almost like we have two worlds out there: one 
world of the PC Party, and the PC government members, and 
their cronies, and their friends, and their big-business friends, 
and their oil company executives, and their bank executives, 
and their cocktail parties; and on the other hand, the masses of 
working people who go to work every day to provide for 
themselves and their family, but who find that no matter how 
hard they work, they find that the hope and aspiration for a 
better tomorrow are denied to them because they can’t seem to 
get ahead any more in today’s world, that the only people who 
seem to be getting ahead are that clique of people who run this 
province, the Tories, the PCs and their friends and their cocktail 
parties. That’s their understanding of what’s happening here. 
We seem to have a province of two solitudes — two solitudes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the throne speech is something like that, because the throne 
speech gives us, on the one hand, a lot of excuses, a lot of 
excuses about the depressed state of our economy, and on the 
other hand a lot of hype, a lot of hype of better days ahead. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, that the economy in this province was in a 
tail-spin before any drought. Last year’s drought, I will admit 
— and I think that anyone will admit — certainly is adding 
these days to the depression around us. But the PC government 
has to start taking responsibility for economic decisions that 
they’ve been making in this province since 1982, and which are 
in large part responsible, and the reason for, the miseries that 
we have today in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The PC government’s whole economic 
strategy since 1982 has been to take tax dollars, to take dollars 
out of the pockets of my constituents, to take those tax dollars 
and to give them to large business concerns and industries like 
Peter Pocklington, in the hopes of stimulating the Saskatchewan 
economy. And I would say that, in isolated situations, that 
they’ve succeeded. But in the main, the economy in 
Saskatchewan has faltered. In fact, it’s more  

than faltered. Many would say it’s come to a dead stop. 
 
Their approach has not worked, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 
proof is the evidence that we see. The proof is in the high 
unemployment numbers in Saskatchewan which, at least as far 
as my memory, if my memory serves me correctly, is the 
highest that I’ve ever seen them as long as I’ve lived in 
Saskatchewan — 9.1 per cent. 
 
And there’s further proof in the high welfare rolls in this 
province, welfare rolls that I might say have increased 
dramatically — dramatically! — since 1982 when the PCs took 
over. And this is the party that says, we don’t want people on 
welfare; we want people to pursue any other alternative to 
welfare. But on the other hand, the biggest growth industry in 
this province seems to have been welfare. You figure it out, Mr. 
Speaker. I can’t figure these people out, and certainly my 
constituents can’t figure them out. 
 
But you know, now the PCs say that there are better days ahead. 
Well they said that in 1982, Mr. Speaker, and they said it in ’83, 
and they said it in ’84, and they said it in ’85, and they’ve said it 
every year that they’ve been in power. You know, there’s better 
days just ahead, just around the corner — wait for us, things 
will get better. 
 
The latest example is their Premier now bragging about his trip 
to the Far East, saying that, boy, there’s all kinds of wonderful 
investor confidence in our province right there in Japan and 
China and all those places; and they have great confidence in 
Saskatchewan. Well, you know, he may have found it there, but 
we’re just not finding it here where we really need it. And I 
hope, and I wish, that all that confidence that he brags about, 
and he talks about, and he goes on about, will somehow find its 
way here. And maybe if he talks enough, maybe we’ll find it. 
 
(1915) 
 
You know, but it’s a different situation here. And maybe he’ll 
get a better idea of that. But, you know, I want to invite the 
Premier, I want to invite the Premier that on his next trip to the 
Far East, to stop in my constituency in east Regina — just on 
the way, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t have to stay for very long but 
just a few minutes, just to get out of his car on the way to the 
airport to the Far East — to stop in my constituency in east 
Regina and talk to the people there. And he would find that 
there’s a different reality, that people just simply don’t share his 
confidence, that people just simply don’t share his outlook on 
the Saskatchewan economy. He would find a world that doesn’t 
share his naive optimism close to home. 
 
You know, and that’s important because the people here have 
been listening to the Premier and his silly statements for the last 
six or seven years, unlike the people in Japan and China who 
are only hearing them for the first time. And I suspect that they 
might be buoyed by all that enthusiasm that they see when the 
Premier says, golly, gee whillikers, you can’t find . . . Give her 
snoose and you can’t find anything better than you can in 
Saskatchewan, and boy, oh boy, it’s going to be a wonderful 
world. Well the people of Saskatchewan have been listening to 
that naive drivel for years now. And I don’t share his optimism 
any more. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

69 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, for the Premier and his 
friends in China, economic nirvana for Saskatchewan might be 
just around the corner, but I tell you, my people don’t know 
which corner, and they’re still looking. 
 
And they remember all too well his business preaching and 
know that things have gone downhill ever since 1982 when he 
started on with his open for business conference and his 
open-for-business theme, and golly gee, we’re open for 
business and things are going to get so much better. Well we’re 
still waiting, Mr. Premier. 
 
But anyway, that’s the throne speech. You know, you have a 
real contrast there between what is reality and what is in the 
throne speech. In the throne speech again you have a bunch of 
cheer-leading hype, but also a reality in Saskatchewan that is 
beset with high unemployment, bankruptcies, outmigration, and 
simply, for many of us who are on the front lines, a lot of 
human tragedy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And only the PCs and their political pals in the chamber of 
commerce believe that the economy is improving. Most 
businesses are waiting this one out. I think there was a great line 
by business leaders after an economic statement by the Minister 
of Finance. And they agreed with the Minister of Finance that, 
boy, things were really improving in Saskatchewan. And this is 
what the chamber of commerce people had to say — their 
political pals — that things were really going to get better, a 
whole lot better, although, frankly, they hadn’t heard of 
anybody really investing any more money in Saskatchewan as a 
result of all this hype. 
 
And I guess what I’m saying is that the real bottom line on all 
this improvement is investment, and most businesses are 
waiting the current economic situation out. They won’t invest 
until they see some real and potentially long-lasting turn-around 
in the economy. That is not happening. You know that’s not 
happening, the people on this side know it’s not happening, the 
people in my constituency and across Saskatchewan know that 
it’s not happening. It’s a pity that the Premier of Saskatchewan 
doesn’t know that it’s not happening, and that the Premier can’t 
understand what is happening in this province because if he did 
he might have taken a different approach in the throne speech, 
an approach that might have been more appropriate to the 
situation that many people find themselves in, and the dire 
situation that the province finds itself in. 
 
You know, the only other way in which the government — at 
least according to the throne speech — seems to be dealing with 
the economy is to sell off our assets, to privatize those things 
we already own. Now by and large my constituents don’t 
understand what the government is trying to do. And if they do, 
they do not support the government in its rush to sell off 
everything we already own. 
 
They don’t understand, for example, how selling off a part of 
SGI is going to benefit them. They say, well you know, my kid 
here, he’s 19, 20 now and he’s desperate to find a  

job. And I say, well the government is going to privatize SGI. 
And he says, I know, but how is it going to help him? Well he 
knows it’s not going to help him. This privatization business 
hasn’t helped him. They create a few jobs here, maybe; on the 
other hand we lose jobs. There is no net gain in employment for 
Saskatchewan people as a result of what the government is 
trying to do. They know there is no net gain for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
They know that the selling off of the SaskTel directory 
business, for example, is not going to mean increased profits for 
SaskTel — profits that might be used to keep telephone rates at 
a reasonable level or might even go as a shareholder or a 
dividend payment to the people of this province to pay for 
health care. They know that that’s not going to happen. They 
know that there’s no better jobs; they know that the services 
won’t be improved as a result of this privatization. 
 
But mostly what the people don’t understand, mostly what they 
don’t understand is the PC government’s total preoccupation 
with something that they do not perceive to provide any benefit 
at all. They see a government that is consumed in everything it 
does, whose whole attention is so tightly focused on the matter 
of privatization. And they say, well we’re concerned about 
health, we’re concerned about education, we’re concerned 
about jobs, but all these people seem to want to talk about is 
privatization. 
 
Well I find it hard to explain these things to my constituents. 
They ask, why are the PCs spending all their time in 
privatization? Why are they not spending time on the more 
important things? And I say, good questions. Why doesn’t the 
PC government start dealing with the issues that concern 
people, as opposed to this ideological fixation of privatization, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was particularly concerned to see that there is no 
mention of the many challenges facing urban municipalities in 
the throne speech — and you will forgive me, Mr. Speaker, if I 
dwell on this issue for a few minutes. This is a matter of some 
importance to me because of the background that I have. I had 
thought that the PC government would address at least two 
pressing issues that concern the public and their local 
governments, especially in our cities, and I refer to the matter of 
the ward system and that of shopping hours. 
 
Since the PC government abolished the ward system, in at least 
one city the public has had an opportunity now to vote very 
directly on this matter and to say what kind of system they 
favoured. And I would point out to you, sir, that in the city of 
Regina last fall, the people went to the polls and in 
overwhelming numbers — and I forget whether it was 
two-thirds or three-quarters or more — said that, we want to 
retain the ward system. 
 
Now I know, you know, that the government sort of orientation 
last year was to do away with the ward system. But I thought 
that, inasmuch as the people of at least one city feel so very 
strongly about it, that they might have listened and that they 
might have said in the throne speech that, this is an issue that 
we’re going to address, and frankly begin to respond to the 
people of Saskatchewan as opposed to shoving things down the 
throats of Saskatchewan people. But we haven’t seen  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

70 
 

that. 
 
And I might say that whatever the government hoped to 
accomplish by turning the matter of regulating shopping hours 
over to urban municipalities, it hasn’t resulted in any peaceful 
resolution of the issue — and that’s no news to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I thought that this is something that might not 
escape the government’s attention, that they might deal with the 
matter of shopping hours in their throne speech and recognize 
that their strategy of turning it over to municipalities as a way 
of solving the issue simply hasn’t worked. 
 
And they will know that many cities are now embroiled in this 
issue. They’re in the courts. They’re fighting in the courts. 
Other cities are waiting to see how the actions . . . or waiting to 
see what the results will be in other cities, because depending 
on what happens in other cities, it may affect them. 
 
I point to a recent article discussing the situation in Melfort, 
who’s sitting by and waiting to see what might happen in Prince 
Albert because what might happen in Prince Albert might then 
determine how they will move in this issue. 
 
Turmoil, confusion is the best way to describe the matter of 
shopping hours in Saskatchewan. I had thought that the 
government might listen to what was going on out there and 
might have given some indication in their throne speech that 
they were sensitive to this and would begin to deal with that. 
But I see that the government is continuing its ostrich-like 
attitude in this matter and, frankly, I’m disappointed, although 
I’m not surprised. I’m not surprised by any lack of recognition 
in the throne speech of urban issues, given their general sort of 
lack of concern for the issues that face our urban municipalities. 
And it’s clear that urban affairs is not a matter of priority, not 
when it comes to any recognition of the challenges that face 
Saskatchewan, certainly not when it comes to any recognition 
of the funding that’s needed in this province to set things right. 
 
I do, however, Mr. Speaker, want to make one suggestion in 
this matter and leave it at that. I want to make one suggestion to 
the Premier that I think will help him to improve matters in so 
far as the administration of urban affairs is concerned in this 
province. And my suggestion to the Premier is: fire the Minister 
of Urban Affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I say to the Premier, fire the Minister of 
Urban Affairs. The present incumbent, the member for Regina 
South, is widely recognized as an ill-informed meddler when it 
comes to urban issues, who is no asset to the PC government. 
 
It is clear that when it comes to the city of Regina, as an 
example, that he has lost any sense of objectivity that one might 
demand of a minister. and he will need to be replaced if the 
Premier wants to improve relations with at least that city. 
 
And I know that the members opposite will say that, well he’s 
simply playing partisan politics; there’s no reason to  

fire the Minister of Urban Affairs. Well I tell you that my 
discussions with many city mayors and councillors — and this 
is off the record, Mr. Speaker — and many of them are Tories, 
agree with me. They agree with me. They think that the 
Minister of Urban Affairs is a walking joke. They think that he 
should go. They don’t understand why the Premier keeps him 
on. 
 
Well I say if you want to do anything positive, get rid of the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
And I know that, given the lack of representation that the 
government has, especially in our larger cities, it would seem 
that it would be difficult to find a replacement for him. But I 
would point out to him that also in the city of Regina is another 
PC member, the member for Regina Wascana, and I think the 
Premier should make him the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
Because — and this is not saying much — but he’s twice as 
smart as the present Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, he seems to be a 
well-informed individual, he seems to be a co-operative, 
amiable kind of person, the kind of person that you need to 
ensure good relations with all those municipalities. That’s an 
important thing. And he’s got that far more than the present 
minister does. So why not fire the present member for Regina 
South and put the member for Wascana in there? 
 
I might also point out again that the member for Wascana has 
got a lot more on the ball than the present minister and would 
certainly be able to understand the complexities and so on of 
urban affairs which seem to escape the present minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one item that I thought I’d see in the throne 
speech was the matter of Senate reform. I was sure, in fact I was 
willing to bet a dollar, that our Premier would take the lead of 
his colleague to the west, Don Getty, the Premier of Alberta, 
and announce in the throne speech that in so far as the next 
vacancy of the Senate in Saskatchewan, that we would fill it 
through an election of the people in Saskatchewan. That’s what 
I thought I’d see in the throne speech. But boy, was I surprised; 
was I surprised when I didn’t see it there, that he didn’t call for 
an election of a senator from Saskatchewan. 
 
And I might say that . . . I think I’m correct when I say that this 
present government has only had one opportunity to appoint a 
senator so far, that senator being Staff Barootes, the big Tory 
fund raiser in Saskatchewan. But most people will probably 
know him from his public days as the head of the Keep Our 
Doctors Committee which did everything in its power, in a 
bitter struggle, to deny medicare to Saskatchewan people. 
That’s Staff Barootes — that senator. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I say to the Premier, I say to the 
Premier, why not put it to the people of Saskatchewan to 
determine who the next senator will be? Why not get the people 
of Saskatchewan to pass judgement on whether  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

71 
 

they want to elect the Staff Barootes who tried to deny the 
medicare, or whether they want to vote for someone else? 
 
(1930) 
 
Well, you know, maybe it’s because the Premier has chickened 
out on this one because he knows that if you call a Senate 
election, then all the people in the province would have a 
chance to vote — it’s one big constituency — and that the 
majority of people out there, the majority of people don’t 
support the PCs. They don’t support the PCs and the only way 
that the PCs can get elected in this province is through some 
crooked, rigged election scheme which means that boundaries 
of constituencies are altered in such a way to give a great 
advantage to sitting PC members. Everybody knows that to be 
the case; everybody knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — They know that if an election were held 
at large in this province, the PC candidate would lose. They 
would lose. 
 
You know when you have an unrepresentive . . . you know, 
election scheme, such as we have in Saskatchewan now, the 
minority of a population can elect a majority in this legislature. 
And that’s what happened in 1986 because of our system and 
the boundaries hadn’t been changed for some time. You had a 
situation where the minority of people were able to elect the 
government majority and we said, fine — well that’s the 
system. I mean the boundaries were fair; they’re due to be 
changed again. 
 
Well do you think these guys would do that? No. Their 
approach is to make the situation even worse, to double ensure 
that the minority will elect a majority next time. That’s their 
scheme. Well, I got news for you, friends. It’s not going to 
work because enough people in Saskatchewan are simply 
revolted, revolted by that type of political chicanery. 
 
I just . . . You know, most people in Saskatchewan understand 
that the average rural constituency — and it’s mostly rural 
constituencies that have elected PCs in the last election — the 
average rural constituency will have 9,000 voters, and the 
average urban constituency will have 11,000 voters. Most 
people know that that situation is not fair. 
 
I say that the PCs couldn’t win an election fair and square in 
Saskatchewan, and that it’s going to take every trick in their 
crooked political book to ensure a re-election for them. But I 
tell you, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, come the next election it won’t 
be the PCs sitting on that side; the PCs will be reduced to a 
mere rump on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, something that’s absent 
from the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, is the volumes of sleaze 
and misrepresentation and outright lies that characterizes the 
remarks of members of the PC government — outright 
misrepresentations. 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order.—I’m afraid that I am going to 
have to ask the hon. member to apologize to the House for 
unparliamentary language. I ask the hon. member to retract 
those charges. I believe I know what he’s referring to. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — No point of order. Order, order. Order. There 
is no intervention at this point. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly apologize if 
I’ve used any unparliamentary language and I do so 
unreservedly. It’s just that I heard a Tory member earlier this 
afternoon use the word "lie" in that same context. But I’m sorry 
and I won’t do it again. 
 
But anyway, I’m not surprised that, I guess, that that isn’t in the 
throne speech because the throne speech is not the kind of place 
where you, you know, introduce volumes of sleaze and 
misrepresentation. That’s something that you do outside the 
throne speech. 
 
I guess I’m not surprised by their attitude of late. I’m not 
surprised by their actions. When I listen to the members 
opposite and I read the papers to what they have to say, their 
attitude seems to be that if you’ve got nothing positive to say to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and if you’re behind in any event, 
then sling as much mud as you can in the hopes that some of it 
will stick. And that’s how you win the next election. People on 
this side of the House know that; the public know that. They 
listened to the Minister of Finance, they listened this afternoon 
to the member for Rosthern, throw the mud — throw the mud to 
see what might stick. They know all about their sleazy politics. 
They know all about their sleazy politics from the very first day 
that this legislature sat in the fall of 1986. We called them 
sleazes then and they’re sleazes now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And you know that that’s their strategy 
for this session; that’s their strategy, that’s their hope for 
turning things around. The PC road is the low road, Mr. 
Speaker. The swamp road is the PC road. Well their strategy 
seemed to start last year. And I would point out that shortly 
before Christmas last year, my colleague, the member for 
Regina Rosemont, wrote to President-elect George Bush, in the 
United States, indicating some concerns that people in 
Saskatchewan and that Canadians had about something called 
the Alameda dam, which is part of the Shand-Rafferty project, 
more commonly known by the people of Saskatchewan as the 
shafferty project. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Boondoggle. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The boondoggle. In any event, my 
colleague sent a reasoned letter to the President-elect, and so he 
should, to make him aware of what’s going on, of the relations 
that affect our two jurisdictions. He wrote to him asking the 
President-elect to consider referring the entire matter to the 
international joint committee for consideration before any funds 
were approved. He said that there were environmental problems 
and that these  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

72 
 

needed to be investigated and pointed these out to 
President-elect Bush. Well, it wasn’t very long, less than a week 
later, and along comes the Minister of Finance, the present 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. He also sent a letter to 
George Bush, he also sent a letter to the President-elect of the 
United States. Now do you think that his letter might also have 
been a reasoned one? Do you think that in his letter that he 
might have said, well you know, we appreciate the letter that 
the member for Rosemont has sent, but we disagree, for all the 
various reasons in my letter, that the environmental impact and 
all the things we’d done on the economic sense that the project 
makes. Do you think he did that? No, Mr. Speaker. No. What 
the Minister of Finance did, he sent a letter and he did nothing 
but sleaze, sleaze the member for Rosemont and sleaze the 
NDP. 
 
That person is not capable of providing a reasoned response to 
anything. His only interest seems to be in muddying the 
political situation in this province and throwing out as much 
mud as he can and introducing as much sleaze as he can into the 
political environment in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, just a few of the 
comments that are attributed to the Minister of Finance. And it 
said in the Minister of Finance’s letter, he notes that the 
member for Rosemont recently returned from a fact-finding 
mission to Chile, after which the member for Rosemont stated 
that only a revolution will restore democracy and human rights 
to that country. 
 
Well that’s no surprise to anybody that has a keen eye for 
what’s happening in Chile. They know that a dictatorship hasn’t 
returned them to any semblance of democracy in their own 
right. 
 
And the Minister of Finance also goes on to say that the 
member for Rosemont is on record in favour of nationalizing 
potash mines — well that’s not a bad idea — and favours 
government ownership of banks, construction companies, life 
insurance, and pension funds, all those bad things. He makes all 
those charges about my colleague. 
 
But the thing that really got to me, Mr. Speaker, the thing that 
really got to me is that the Minister of Finance said, I quote: 
 

 I would also advise you that it was a group of New 
Democratic Party members who burned the United States 
flag during a demonstration at Winnipeg, Manitoba, a few 
years ago. 
 

Said the Minister of Finance, in a letter he describes as putting 
the matter in a proper prospective. Well talk about not 
addressing the issue but talk about introducing more sleaze. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance knows that New Democratic Party 
members were not burning any flags in Winnipeg. He knows 
that, but yet he’s inferring that it was New Democratic Party 
members in Manitoba who were burning flags out there and it’s 
not true and he shouldn’t be saying those kinds of things. He 
just simply shouldn’t be saying those kinds of things. 
 

You know it wouldn’t be the first time that the Minister of 
Finance has been off the mark, Mr. Speaker. You know that. 
Even the government members know that. Everybody in this 
province knows that the Minister of Finance is off the mark 
sometimes. I mean, after all, he did project a $389 million 
deficit in the fiscal year ’86-87 which ballooned to a $1.2 
billion deficit within that same fiscal year. So he’s been off the 
mark before. And I might say he was off the mark, he was off 
the mark in his letter too, Mr. Speaker, because I have an article 
from the Brandon Sun, I have an article from the Brandon Sun, 
and this article says that at least the member for Rosemont had 
the right address. He sent his letter directly to Bush via the 
presidential transition office on Connecticut Avenue in 
Washington. The Minister of Finance’s note went to the White 
House on Pennsylvania Avenue where Bush wasn’t expected 
for at least another month. 
 
So I think it’s fair to say, without any equivocation, that this 
Minister of Finance has a record for being off the mark and 
being wrong. And I want the members opposite to know that he 
was wrong, very wrong in saying that New Democratic Party 
members were burning flags in Winnipeg. 
 
And we saw a continuation of that approach before the session 
when the Finance minister held forth on the upcoming session 
on the changes in opposition critic assignments. He said . . . The 
Finance minister predicted the most wild-eyed session of the 
Saskatchewan legislature we’ve ever had. And the Leader of the 
Opposition set it up. The session is going to be marred by bell 
ringing, walk-outs and delays in legislation. Mr. Opposition 
House Leader, the member for Elphinstone, has a past record of 
causing disruptions. That’s what he said. And he also said, in 
commenting on the shuffle of critic assignments in the 
opposition caucus, he said, we see the radical left starting to get 
positions. Well I might ask, where is my position? But the left 
has never been happy with Mr. Opposition Leader, the member 
for Riversdale, and now he obviously has had to make some 
serious compromises. Well everybody knows how much 
malarkey that was. 
 
But again it’s another example of the Finance minister trying to 
introduce sleaze into the political spectrum here. And to top it 
all off, he accused my colleague, the member for Rosemont, of 
somehow, of some wrongdoing with respect to location of his 
constituency office, which most people in this city know to be a 
bunch of malarkey. 
 
And today we saw the attack continue when the member of 
Rosthern got up and attacked the opposition leader for 
foreclosing on farmers — something that the opposition leader 
has made quite clear he has personally never done — yet he 
continues to stand there. He stood there this afternoon going on 
and on and on about how somehow the opposition leader 
foreclosed on farmers. 
 
But, you know, my leader is quite capable, and his caucus is 
quite capable, of defending his actions, especially where no 
defence is necessary because he didn’t do that. And the member 
knows that, and won’t attack him directly — won’t attack him 
directly. That’s the nature of a sleaze — he won’t attack 
directly, he goes a little bit  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

73 
 

around about. 
 
I guess the thing that concerned me the most was that the 
Minister of Finance would write to the President-elect, would 
write to the President-elect of the United States and attribute to 
us things that had occurred in Manitoba and substantially 
misrepresent what had happened in Manitoba. Because it wasn’t 
New Democratic Party government members that were burning 
any flags . . . But substantially misrepresent . . . anyway, to give 
the impression somehow that we are responsible, that we are 
responsible for the actions of New Democrats in Manitoba, and, 
I guess, by inference, for the actions of New Democrats in other 
parts of the country. 
 
Well I want to say to the Finance minister and to the PC 
government that I will accept full responsibility — full 
responsibility — for the actions of New Democrats in Manitoba 
and New Democrats in other parts of this country if he will 
accept, and they will accept responsibility for every crook, 
grifter, and con artist that has found its way into the Tory party 
in recent years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — These are not new revelations to the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. These are not new 
revelations. The people of Saskatchewan and of Canada are 
only too well aware of the crooks and grifters and con artists 
and others who have found their way into the Tory party, 
especially in the provinces to the east of us. They know all 
about that. 
 
(1945) 
 
They know about the federal cabinet ministers. They know 
about André Bissonnette. They know about Michel Côté, who 
was fired as a minister of Supply and Services for failing to 
disclose personal loans. They know about Sinclair Stevens, who 
was found to have violated conflict of interest guide-lines 14 
times as a federal minister. They know all about Tory member 
of parliament, Michel Gravel, who went on trial for 50 charges 
and was convicted on a number of charges. He was charged 
initially with breach of trust, fraud against the government, and 
bribery. They know all about them. 
 
They know all about the more recent ones, the ones that were 
reported in February of ’89, in the newspaper where it says, "PC 
riding president charged." 
 

 A Progressive Conservative riding president has been 
charged with fraud and bribery in connection with his 
contacts with government officials. 
 
 Suburban businessmen Joseph Hamelin . . . has been 
ordered to appear in court . . . in south-shore Longueuil to 
answer the charges . . . 
 
 Hamelin is past-president of the federal Progressive 
Conservative St-Hubert riding association and former 
president of the party’s Chambly association. 
 
 . . . the Crown alleges that Hamelin bribed high  

officials of Defence Construction Canada . . . 
 
 Another charge says Hamelin obtained $1,200 from a 
federal job-creation program by filing false time sheets and 
salaries scales for two employees hired under the program. 
 

And on it goes. That same paper, Mr. Speaker, related about, 
"Former MP pleads not guilty." 
 

 . . . former MP Edouard Desrosiers pleaded not guilty 
Tuesday to charges of fraud, breach of trust and using 
forged documents. 
 
 The charges against Desrosiers . . . who held the east-end 
Montreal riding of Hochelaga-Maisonneuve for the (PC’s) 
. . . from 1984 to 1988, were laid after a three-month 
investigation by the RCMP. 
 

So I say take responsibility for your friends in the Conservative 
Party as I will take responsibility for other New Democrats to 
the east of us. I say stand up and account for their actions to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Account for their actions to George 
Bush in Washington when you’re giving out the full story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I could go on, Mr. Speaker, about Bob 
Wilson, the PC MLA for Winnipeg Wolseley, who was charged 
and ultimately sent to jail for pushing drugs, pushing drugs on 
little children in Winnipeg. I say, accept responsibility for his 
actions. Accept responsibilities for Colin Thatcher, a former 
member of your caucus. Accept responsibility for the actions of 
Lewis Brand. Accept responsibility for all those people when 
you stand up and say that we should somehow be held 
responsible for things that people didn’t even do in Manitoba. I 
say, stand up and be responsible for all the crooks and grifters 
and con artists that have found its way into your party in recent 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the 
motion that’s before us. The PC governments are prone to using 
the word "win." And I know that they have an Everyone Wins 
program. And I might encourage the member for Regina 
Wascana to stand on his feet and contribute to the debate or 
otherwise I might take back the nice things I had to say about 
him earlier and not sort of wish for him the job of Urban Affairs 
minister. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Tories are fond of the use of the 
word win. They’ve got their Everyone Wins program in which 
they send . . . They do all kinds of massive advertising, and they 
send out $1,000 to every group and organization in the province 
to, you know, promote Everyone Wins, and I suppose promote 
the PC government. And they’ve got a farming to win program 
which is mostly a bunch of the old boys from the right wing 
farm organizations trying to encourage young farmers not to get 
too close to that wheat pool and to make sure that they go to the 
local inland grain terminal. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

74 
 

You know, they’re fond of the word win. The only thing I can 
say, Mr. Speaker, after listening to the throne speech, after 
reading it in some detail, is that . . . and after consultation with 
my constituents, is that my constituents do not feel like winners 
in Saskatchewan today. They simply do not feel like winners 
with the present government. And they have encouraged me 
very strongly to oppose the throne speech, and therefore I will 
vote against the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour to rise before this Assembly and speak in response to 
Her Honour’s first Speech from the Throne, which I 
congratulate her on. I would like to say a few words tonight, 
Mr. Speaker, on a topic that was mentioned in the throne 
speech, co-operation and volunteerism in Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate my 
colleague from Assiniboia. I missed his first speech and I 
understand it was a good speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — And I, along with the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg . . . I relish this moment, Mr. Speaker, 
this moment being that this is the first time a member of our 
party represented the constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
But with a member like him, Mr. Speaker, it will not be the last 
time. 
 
And I agree with the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
who in his speech reinforced the fact that the people of his 
constituency sent a message. And I hope the members opposite, 
especially the member from Riversdale, appreciate the impact 
of that message, the message, Mr. Speaker, being that the 
people of the province don’t want to be lied to. And I refer to 
the letter sent by the Leader of the Opposition to the people in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in respect to the closing of five 
hospitals. Mr. Speaker, the people don’t mind rhetoric but they 
don’t like untruths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message that’s here is only that there is only 
one credible party in the province of Saskatchewan; there is 
only one party that the people can believe in, and that is the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. The people of 
this province can rely on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
They want solutions and we will supply them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize an important component 
of today’s society, a component that we, the government, have 
reinforced for the past eight years. The component that is so 
integral to Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, is co-operation — 
co-operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the members on the other side suggest I don’t know 
what the word means, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest to that 
member that I know what co-operation means. I have 
co-operated in my community all of my life and I take pride in 
that. 
 
The members opposite should take note, Mr. Speaker, of 

 a few words. Co-operation is defined as a willingness to work 
together with others, a wanting to work together with others. 
 
The key words, Mr. Speaker, and I wish the member would 
listen, are willingness and wanting to work together. The 
member from Riversdale should take note on my short speech 
today, Mr. Speaker; he could use a few pointers in this area. 
Co-operate with the people, co-operate with them. 
 
He talks a lot about going to the grass roots on policy, but I 
think, Mr. Speaker, he and his fellow members across the way 
are copping out. He’s not leading his party, Mr. Speaker; he’s 
waiting for them to come up with his policy. He’s not working 
with the people of the province; he is depending on them and he 
is using them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our government is committed to co-operating with the people 
in Saskatchewan and working with them. I don’t have to 
mention some of the things we’ve done — other members have 
and will — where we are co-operating with employees to 
become a member of society and have a right to work and 
something to work for. Co-operation — it is a relevant concept 
in our society today. The throne speech clarifies my point, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In our objectives this year, almost every area is focused on the 
necessity of co-operation. Co-operation and volunteerism must 
be recognized. It is evident in all areas of our life today. I don’t 
have to think loud and hard to come up with examples of 
government contributing to this component. 
 
In my own constituency we have seen jobs created to govern 
co-operation with the citizens of the constituency of Wilkie. 
Take our government’s home program, for example. Mr. 
Speaker, a total of 270 jobs we’ve created through this program. 
Our government contributed $3,000,394 million to the people 
of the Wilkie constituency to improve upon their homes. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, contributed $3,197,580 in the 
form of loans to people in the Wilkie constituency to help them 
buy a home. Over 3,838 individuals were approved to renovate 
their homes utilizing the $3,000 matching grant from our 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 511 individuals were approved for low interest 
loans to buy homes. The government and the people of my 
constituency created 270 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at all the volunteer positions that 
our citizens fill. Look, Mr. Speaker, at the PALS program, for 
an excellent example. PALS, Principle of Alphabet Literacy 
System is a computer-based interactive, instructional system 
designed to teach adolescents and adults basic reading and 
writing skills. The project serves over 5,000 students in our 
province, Mr. Speaker, in the next three years. 
 
Who are their instructors, Mr. Speaker? The instructors are 
primarily volunteers. Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of taking 
part in the opening of the second centre of computer-based 
literacy instruction in North Battleford. It is located at the North 
West Regional College. And at that  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

75 
 

centre, Mr. Speaker, more than 75 school age and adult learners 
are making use of 12 computer terminals for the purpose of 
upgrading their reading and writing skills. 
 
Co-operation, Mr. Speaker, not only between the people of 
Saskatchewan and the government, but with IBM Canada Ltd., 
the private sector as well. We have a three-year agreement with 
IBM, Mr. Speaker, where they donated $850,000 worth of 
software, hardware and personnel, and 24-hour service to the 
people in that PALS project — co-operation between the 
private sector, the people and the government. 
 
This example of co-operation represents the first major 
application of computer-based literacy training in Canada — in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. The first one . . . I don’t have to think too 
hard to come up with some more examples. Sporting events 
come to mind immediately — events like the 1989 Labatt’s 
Brier, and the 1989 Canada Summer Games could not occur if 
the concept of co-operation did not exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has long been a leader in Canadian 
curling, growing from small community rinks in almost every 
community in this province, small and large. Many of those 
rinks were started through the recreation facility grants funded 
by our government. It was volunteers that went out and raised 
the extra money needed. Volunteers are the binding force that 
brings community together and gives it a sense of pride and 
purpose. That is co-operation and volunteerism. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan and the government built those 
rinks together and from this tradition and the work of countless 
volunteers over the years have come curlers demonstrating the 
team-work and commitment to excellence that characterize an 
event like the Brier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are over 3,000 athletes from across Canada 
competing in Saskatoon in the 1989 Canada Summer Games. 
Approximately 6,000 volunteers have donated their time and 
energy preparing and ensuring the success of these games. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, over $9 million in facilities and $8 million in 
operating costs are going into the games. Our province has 
contributed $2.5 million to help ensure its success. 
 
This money will help to construct many new facilities. The 
co-operation between these volunteers and the government will 
generate a great amount of economic activity. Countless hours 
and many dollars go into hosting these games and our province 
will benefit through the co-operation of government people and 
the community. It will benefit, Mr. Speaker, through new and 
upgraded facilities, trained personnel, and many visitor dollars 
left in Saskatchewan — all due to the spirit of co-operation. 
 
And on a more local level, Mr. Speaker, this weekend the 
intermediate ladies will be holding a bonspiel in my home town 
of Unity. And I know of over 60 volunteers that will be 
involved in that bonspiel in this little town of Unity. 
 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed, building on this 
co-operative foundation to continue to meet the needs of our 
citizens. Mr. Speaker, when our government introduced the 
Department of Health, Everyone Wins campaign, 10 third-party 
endorsements came in in one day — 10, Mr. Speaker. Over 10 
third-party endorsements. All participated in the announcement. 
They threw their support behind the government’s program. 
 
I want to give you a more specific example, Mr. Speaker: team 
WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker. Team WESTBRIDGE is made 
up of members of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. They are 
sponsored by the WESTBRIDGE computer company and they 
are working in co-operation with SADAC (Saskatchewan 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission), travelling from school 
to school in Saskatchewan, speaking on drug and alcohol abuse. 
These three organizations came together to help the Everyone 
Wins campaign in educating people in co-operation, Mr. 
Speaker, with each other. 
 
Educating people on living more healthy life-styles — that is 
co-operation, Mr. Speaker. And I could use examples from 
health for hours, but I’ll stop at this next one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Kidney Foundation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, donated 
$30,000 to our government to help implement a transplant 
program in Saskatchewan. Together, in true co-operation, the 
Kidney Foundation and the Government of Saskatchewan are 
working together to set this program up. 
 
In March, we witnessed the annual event of Telemiracle. The 
Saskatchewan Kinsmen came within $35,000 of realizing 
another $2 million dream, Mr. Speaker. This 13-year-old 
tradition has been maintained, Mr. Speaker, through the 
co-operation of all the people in Saskatchewan. The Kinsmen 
have put more than $17 million into projects since the telethon 
began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 80 cents of every dollar raised goes back to the 
people of Saskatchewan. This event could not occur year in and 
year out without the concepts of co-operation and volunteerism, 
Mr. Speaker. Events such as these make me proud that our 
government is committed to something as important as the 
concept of co-operation. 
 
Twenty-nine new businesses were created through the youth 
entrepreneurs program in 1988. These businesses ranged from 
shoe repair to optical lens manufacturing. These businesses 
received nearly $364,000 in loans from our government to start 
up. This program was established in May of 1985 to encourage 
our young entrepreneurs to create small businesses and new 
jobs. This program, Mr. Speaker, has resulted in the creation of 
139 businesses and 265 new jobs. Co-operation, Mr. Speaker, 
co-operation helps build. 
 
Let me give you an example: the Co-op heavy oil upgrader 
located in Regina, Mr. Speaker — the first ever in Canada — a 
joint venture between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Consumers’ Co-operative Refineries Ltd. People and 
government together co-operating, Mr. Speaker. And that is the 
thrust of the  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

76 
 

throne speech, is to co-operate. This co-operative partnership is 
increasing heavy oil exploration and production in creating new 
jobs in Saskatchewan and it impacts very heavily in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, because we have some heavy oil 
reserves. 
 
The provincial government is building in Saskatchewan; 
building in co-operation with groups all across Saskatchewan 
and I’m here to tell you that we will continue to do so. We are 
committed to it. 
 
And this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, continues that 
commitment. I therefore urge all members of the House to 
support the main motion and defeat any and all amendments. I 
thank you for your time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin, Mr. 
Speaker, by saying that it’s a privilege to give voice to some of 
the concerns of the people of Saskatoon Sutherland, and to call 
for a public accounting of the government’s action that is long 
overdue. 
 
I look at this Speech from the Throne, as do many of my 
constituents, as evidence that this PC government is about to 
become history, is about to become dust on the face of the 
province’s history, because this speech, Mr. Speaker, adds to 
the pile of lies and broken promises that characterize this 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. The issue 
of unparliamentary language is, of course, one that we have 
faced before, and sometimes some members might disagree 
with a ruling. However, I intend to try to enforce it, but that 
doesn’t mean that one isn’t human and may not make a mistake 
from time to time. But, however, I don’t think that we should 
get into the habit of using those kinds of, that kind of language. 
It isn’t good for the House. And therefore I ask the hon. 
member to please withdraw it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I should have said 
that this Speech from the Throne adds to the pile of corruption 
and duplicity, the broken promises that surround the record of 
this government and is built up around the Premier of this 
province. Because never, in the history of Saskatchewan, have 
Saskatchewan people seen a government that is more inept, 
more corrupt, and more uncaring than this Progressive 
Conservative government opposite. 
 
And in reflecting on the history of the last seven years and on 
the words of the Speech from the Throne, I am reminded of the 
larger panorama of human history and that period in time 
known as the Dark Ages, or the feudal times. 
 
And much like the feudal times, this government here in 
Saskatchewan simply doesn’t care about the people that it 
governs. This is a government that doesn’t simply ignore 
Saskatchewan people; this is a government that actively preys 
on Saskatchewan people — preys most especially on the weak 
and the vulnerable and those who are unable to protect 
themselves. This is a government that plunders the public 
welfare, that plunders and wastes the public  

purse while it shovels jobs and patronage appointments to its 
friends. 
 
And so what we have is really a new form of feudalism — a 
new feudalism perfected by the Progressive Conservative 
government opposite. Just as the Middle Ages were 
characterized by rigid class distinctions, basically in only two 
directions — serfs and peasants who had nothing and the kings 
or lords who had everything, this is what we see happening 
across the province of Saskatchewan in the last months and 
years. 
 
We now have two classes of people in Saskatchewan: people 
who have wealth and privilege and power and access to 
opportunity and preferential treatment; and a second class of 
people in Saskatchewan, everyone else. In other words, we have 
the friends of the PC Party and everyone else — everyone else 
who takes a back seat. So there’s life in the castle and there’s 
life on the outside for everyone else. 
 
The proof of this is found in the government’s record on 
patronage. At a time when working men and women are being 
driven from their work place and from their jobs, at a time when 
young people are looking for jobs that don’t exist, at a time 
when Saskatchewan families are having to leave the province of 
Saskatchewan for employment, the list of those who have been 
kicked out of office by the voters of Saskatchewan and who 
return to feed off the public purse continues to grow and grow. 
 
And I think of defeated PC cabinet minister, Paul Schoenhals, 
who is now chairman of the potash corporation to the tune of 
some $100,000 a year, who the people of Saskatoon Sutherland, 
the very constituency that I represent, said that they didn’t want 
serving them as a member of the legislature. And I know from 
visiting those people that they aren’t pleased with him serving 
as the chairman of the potash corporation. 
 
I think of another PC cabinet minister, Gordon Dirks. Gord has 
a consulting contract now with the provincial Department of 
Education. Or, PC cabinet minister, defeated, Tim Embury, 
interim president of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
How comfortable, how very comfortable life in the palace can 
be — life close to the palace, for those who are friends of the 
PC Party and have the access and the opportunity to feast at the 
king’s table. 
 
I think of another . . . There’s another PC cabinet minister 
defeated in this past election, Louis Domotor. Well, what is 
good old Louis doing now? Well Louis is doing special projects 
for the property management corporation. Former PC cabinet 
minister, Paul Rousseau, is now agent-general for the 
Government of Saskatchewan in England. Gordon Currie . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like to ask the hon. member 
to please refrain from interrupting the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Former PC cabinet minister, Paul Rousseau, 
now is feasting at the king’s table in England, on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Very, very comfortable. The 
Queen’s table perhaps, as an hon.  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

77 
 

friend says. 
 
Another PC cabinet minister, Gordon Currie, now at the board 
table for the youth treatment centre. PC MLA, Keith Parker — 
they get in the acts too, the MLAs do — working with booze, as 
assistant chairman to the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. The 
government that wants to open liquor stores across the province 
in the constituency of Rosthern, for example, puts its former 
MLAs to work greasing the skids for that sort of program. And 
the list goes on and on. Ralphie Katzman is in there, of course 
— people know that. 
 
And while all this patronage goes on, at the very time that all of 
this patronage goes on, and we enter the PC era of the new 
feudalism, the gap, Mr. Speaker, between the rich and the poor 
widens and grows greater day by day. People only have to read 
this Speech from the Throne that was delivered last week to see 
that this government is now going to experiment with the new 
feudalism down on the farm — feudalism on the farm, 
Saskatchewan-style, with the introduction of equity financing. 
What else, after all, is equity financing, but the modern day 
equivalent of the feudal system where farmers who are 
strangled by debt are handed over to the lords and ladies of 
capital to become hired hands, indentured servants on their own 
land? 
 
And what we have is the Premier of this province who 
countenances that, in fact, who advances it in this Speech from 
the Throne; who has no problem at all with farmers being first 
turfed off their land and then asked to come back, forced to 
come back and farm it for someone else. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not farming Saskatchewan-style, that is farming 
in feudal style and Saskatchewan farmers will have nothing to 
do with it. 
 
(2015) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And Saskatchewan farmers are losing rapidly 
all respect for the Minister of Agriculture, who espouses this 
kind of exploitation of those who work the land, and they’re 
going to give him his just reward in due time. 
 
But it isn’t simply farm land that has been transformed by this 
new feudalism PC-style; this new feudal system that’s entered 
the province with the Premier and his government. Precisely the 
same dimension, or dynamic, is at work with the forest lands in 
the northern part of the province. 
 
Just as in feudal times there was a situation in which the 
peasants or the serfs could not hunt, or even gather fuel wood 
from Crown land, the same situation exists here today in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The Premier of the province, just 
like a king in feudal times, acting on some kind of divine right, 
sells off Saskatchewan forests to American forest giants like 
Weyerhaeuser corporation and kicks Saskatchewan people off 
the land. Purportedly we are told by this Premier that the 
province receives $248 million for the sale of the Big River saw 
mill, the Saskatoon chemical plant, the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company, and probably more than one-half of the  

northern Saskatchewan forests — purportedly $248 million. But 
it’s not true. There was no money put down at the time of that 
sale and Saskatchewan people need to know that Weyerhaeuser 
was given 30 years to pay — no money down and 30 years to 
pay — at a preferential interest rate of eight and one-half per 
cent with no payment required in years in which 
Weyerhaeuser’s profit in Saskatchewan was less than 12 per 
cent. 
 
And to add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan are required to pay annually for the 
building of 32 kilometres of roads in that northern forest area 
every year, each year into perpetuity, until the end of the forest 
management lease agreement with Weyerhaeuser. And I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that agreement will come to an end the day 
the New Democratic government is elected because the New 
Democratic government will not see the people of 
Saskatchewan victimized in that kind of fashion. 
 
And to this day then what do we have to show for the sale, this 
so-called sale, of all of these Crown assets to Weyerhaeuser, 
this sale engineered by the Premier of the province? We have 
less than 10 per cent of the purchase price in the provincial 
purse; less than 10 per cent of the purchase price in the 
provincial purse. 
 
And I say to people who are looking at attending the University 
of Saskatchewan and who can’t get in because the doors are 
locked on them because of inadequate funding from the 
province, I say that even a down payment of $100 million could 
have gone a long way to restore education on the University of 
Saskatchewan’s campus. But that was too much for the Premier 
to ask of his friends at Weyerhaeuser, the robber barons. Yes, 
what we have with Weyerhaeuser is a licence to rob the 
province of Saskatchewan, to rape and plunder Saskatchewan 
forests, and nowhere do we see the effects, the long-term effects 
of this feudal system, more than when it comes to young 
people. 
 
Would you believe that this Speech from the Throne does not so 
much as mention any kind of job program for young people in 
this province? Imagine that! How could it be that a government 
that talks about the importance of the future and loves to talk 
about the importance of families has nothing to say about the 
future of young people in the work place? To this day there has 
yet to be a summer jobs program announced for Saskatchewan 
young people — and it won’t be announced either, in the 
budget. It won’t do anybody any good even if it would be. 
 
But that’s like the feudal lord. It’s just like the feudal lord to sit 
in his castle and to imagine what’s going on, on the outside; to 
ignore the reality of what’s going on, on the outside, and to 
imagine what’s going on. And the Premier of this province 
doesn’t care enough about Saskatchewan people, young people, 
to do anything for them. 
 
And I have some statistics. I’ll give the Premier credit for this, 
that he still has a bureau of statistics within the provincial 
government. I have here the most recent Government of 
Saskatchewan statistics, dated March 10, 1989, for the 
Saskatchewan labour force. And I note that the unemployment 
rate for young people between the ages of 15 and 24 is 
seventeen and one-half per cent —  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

78 
 

seventeen and one-half per cent unemployment rate for young 
people between the ages of 15 and 24. Now what kind of future 
is there for these young people with no work? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what kind of future there is. There’s a 
future of poverty, and there’s a future of alcoholism, and a 
future of drug abuse because the devil quickly finds work for 
idle hands even if the Premier of the province can’t. 
 
And while the . . . This unemployment rate for young people 
between the ages of 15 and 24 is more than double the 
unemployment rate for the rest of the province. Now that’s 
damning enough, but when we look at similar government 
statistics from the Government of Saskatchewan dated February 
9, 1989, we look at outmigration from the province of 
Saskatchewan, we see that a very similar circumstance is at 
work. 
 
Who are the people leaving the province of Saskatchewan in the 
last year? They’re basically young people between the ages of 
20 and 29. For the age group 20 to 24, there are four and a half 
thousand people, young people who left the province last year; 
and another four and a half thousand people between the ages of 
25 to 29 who left the province. 
 
And indeed if you look at the government’s own statistical 
figures for the month of January, 1989, we see that there were 
1,000 more young people who left the province this past 
January than a year ago in January — almost 3,000 people 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in fact if we look at the total outmigration statistics for 
families leaving the province of Saskatchewan, we’ll see that a 
similar trajectory is in place, that for the month of January ’89, 
there were almost 1,000 more Saskatchewan families leaving 
the province than a year ago in January. 
 
While all this is going on then, while Saskatchewan young 
people are going without work or going out of the province, 
who is at the banquet table, feasting like a pig at public 
expense? The Tories. People like Paul Schoenhals and other 
friends of the PC Party grunting away at the public banquet 
table. The people of Saskatchewan know something is wrong, 
and they know what’s wrong, and they know that it comes from 
this Premier and his government with their patronage programs 
and their preferential treatment for the wealthy. 
 
Just this past week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity 
to listen to a constituent who shared her concerns about her two 
sons and their future employment prospects in this province. 
The one is a young man in his teens who is studying to be a 
psychiatrist. He is studying to be a psychiatrist because he 
realizes that in a few years there will be so many people with so 
many problems that the province of Saskatchewan is going to 
have to have a slew of psychologists and psychiatrists to deal 
with these problems, and so his employment prospects are 
pretty great. The second son is much younger and still in 
elementary school, and this woman reports that his future is not 
so bright — that he sees that the door to his future education has 
really effectively been closed if he wants to go to the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) because of  

lack of funding and admission quotas at the U of S. 
 
And so when the Speech from the Throne, on the second page, 
talks about this government increasing educational 
opportunities, the speech is just that — talk. Talk, empty words, 
and words are cheap. Empty promises like so much of what this 
Premier utters. 
 
And young people and parents across the province know full 
well, know firsthand that educational opportunities at the U of 
S, for example, are fewer and harder to access. And the same is 
true really for Kelsey and the technical institute system, with 
program cut-backs that were instituted after the provincial 
election in 1986. 
 
Yes, the Dark Ages have settled on the educational system of 
Saskatchewan with an increase in ignorance and human misery. 
In Saskatchewan, young people know that the educational 
system is in shambles; the scholars are leaving the province at 
the university; the libraries are going without books at the 
University of Saskatchewan; and that science is being 
conducted with outdated equipment. 
 
Yes, just like in feudal times, under this Premier and this PC 
government there is a real transfer, a real transfer of wealth and 
opportunity from the hands of the many into the hands of the 
few — the granting of largess to those who already have, and 
the taking away of services and programs and protections from 
those who are left on their own. 
 
This is precisely the kind of dynamic or dimension that’s at 
work in the government’s privatization agenda — a plan to 
institute the new feudalism here in Saskatchewan; the new 
feudalism that concentrates capital in the hands of the lords of 
capital. The privatization is really the modern-day equivalent of 
the feudal lords of old who used to ride into villages and seize 
possessions of the peasantry and ride back to wine and women 
and songs, laughing about their exploits. 
 
And I think, for example, of the way this Premier wants to 
waste the province of Saskatchewan . . . the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, to sell it to the Japanese and the Chinese or 
the Koreans or the Indians or whoever will buy it. And I say to 
folks on the other side of the sea, you don’t need the profits 
from the potash that’s here in Saskatchewan; you aren’t entitled 
to the profits of the potash in Saskatchewan. These are the 
province’s natural resources. 
 
And I say when He created this province and this earth, God 
Almighty put the potash in the ground here in Saskatchewan for 
the people of Saskatchewan to benefit from. And the profits 
from the sale of this resource ought to stay here in 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people and not get shipped 
across the Pacific. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Ship the potash across the Pacific, but keep 
the profits here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Indeed it’s no accident that Saskatchewan has established some 
of the finest health care programs in North America  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

79 
 

or the world — programs like the prescription drug plan or the 
dental plan — established these programs precisely because of 
judicious use of resources like potash and oil, the mineral 
wealth that belongs to all the people of the province, benefiting 
all the people of the province, ploughed back into programs that 
serve Saskatchewan people. But now we have the new 
feudalism to concentrate control and profits from resources in 
the hands of a few — welfare for the rich. 
 
(2030) 
 
And we have a similar situation, not just with the resource 
Crowns but with the publicly-owned utilities like SGI and 
SaskTel and SaskPower corporation. Two years ago, the 
Premier promised the people of Saskatchewan that these 
utilities would not be sold, would never be privatized. But what 
does this Speech from the Throne announce but the sale of 
SaskPower and SGI? Another broken promise. And worse than 
the Premier’s broken promise is what this broken promise 
means for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Already, a year ago in April, the PCs announced the 
privatization of SaskPower’s natural gas reserves to Saskoil, 
510 billion cubic feet of natural gas, the equivalent of 15 years 
worth of consumption by all the home owners of the province, 
signed over from SaskPower to Saskoil. Imagine that resource, 
that future supply of natural gas to heat all of Saskatchewan 
home owners for the next 15 years, sold to Saskoil which is 
now owned 75 per cent by out-of-province shareholders. Worse 
still, the gas was sold for $325 million when it had a market 
value three times greater — a market value of $1 billion. And 
what cash do taxpayers have to show for this transaction? Not 
$325 million, not even $225 million, $125 million. A third of 
the purchase price is cash in hand and the promises from the 
directors of Saskatchewan Oil to make up the difference in due 
course. What a wonderful deal. What a wonderful, wonderful 
deal for the people of Saskatchewan, orchestrated by none other 
than robber baron George Hill, the president of SaskPower and 
former president of the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan. And the pay-off for such a little raid on the 
public purse, a salary of some 150 or $200,000 a year for old 
George. A deal set up by the Premier of the province who will 
say one thing, will promise not to privatize SaskPower or SGI 
or SaskTel, but we watch him do another. We watch him sell it 
out from under our feet. 
 
The same Premier who says to a group of financial wheelers 
and dealers in New York when he visits there a number of years 
ago, Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can afford 
to mismanage it and still come out ahead. Well it’s that kind of 
logic and it’s that kind of action, that kind of record that 
nauseates Saskatchewan people, that makes them sick when 
they realize what’s really going on here in Regina. How can a 
Premier promise, for example, to eliminate the sales tax in his 
first term of office and then half way through his second term 
still not have acted on that promise and broken it? 
 
How can the Premier, people wonder, promise to reduce income 
tax by 10 per cent and break that promise? How can he get 
away with it? Does might make right? How can the Premier 
promise to remove the gas tax for ever so that  

it will never darken the doorstep of Saskatchewan people and 
then break that promise too? Make a promise; break a promise. 
Tax the socks off of everyone but those in the top tax brackets, 
that’s the name of the game with this government. To do what? 
To build a little private plaything down in Estevan, the 
Premier’s own constituency, the Shand Rafferty project. 
 
Tax Saskatchewan taxpayers to the hilt for a billion dollar 
plaything to build up the Premier’s ego and to enhance his 
political fortunes, perhaps to impress other empire builders with 
what’s going on in his backyard while he bleeds the people of 
Saskatchewan with tax grabs. 
 
In 1985, we got the flat tax. It started out at half a per cent of 
net income and it’s increased every year since then: in ’86 to 1 
per cent; in ’87 to one and one-half per cent; in ’88 to 2 per 
cent; and the sky seems to be the limit when it comes to 
taxation from this government. To pay for what? A billion 
dollar plaything for the Premier down at Shand-Rafferty — a 
billion dollars that could have gone into hospitals or highways 
or any number of other things. 
 
And so we see the Dark Ages descending on Saskatchewan 
with this government, a government that victimizes its own 
people, that breaks promises, that introduces unfair flat taxes, 
and increases the level of debt and ignorance and human misery 
in the province. 
 
And darker still is the lot of Saskatchewan people when it 
comes to health care. I say, it’s back to the Dark Ages when 
Saskatchewan people have to die waiting to get into hospitals, 
and when they wait so long that when they finally do get 
through the doors, it’s not for surgery, but it’s for the autopsy. 
That’s scandalous! 
 
And what an indictment of this government, that accident and 
illness has to plague Saskatchewan people, and that my 
constituents have to phone me begging and pleading with me to 
see if I can do something to get them into the hospital beds, to 
get through the waiting lists. And the government has nothing 
better to do than to suggest that we install slot machines to pay 
for the health care costs of the province. 
 
Gambling on people’s lives, that’s the name of the game, from 
the Premier who doesn’t care. The same Premier of this 
province who would play God and restrict access to health care, 
at the same time has a half a million dollars to give to the horse 
races — that’s unforgiveable. 
 
The Premier of this province will even go so far as to equate 
people who need prescription drugs with drug pushers and drug 
addicts. 
 
But Saskatchewan people know that there is a better way. 
Saskatchewan people know that there is a new day coming, that 
there is a democratic way of providing for basic human needs 
— a way that’s far different from the feudalism of the PC Party 
that’s settled across the province — and that the new and the 
democratic way of governing this province is predicated on 
fairness and co-operation and compassion. 
 
Saskatchewan people know full well and remember, in spite of 
the dark days that they’ve lived through these last  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

80 
 

seven years, times when Saskatchewan had the finest programs 
of any province or jurisdiction in North America. Saskatchewan 
people remember the time when they were protected by 
universal medicare that meant something and that dealt with 
sickness and accident as it happened, not forcing them to wait 
inordinately. 
 
Saskatchewan people remember the time when there was a 
measure of security in the work place, and when there was a 
decent minimum wage, when there were job opportunities for 
young people and they didn’t have to leave the province. Yes, 
Saskatchewan people remember a time in education when there 
was opportunity to grow and learn and go to the university and 
receive a first-class education. 
 
Once in Saskatchewan there was a co-operative caring and 
sharing sense of partnership among people, common values that 
were passed on from mother to daughter, from father to son. 
And there was optimism and hope for the future. But these last 
seven years have changed a lot of that, have taken us from a 
province that had no debt to a province with a deficit and a 
burden of debt, a province that now spends $1 million a day for 
nothing, for nothing other than to service the provincial deficit. 
A thousand . . . a million dollars, rather, a day that goes to 
service the provincial debt. A million dollars a day that can’t go 
into hospitals, that can’t go into education, that can’t go into 
highways or anything else because it’s going for nothing — for 
a debt that wasn’t there seven years ago. 
 
And yet there’s $100,000 for old Paul Schoenhals at the trough 
and $200,000 for George Hill and thousands of dollars for 
empty office space in Regina and Prince Albert. This won’t last 
much longer. There’s a new day coming to Saskatchewan and 
there’s a new government that’s coming to Saskatchewan — 
one that will put an end to waste and mismanagement, one that 
will put an end to corruption and patronage, one that will put an 
end to the PC style of feudalism that we now live under where 
the rich get richer and the poor get it in the neck. 
 
People are tired of a Premier who’s a deadhead, who thinks 
only about his friends. People are tired, and sick and tired of a 
Premier who has a dead heart and who doesn’t care about them. 
Saskatchewan people are sick and tired of living like peasants 
and serfs in their own province. They’re sick and tired of being 
taken for granted, of being exploited and being left unprotected, 
victimized by the robber barons and lords of capital. 
 
And it’s high time, Saskatchewan people are saying, it’s high 
time for Saskatchewan to have a government as good as its 
people, a Premier as good as Saskatchewan people. That’s the 
government that’s waiting just around the corner when the New 
Democrats take over and usher in a new day for Saskatchewan 
people. And it’s on that basis and with that realization that I will 
not be voting for this old feudalistic style Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

It is a distinct pleasure for me to rise in this Assembly and to 
join my colleagues and those on this side of the House in 
recognition of the support for the Speech from the Throne. 
 
It is a document that I believe is both substantial and is also 
timely. It demonstrates the forward-looking attitude that 
everyone has come to expect from our PC government while 
dealing responsibly with concerns we are facing today. 
 
Before I continue, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my personal 
congratulations to Her Honour on her appointment as 
Lieutenant Governor for the province of Saskatchewan. Here is 
a vital role in the tradition of the Legislative Assembly, and in 
all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, I would like to convey my 
expectations that she will fill it with honour and distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in returning to the Speech from the Throne, I 
maintain that it is a document expressive of the kinds of 
direction we as government must take and the leadership 
necessary in going in that direction. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to commend this government on the public 
participation initiatives it has taken since 1982. I believe 
strongly in the rights of the individual to grow and prosper. I 
believe in accomplishing that goal, which is why I endorse 
public participation. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, in order to discuss this issue properly we 
have to start with some basic truths — truths that we as 
government are familiar with, but truths that often go 
overlooked by people we serve. The first truth, Mr. Speaker, is 
that governments have no wealth of their own. A government’s 
only wealth is that which has been taken from the individual. 
Even on rare occasions when a state-owned business shows 
some return, Mr. Speaker, it is a return on dollars taken away 
from taxpayers — taxpayers who did not voluntarily surrender 
their money for investment purposes. So, Mr. Speaker, because 
governments have no money of their own when they buy up 
their established Crown-owned corporations, they are using an 
individual’s money to do it, and that, Mr. Speaker, is a truth that 
is often ignored. 
 
(2045) 
 
The second truth, Mr. Speaker, is that public participation goes 
beyond the boundaries of any political ideology. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, we see even socialist governments embarking on 
public participation strategies in order to stimulate their 
economy. 
 
Why is it then that the the Saskatchewan New Democrats 
opposed every initiative government’s taken in moving 
forward, creating opportunity and diversifying the economy 
through public participation. And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at 
the success of the various public participation initiatives of this 
government, you can see that these are all areas where 
government involvement was not, and is not, necessary. 
 
Through the development of government assets, Mr. Speaker, 
the formation of new Saskatchewan companies, public 
participation is now the forefront of new economic 
development in Saskatchewan. Public participation has  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

81 
 

resulted in Crown corporation bonds allowing Saskatchewan 
families to save at home while earning a good return and 
creating new economic activity. New ownership opportunities 
have been presented through investments in shares and new 
business ventures for government employees and the general 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new forms of service delivery are encouraging 
more efficient use of resources, and new jobs are being created 
and existing jobs are being protected. 
 
I’d like to give you some examples of this, Mr. Speaker. For 
instance, over 42,000 Saskatchewan residents purchased the 
SaskPower Plus bonds. This, Mr. Speaker, raised $343 million 
for this corporation. 
 
The Meadow Lake Sawmill is another example of kinds of 
things public participation does. The sale to employees at local 
Indian bands attracted two new companies: a chopstick factory 
and a pulp mill to locate and invest in their areas. Mr. Speaker, 
the new employees and the native owners have created a new 
spirit of enterprises and attracted new economic activity in that 
area. 
 
The sale of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) in Prince 
Albert is another fine example of public participation. 
 
The $250 million investment in the Weyerhaeuser and 
construction of a world-class paper mill has already brought 
$63.5 million of new revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, has over 700 jobs created during the 
construction of the new paper mill. 
 
Since completion, Mr. Speaker, the new mill has created 169 
new permanent positions for Saskatchewan men and women, 
and has just recently announced a $20.8 million expansion of 
that mill. That’s in direct contrast, Mr. Speaker, to the 
money-losing corporations, PAPSCO, that cost the taxpayer of 
the province more than $90,000 a day to operate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s PAPCO. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Sorry, my mistake. A few more examples, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just listen for a while, 
it’ll get real interesting. 
 
A few more examples, Mr. Speaker. When WESTBRIDGE 
Computer Corporation was initiated with a $13.9 million share 
issue by its employees, expansion was almost immediate. A $6 
million in out-of-province contracts have already created 50 
new jobs and continued growth promises of another 200 
employment opportunities. 
 
How about Saskoil, Mr. Speaker? Planned gas development 
activities resulting in the purchase of underutilized natural gas 
reserves will create new economic activity with 100 new gas 
wells and a potential for another 600. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there is a projected total of 1,000 jobs 
to be created through that initiative. That’s 1,000 jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, jobs that would not 
have existed without this initiative. 
 

And these are not the only ways of efficiency that’s being 
restarted in the province of Saskatchewan. Increased 
participation in the delivery of public services is being achieved 
through new forms of delivery involving contracting of services 
from the private sector, government employees, community 
groups and third parties. 
 
Some of these initiatives include: in agriculture, contract 
services for farm input cost study, for commercial lending, is 
now in the hands of the private sector. 
 
In Consumer and Commercial Affairs, licensing and inspecting 
of real estate activities has been done through self-policing on 
the part of real real estate associations. 
 
In Environment, a contract with SARC (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres) to collect beer and soft 
drink cans has provided employment for 98 people with 
disabilities . . . Those are with disabilities. 
 
In financing, contracting the audited service is now privately 
done. In Highways and Transportation, highway grass mowing 
is being handled by the private industry, and there is a 50 per 
cent saving to this government. In Justice, contracts for court 
reporting and data entry are privately done. 
 
In Parks, Recreation and Culture, private capital investment and 
leasing arrangements for commercial operations in parks are 
now available. In Crown corporations, contracts for audit 
functions, inspection services, security services, and janitorial 
services have been contracted to the private sector companies. 
And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 
part of this success. 
 
In 1988, 15 public consultation meetings were held through the 
province with over 2,500 people attending, and 1989 meetings 
are now under way. Mr. Speaker, over 20 informational 
seminars have been held with over 400 government employees 
from all parts of Saskatchewan attending. And from these 
people, Mr. Speaker, we have learned that Saskatchewan people 
want more opportunities to invest in the province. People want 
to use their money to facilitate our own economic development. 
We have learned, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people want 
to see more efficient forms of public service delivery that will 
stimulate and create jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has delivered to the people 
of the province by embarking on these public participation 
initiatives. Revenues received from the sale of non-essential 
government assets can be used to fund our health care and 
education systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, financing Crown corporation activities through 
bonds and share offerings will reduce our tax burden in this 
province. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the government is 
currently paying $220,000 a day to finance a debt load of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — tax dollars that could 
be better spent on essential services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, attracting new investments into  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

82 
 

Saskatchewan is creating new jobs for the people of our 
province, and encouraging greater efficiency in the government 
will improve public service delivery to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, whether a share or a bond is 
bought, a government service is contracted out or an employee 
bond is formed, public participation is working for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members across the floor have criticized our 
public participation initiatives and I will respond with those 
criticisms simply to prove their lack of validity. Before I do 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind those same members 
of their own drive towards share offerings in Crown 
corporations that was ended by a 1982 electoral sweep by 
Premier Grant Devine. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the member not to use 
other members’ names. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — I repeat, before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to remind those same members of their own drive towards 
share offerings in Crown corporations that was ended in the 
1982 electoral sweep by the Premier of this province. 
 
On January 14, 1982, Mr. Speaker, at a meeting of Crown 
investments corporation of Saskatchewan, the board reviewed a 
management paper which outlined the proposal for: 
 

 Providing Saskatchewan residents with an opportunity to 
invest in provincial industrial development projects and at 
the same time generate a new pool of capital which would 
allow the province to take advantage of large industrial 
projects in an area where capital rationing for Crown 
investments has become reality. 
 

And then, Mr. Speaker, following the discussion, the board 
agreed to: 
 

 . . . approve in principle a program to provide 
Saskatchewan residents an opportunity to make equity 
investments in Saskatchewan enterprises through 
Saskatchewan Holding and Reinvestment incorporations. 
 

An Hon. Member: — What party was that again? 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the decision to incorporate 
SHAR (Saskatchewan Holding and Reinvestment) was made by 
this same party, the New Democratic Party, who today are 
determined to convince the people of Saskatchewan that in the 
name of public good, Crown ownership is necessary. 
 
I’d like to ask the members opposite just what policy they 
support, Mr. Speaker. Or perhaps, like many of their other 
policies, Mr. Speaker, that which best serves their political 
interest at that time is the policy they support. 
 
I think we’re all familiar with what the policy flip-flops across 
the floor means, Mr. Speaker. They support freer trade; they 
don’t support freer trade. They support Meech Lake; they don’t 
support Meech Lake. They support public participation; they 
don’t support public  

participation. I can send the list of inconsistencies, Mr. Speaker, 
but I chose not to. 
 
I would like to respond to the criticism of public participation 
versus public good, and I will enclose that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One example used by the socialists to promote Crown 
ownership is the idea that when the government controls the 
business, the business is somehow more accountable. History 
proves that this is not true, Mr. Speaker, and the reverse is the 
reality. We can stay right here in Saskatchewan for many clear 
examples, Mr. Speaker, and that is environmental 
accountability. 
 
Under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, the City of Regina 
experienced a PC spill, a very dangerous chemical. This spill 
happened in 1976. This spill was not discovered until 1978, and 
it happened to be the mayor at that time was Mr. Henry Baker. 
And there was a 1,500 gallon leak that was covered up with 
asphalt. The first indication that they found out about this, the 
city of Regina, was through the media. This was kept quiet by 
pouring asphalt over it, hoping that nobody would find out 
about this — this very serious spill that could have caused 
many, many things to the wildlife, to the fish, and to the people 
of this province. 
 
They call that accountability. Well I don’t know, I don’t know 
what you call accountability, but I don’t call that accountability. 
The Crown-operated Department of Environment is entrusted 
by the people to report such environmental accidents and to 
police all engaged environmentally sensitive activities. When 
this accident occurred two years later, they covered it up. And 
like I repeat again, they call that accountability. I think not, Mr. 
Speaker, I think not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the governments have the right, the power, and the 
obligation to pass the laws that ensure accountability and to 
protect the public interest. Mr. Speaker, governments do not 
ensure that farmers use chemicals properly by taking over their 
land. We enforce regulations. Governments do not protect the 
safety of miners by buying the mine, Mr. Speaker. We pass 
labour standard laws and health safety regulations. Mr. Speaker, 
governments do not ensure truthful at advertising by owning the 
advertising industry. We enforce regulations. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is that government ownership is not the 
answer to protecting the public good. When the people who are 
breaking the rules are the same ones making the rules, the 
deepest possible conflict of interest exists. The political price is 
too high, and governments can too easily bury harmful 
information. Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of accountability that 
Crown ownership provides. 
 
So then, Mr. Speaker, the question becomes not why private 
ownership, but rather, why government ownership? The 
answers, Mr. Speaker, have been given. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
excited about the prospects at the sale of some of these Crown 
corporations, such as the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
SaskEnergy, that Her 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

83 
 

Honour mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the development of more government 
assets, the formation of new Saskatchewan companies, public 
participation will create new jobs, attract new investments and 
revenue dollars into this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind that under the 
dynamic leadership of our Premier, the member from Estevan, 
that the Progressive Conservative government will continue to 
provide good kinds of legislation that will build this province 
and improve the quality of life well into the next decade and 
beyond. 
 
And with that, I support the Speech from the Throne. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased, as other 
members have said, to participate in this throne speech debate. 
Each time we have an opportunity to speak in this House, I 
think we as members ought to view that as a privilege. And I 
consider it a privilege to be participating in this throne speech 
debate. 
 
And I, too, want to join with other members who have 
congratulated the new member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I 
want to congratulate him on his election victory and 
congratulate him on his taking of his seat in this House and on 
his maiden speech. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I fought hard to keep 
that member from taking his seat. He won, we lost, and the 
people spoke. And I wish for him, sincerely wish for him a 
rewarding legislative career. I wish that for him because I can 
guarantee it’s going to be a short one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Welcome to this House, member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the throne speech debate thus far, I 
would want to commend my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 
particularly for her remarks this afternoon, and particularly for 
her raising of the concerns, the needs and the concerns of 
seniors, of families, and the needs and the concerns of women, 
all of which were sadly neglected in this throne speech. I want 
to commend her for the remarks she brought to this House and 
to this debate this afternoon. 
 
In her remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleague from 
Saskatoon Centre noted, and noted appropriately, that it has 
been eight months since this legislature last sat — eight months, 
nine months, eight months and more since we last sat. For eight 
long months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has inflicted 
its political agenda on the people and the province of 
Saskatchewan without debate in the people’s legislature. For 
eight months and more, this government has inflicted its 
ideological blindness, it has inflicted its course of patronage and 
waste and mismanagement on the people of Saskatchewan 
without the opportunity for the people to question this 
government through their legislature and through their 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure this concerns you, and it should  

concern every member of this legislature that this legislature 
has so been stifled by this government. It is an attack on the 
very institutions of democracy in our province. It should not be 
tolerated in a free and democratic society. These are freedoms 
and institutions that other generations have fought and died for. 
This government treats this legislature and the democratic 
institutions of this province with impunity, and they do so 
without apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have come to see that unfortunately this is 
typical of this government, typical of its arrogance, typical to 
the way it does treat the democratic institutions of our province, 
typical of its disregard for the people of this province. And I 
might also say, this is typical of a government that is on its last 
breath, a government that is at the end of its rope, that’s 
desperately clinging to power, a government that’s soon to be 
history. 
 
And when that happens, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s this year or 
next year or the next, there will be a new day in Saskatchewan, 
there will be a better day, and there will again be a government 
that has respect for the democratic principles and the 
democratic institutions of our society.—It can’t come too soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Now one would think, Mr. Speaker, that, given 
the eight-, nine-month delay between sittings of the legislature, 
given that it’s a full year now since the last throne speech, we 
could have expected a throne speech that was just full of new 
ideas, new initiatives, new challenges, new legislation, new 
directions. One would have expected in this length of time this 
government could have come up with something new, 
something different. 
 
Well if that was our expectation, I’ll tell you we’ve been sadly 
disappointed — sadly disappointed in this throne speech. Mr. 
Speaker, the most dispassionate of observers, the most objective 
of commentators have looked at this throne speech and 
determined that in it there is nothing new. 
 
If you take this throne speech and you remove the commitment 
to privatization, which is nothing new, if you remove all the 
announcements, the re-announcements of legislation that we 
have already seen or heard about, if you pull out all the old 
rhetoric that we’ve heard a dozen times, you’ll find precious 
little else, and nothing that could be described as a new or major 
initiative. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a recycled throne 
speech, a recycled throne speech, a rehash of the same old Tory 
stuff that we’ve heard over and over again. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
generally favour recycling, but in this case rubbish in has been 
recycled to rubbish out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Given the record of this government on the 
people of Saskatchewan, not only is it rubbish out, it’s 
hazardous waste. It’s hazardous waste, Mr. Speaker. We should 
have expected, we could have expected  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

84 
 

something new; we’ve got the same old Tory stuff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have been 
delivered of this kind of recycled throne speech, I think, is 
indicative of three things. It is first of all indicative of a 
government that is tired, that is worn out, that is pooped out, 
that has lost all of its initiative and energy. Others have said it 
before. I say it again: this throne speech is a tired document 
from a tired, worn out government, and the people of this 
province deserve something better than that. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech that we have before 
us is the sure sign, the sure sign of a government that’s now 
hidebound by its own ideology and it has come to the point 
where it’s starting to believe its own rhetoric, and that’s 
dangerous. That’s dangerous. 
 
It’s as if, Mr. Speaker, the blinkers are on. It’s as if they’ve got 
themselves so deep into a rut that they can’t see out any more. 
The walls of this rut are threefold: there’s the wall of this 
commitment to de-regulation; there’s the wall of commitment 
to free trade; and there’s the wall of commitment to 
privatization. And they’re so deep in that rut that they can’t see 
anything else, they can’t see anything else, see any other 
solutions. 
 
It’s as if somehow, Mr. Speaker, this government has got itself 
on a waterslide, and they can’t see out of this waterslide, and 
they can’t stop on the downhill slide. And that’s precisely 
where they’re going, downhill, Mr. Speaker, on a free fall. The 
tragedy is they’re taking the province with them. And 
Saskatchewan people deserve something better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is the sign, a sure sign, of a 
tired government. It’s the sign now of a government that is 
hidebound by its own rhetoric and its own ideology. And 
thirdly, and perhaps worst of all, it’s a sign, a sure indication, 
that this government has simply lost touch, simply lost touch 
with the reality of people’s lives and the reality of what is 
happening in the homes and on the farms and in the shops of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me illustrate, Mr. Speaker. To read this throne speech, it’s 
as if this government hasn’t heard that only blocks, only blocks 
from the front doors of this legislature there are families living 
in poverty in this city — only blocks away from this building. 
To read this throne speech, it’s as if this government hasn’t 
heard that only blocks away from where we sit there are 
children who go to school hungry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are so out of touch, they don’t know that the 
poor are at the doors of the legislature. It’s a scandal. It’s a 
scandal that here, in the bread-basket of the world, we should 
have hungry children. It’s a scandal that here, in the 
bread-basket of the world, we should have the second highest 
rate of family poverty in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a government that is so blind to that reality 
deserves to be turfed. They have lost the right to govern in this 
province. The poor of our society deserve something better than 
this throne speech. And the day is coming, Mr. Speaker, when 
they will get better — when there will be  

a government that hears their concerns, when there will be a 
government that acts on their behalf. That day is coming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to read this Speech from the 
Throne, one would also quickly learn that this government is 
deaf to what the people of this province think of its $9 million 
birthday party idea. 
 
I venture to say that in every coffee shop, every beauty parlour, 
every curling rink, every service station across Saskatchewan, 
the verdict is the same. The people of the province do not want 
their money spent on a $9 million birthday party. When 
hospitals in this province are begging for equipment, when 
young people can’t get into university, the people of this 
province don’t want their hard-earned tax dollars spent on a 
political birthday party. 
 
Across the province they’re saying that. The verdict is 
unanimous. What did the people of Saskatchewan get in this 
throne speech? Another announcement of a $9 million birthday 
party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has lost touch. They have lost 
touch with what people are thinking and feeling. They are out to 
lunch, and Saskatchewan people deserve better than that from 
their government. And the day will come, the day will come — 
and come soon, Mr. Speaker — when there will be a 
government that will listen to what the people are saying and 
feeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some weeks ago, members of this caucus met with 
a delegation of people from rural Saskatchewan. And members 
of this caucus heard a presentation from a young farm woman, a 
farm wife, and I think we who heard that presentation were 
moved by what she had to say. 
 
She talked about the stress in the farm home. She talked about 
the stress of the debt load on farm families. She talked about the 
pressures on farm marriages, the pressures on farm children. 
She talked about what it’s like to have to maintain these 
off-farm jobs just to keep the farm going. She talked about the 
effects on community life. She talked about the effects on 
health. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, what is there in this throne speech for that 
farm woman? What is there in this throne speech for her? Well 
what do we have — the promise of equity financing, the pledge. 
We’re going ahead with equity financing even though people 
across the province rejected it and rejected it soundly. They 
don’t want to be tenants on their own land. We get a throne 
speech that brings it back because nobody on that side of the 
House, in the capital city of Regina, is listening any more. They 
are out of touch with the reality for life for Saskatchewan 
people. The farm families of Saskatchewan deserve better than 
they are getting, and that day too will come, Mr. Speaker, that 
day will come. 
 
(2115) 
 
Friday, last week, we were delivered the latest of 
unemployment statistics in this province — 9.1 per cent.  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

85 
 

One out of every 11 Saskatchewan people looking for work. 
Seventeen per cent young people unemployed — 15 to 25 — 17 
per cent out of work. And of course those numbers would be 
higher, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, if people weren’t 
leaving this province in droves. 
 
The escalation of the unemployed in this province is 
frightening, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps more frightening is the 
escalation of the underemployed in our province. What is there 
for the unemployed in this throne speech? What is there for the 
underemployed? 
 
Well the reintroduction of regressive labour legislation, that’s in 
it. And not a word, not a word about a job strategy, not a word 
about a new job program. Mr. Speaker, the workers and the 
working families of this province deserve something better than 
they’ve got from this government in this throne speech. It’s a 
government out of touch with reality. Saskatchewan people 
deserve better, and the day is coming when workers and 
workers’ families in this province will have a government that 
listens and a government that cares, and that day is coming 
soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I walk down the main street in 
the community where I live, the community I am proud to 
represent, the community of Moose Jaw, and I pass store front 
after store front empty and vacant. And behind every one of 
those vacant store fronts is the story of a family business gone, 
the story of years of hard labour gone, the story of hopes 
destroyed, all of them victims of this economy which has been 
put in the hands of Tory governments. 
 
And the member from Weyburn laughs from his seat, Mr. 
Speaker. Has this government heard the message from Main 
Street, Moose Jaw, and the other main streets of Saskatchewan? 
Has this government heard that message? Well, in the throne 
speech, what do I find? I find two sentences, Mr. Speaker, two 
small sentences dealing with small business and family business 
in our province. The largest generator of jobs in this province 
receives two small sentences in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
And not a word in this throne speech, not a word about 
downtown redevelopment, downtown revitalization — not a 
word. The small-business people, the family-business people, 
the downtowns of Saskatchewan deserve better than they’ve got 
from this throne speech. These people are out of touch, Mr. 
Speaker, they are out of touch with the reality of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to read this throne speech one would assume 
that this government hasn’t heard that 1,400 to 1,600 people are 
leaving our province every month, each and every month — it’s 
as if they hadn’t heard — that young people, the young people 
are leaving Saskatchewan in search of opportunities elsewhere, 
in search of employment elsewhere, in search of education 
elsewhere. 
 
It’s as if they haven’t heard because there’s not one mention in 
this throne speech of that tragic fact. The government that 
promised to bring the young people home is driving them away 
in record numbers. They are  

voting with their feet, and that is not good enough. 
Saskatchewan young people deserve something better than that 
from their government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the day will come, and it will come soon, when 
there will be a government that cares when young people are 
fleeing the province, a government that will govern for the 
young people of Saskatchewan to give them opportunity, 
employment and education right here at home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This throne speech, this recycled old rehash of Tory ideas, this 
everything old, nothing new throne speech indicates three 
things. It is indicative of a tired, worn-out government that has 
lost the will and the energy and the creativity needed to meet 
the challenges of today. It is a sure indication of a government 
that is now hidebound by its own ideology, trapped in its own 
rut on the waterslide downhill. And perhaps, worst of all, it is a 
government that is so now completely out of touch with the 
reality of life in Saskatchewan for most people, that it has lost 
the right to govern. It is a government so blind and so deaf to 
the realities of anything beyond the oak walls of its offices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are none so blind as those who will not see 
and none so deaf as those who will not hear. They are blinded 
by their ideology, they are now deafened by their own rhetoric, 
and the time for change in Saskatchewan has come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, deserve 
something better than this. Saskatchewan people are demanding 
something better than this, and mark my words, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people will have their way. They will have their 
way when this government is gone, whether it is this year, next 
year or the next. And it won’t be too soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will cast my vote in opposition to this 
government, in opposition to this Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start expressing . . . by 
first expressing, like my colleagues before me, the great honour 
that I feel to be able to stand before you today and address the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
And I’d also like to congratulate Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan on this occasion of her first Speech 
from the Throne. We, of the province of Saskatchewan, are very 
fortunate indeed to have a person of such high esteem and 
respect to occupy this position and execute its duties with such 
grace and dignity. 
 
I remember very well, last summer, when the announcement 
was made about Sylvia Fedoruk, the young lady from Canora, 
Saskatchewan who has a Ph.D. in engineering physics from the 
University of Saskatchewan, who I knew through sporting 
circles, in curling, etc., and when she was named the Lieutenant 
Governor I thought to myself, now that is without doubt  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

86 
 

the finest appointment that could be made. And I’m sure that 
everyone in the province felt the same way. 
 
She is a person who has a remarkable record of achievements 
— a scholar, as I said, a Ph.D. in engineering physics from the 
University of Saskatchewan. She was an athlete of national 
fame. She is one of the world leaders in nuclear medicine, and 
anyone whose family has been touched with the need for cancer 
treatment, as our family has, you learn to understand and 
respect how important that cancer treatment is and what an 
achievement, or contribution, Sylvia Fedoruk, a Saskatchewan 
girl, has made to the study of cancer treatment in the world 
today. 
 
So she’s a remarkable person, and it’s such a privilege to be 
able to speak about her in this House. And we’re so fortunate 
indeed to have her as our Lieutenant Governor. But I think the 
finest quality of all of Sylvia Fedoruk is the opportunity to meet 
her, the opportunity to talk to her, because she is a wonderful 
person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne brought to our 
attention the path that this government has taken in the past, and 
in the accomplishments that it has made. It also sets out our 
agenda for the future, our vision for Saskatchewan as we head 
into the 21st century. 
 
The vision is one of growth, one of prosperity and healthy 
living for Saskatchewan, and we are confident that our efforts, 
in co-operation with the efforts of the people of Saskatchewan, 
will bring about positive change that keeps in step with the 
times and that will prepare us for the 21st century and, of 
course, beyond. 
 
Saskatchewan is a land of opportunity with resources, both 
human and natural, that have yet to be tapped. We all 
understand that, Mr. Speaker. In spite of our wealth of untapped 
resources, Saskatchewan is still a world leader in many areas. 
It’s exciting reading to think about the potential that this 
province has. One of those areas in which Saskatchewan excels, 
of course, as a world leader, is in the area of health care. 
Residents of Saskatchewan enjoy health care that is second to 
none, and will continue to do so. This administration has spent 
more money on health care than any other administration in the 
history of the province. Since 1981, funding for health care has 
increased by 63 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, budget figures show that the Government of 
Saskatchewan spends more money on health care per capita 
than any other government in all of North America. In spite of 
these facts, my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, and his party still say that they are the only ones 
who care. 
 
I’d like to briefly review the NDP record on health care. In 
March . . . March 13, 1980 edition of the Leader-Post, a 
headline reads, "Hospital to close off two floors." This is 1980, 
March 13. The hospital referred to in the article is the Weyburn 
Union Hospital, and do you know why it was closing the two 
doors? Well, they were closing two floors because they had 
been denied financing in the special care unit since it was 
constructed in 1976. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, that same party that says it is the only  

one that cares, forced the Weyburn Union Hospital to close two 
of its floors because they refused to provide them with any 
funding. That was in 1980. 
 
A headline, May 31, 1980, in the Regina Leader-Post. "Closure 
of hospital beds called normal practice." And who was it who 
said this? Who called the closure of hospital beds normal 
practice? Well it was the former minister of Health, the member 
from Saskatoon South. 
 
And again, June 6, 1980, the Leader-Post shouted from the 
headlines, "Shortage of nursing staff closing beds in hospitals." 
 
I need not remind you, Mr. Speaker, that those headlines 
occurred during the NDP administration. 
 
It’s ironic, isn’t it, that the members of the opposition are now 
fond of saying that this government is planning on closing 
hospitals when clearly their own administration is guilty of 
doing just that when they were in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, the government of the 
Progressive Conservative Party, builds hospitals. In the past 
year there have been major construction projects under way at 
St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon, University Hospital in 
Saskatoon, and the cancer clinic in Saskatoon, and a sod-turning 
ceremony has already taken place to celebrate the building of a 
new City Hospital for Saskatoon as well. 
 
Recently major renovations were completed, and the grand 
opening was held at the Wascana rehabilitation hospital in 
Regina. How well I remember the story that was told here a 
couple of years ago about the farmer who had driven into town 
to come and visit his wife who was in — this was back in the 
late 1970s — who went to the Wascana hospital of the day, the 
former reform school when I was a kid growing up in this town, 
the hospital that the NDP refused to fund, refused to expand. 
And as the farmer sat there in the parking lot in front of what 
was then the hospital, he looked across the field to the 
magnificent Tommy Douglas building, and he said to himself, 
or to his friend who was in the car with him, he said, the NDP, 
that’s where their priorities are, in the Tommy Douglas 
building, a building for the civil servants, while his wife and 
other patients had to live in the Wascana hospital of the day. 
 
Well thank goodness, thank God for this government who have 
come along and done something with the Wascana 
rehabilitation hospital. It is without doubt one of the finest 
rehabilitation hospitals in North America. It will continue to be 
and grow. 
 
In addition, phase 3 construction of the Regina General 
Hospital has been completed, and the unit is fully occupied. 
Some of the smaller rural centres where there has been hospital 
construction include: Gull Lake, Hudson Bay, Lloydminster, 
and Watrous, and just a couple of weeks ago the announcement 
of a new hospital special care home for Lafleche. Again I say, 
Mr. Speaker, this government builds the health care system and 
the NDP attack it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former minister of Health, the member  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

87 
 

from Saskatoon South and his colleagues tell us that we must 
eliminate waiting lists — eliminate them, Mr. Speaker, he said. 
Well the member from Saskatoon South said when he was the 
minister from Saskatoon South and his colleagues tell us that 
we must eliminate waiting lists — eliminate them, Mr. Speaker, 
he said. Well the member from Saskatoon South said when he 
was the minister, and I’m quoting from December 1, 1981, in 
Hansard. He said, under the NDP, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 I indicated to this House that in order to run an efficient 
hospital system you must have a waiting list; this is 
nothing new. I have said this on a number of occasions . . . 
a waiting list is an efficient way of running a hospital 
system. 
 

The member from Saskatoon South said: 
 

A waiting list is an efficient way of running a hospital 
system . . . Those who run efficient hospital systems do 
have waiting lists. 
 

(2130) 
 
The member from Saskatoon South said the waiting lists are an 
efficient way to run a hospital. Well this government believes in 
reducing hospital waiting lists, and that is exactly what we’re 
doing. 
 
In the last four months of 1987, waiting lists in Saskatoon — 
where the demand for surgery is the highest — waiting lists 
decreased by 768. Over the past year waiting lists have been 
reduced by 25 per cent in Saskatoon. I want to repeat that figure 
for the members from Saskatoon. Waiting lists have been 
reduced by 25 per cent in Saskatoon this past year. That’s 
progress. That’s caring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has increased funding which has 
facilitated increased numbers of patients that receive treatment 
and are released from hospitals. Between 1982 and 1983, 
1986-1987 in Saskatoon alone, the number of surgeries 
performed increased by over 11,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like again to refer back to the NDP 
administration. In a letter dated July 11, 1977, from the Minister 
of Health, the member from Saskatoon South, to the 
administrator of the Cudworth Nursing Home, said this. In that 
letter, a request by the nursing home for a twelve bed extension 
was denied because of a moratorium that the NDP 
administration had placed on special care beds in the province. 
 
The NDP government of the day decided that we didn’t need 
any more nursing home beds. I mean, it’s unbelievable to even 
consider that, that anybody could think that in that day and age, 
and this in a province with a growing population of senior 
citizens. The former government decided not to build any more 
nursing homes. No more nursing home beds, they said, we 
don’t need them. 
 
Mind you, this is the same government that said there was 
going to be a decrease in the demand for spaces in universities 
too. They said that in 1982. And we know what happened there 
— went up 65 per cent. Well they had the same kind of bad 
advice, I guess, on nursing home beds. In 1982 this government 
lifted that moratorium, and since that time nursing homes have  

appeared in many small communities and almost 2,000 new 
nursing home beds have been built. 
 
Well that’s obviously not enough. We’re going to have to build 
more because the demand is there. It was there in 1980, it was 
there in 1982, and it’s there in 1989. We need to build more 
nursing home beds and we will. But we’ve got a good start. 
 
In March of 1987 the Parkridge Centre in Saskatoon opened. It 
replaced the Saskatoon Sanatorium and the Frank Eliason 
Centre and has 44 more beds and 91 new staffing positions. Mr. 
Speaker, we added 400 new nursing positions and the Speech 
from the Throne indicates that we will expand this number in 
the province yet again. 
 
This administration set up a commission on health care, Mr. 
Speaker. For the first time in Saskatchewan history, the people 
have been asked to participate in designing their own health 
care system. Given that the NDP say that we shouldn’t have set 
up the commission, they must also think that the people of the 
province shouldn’t have a hand in designing their own health 
care system. Well they have a right to their own view but, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, this government does not agree with 
them, nor do the people of this province, nor do the people of 
any other province in the country believe in the NDP, or they 
wouldn’t be long gone like they are in every province. We 
believe in the right of the people of Saskatchewan to help 
design their own health care system, and the response has been 
positive and indeed encouraging. The public understands the 
serious challenge to health care, not only here but throughout 
the nation, and have responded to the opportunity to help share 
and to help shape our health care for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether it be health care, agriculture, or economic 
development, or any other concern of the people, it is this 
government’s duty to set policies according to what the people 
of Saskatchewan want. We will continue to listen and respond 
as this government has since being elected in 1982. 
 
All these initiatives are part of this government’s dedication to 
health care in Saskatchewan, and can be summed up quite 
nicely by the Department of Health’s Everyone Wins campaign, 
directed at improving life-styles and improving healthy living. 
 
Our record speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker, and it was interesting 
to note the last speaker, the speaker from, I guess it would be 
Moose Jaw South, who said there isn’t anything . . . nothing 
new in the province, nothing exciting. Well I must say that we 
have four daughters, and every one of them is being educated in 
this province and is so excited about the opportunities that are 
being presented in this province to them and by their desire to 
take part in such things as SaskPower bonds. 
 
I mean how . . . could you be more imaginative than that? We 
needed to raise something like $300 million for ongoing 
SaskPower projects, so rather than go to Tokyo, or to London, 
or to New York, or to Toronto to borrow money from 
somebody else and have to pay heavy interest on it, we went to 
the people of Saskatchewan. We  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

88 
 

said, hey, why don’t you get involved in this process? Let us 
sell you bonds. So we sold, the province sold $340 million 
worth of bonds to Saskatchewan people. As a consequence, 
instead of having to pay the interest to New York, or to Tokyo, 
or Calcutta, or some other place like that, the interest on that 
$340 million dollars will go to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Now that’s public participation. 
 
And it’s happening in so many other ways — SaskTel bonds 
and all the other things that are going on. I think it’s terribly 
exciting. It is new, too. The interesting thing is . . . and, of 
course, the last speaker from our party that spoke, brought up 
. . . mentioned that the party across talked about public 
participation back in 1982. 
 
As a matter of fact, my former tennis partner, Gary Beattie, was 
one of the people who was involved in this process at that time 
and, I mean, that was exciting then; it’s exciting now. 
Unfortunately, they didn’t have the wheels nor the imagination 
to put into place, and so we have it, and we’re running with it 
because it’s the thing to do. But it is exciting; it’s terribly 
exciting, and the people of the province are joining in with great 
enthusiasm. 
 
I find, Mr. Speaker, that the tactics of the NDP during the recent 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election were reprehensible. We’ve 
heard a great deal here tonight from the other side about 
corruption and patronage and all the rest of that stuff . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — I may have to go through this list of 91 names, 
of 91 names that I have in front of me, of patronage 
appointments, of patronage contracts to members of the NDP 
party and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give us a few examples. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well, I . . . Should I give a few examples? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just a few. Just to get the flavour. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well, there’s 91 names here, Mr. Speaker, and 
I mean, I could talk about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are there any Koskie’s on it, for 
example? 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well there’s a Doug Archer on here, a former 
EA (executive assistant) to Mr. Brockelbank, appointed director 
of administration, government services, his wife Gloria . . . and 
now he is the Mayor of Regina. And we’ve got all kinds. In a 
matter of fact, some of the names here are people who are now 
sitting on the opposite side. 
 
Ninety-one names on here, Mr. Speaker, all of them connected 
to the NDP, and every one of them a patronage appointment. I 
mean, I could stop . . . I could even get to . . . Well here is Don 
Faris, Mr. Speaker. Don Faris and Margaret Fern, and there’s a 
Hagel in here. There’s a Hagel from Moose Jaw and a Don 
Keith. It goes on and on — 91 names, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t want to read them. I really . . . I find it embarrassing  

to talk about these things because they set the standard for 
patronage in this province. I’ve lived all my life in this 
province. I know where all the dirty linen is hid in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and those people wrote the book. But I 
won’t get into that. 
 
I would like to go back, if I may . . . I would like to go back 
briefly, if I may, to the tactics of the NDP during the recent 
Gravelbourg . . . Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election. The 
tactics, I felt, were really quite reprehensible. They wrote letters 
of fear to all the constituents saying, the government is going to 
close all the hospitals in the area. It was a vicious threat, and it 
certainly wasn’t true. 
 
It’s interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, that even though the people 
of the province have seen through this scare tactic the NDP use, 
is that the NDP insist on continuing to use it. And they’ve been 
doing it since 1978 — it worked in ’78. It didn’t work in ’82. It 
didn’t work in ’86, and it’s not going to work in ’90-91. It 
didn’t work in 1988, but they insist on doing it. They insist on 
trying to scare people. That’s unbelievable. 
 
They insist on spreading falsehoods. They insist on distorting 
the truth. This party of Tommy Douglas, a once great political 
party, that has sunk so low that they now have to resort to 
distortion, to half truths, to saying anything no matter how 
outrageous to win votes. We heard it here in the House just the 
other day. 
 
Mind you, Mr. Speaker, they are a party that is politically . . . a 
political party that is morally bankrupt, a party with absolutely 
no new ideas, no solutions, no policies. As a matter of fact, they 
are a party whose leader is scrambling for his political life 
within his own caucus. The knives are out, Mr. Speaker, the 
knives are out. And the member from Saskatoon Riversdale is 
in trouble within his own caucus. Unfortunately, the alternative 
would be worse. 
 
When we listen to their speeches, as we have here tonight in 
this debate, we might as well be listening to last year’s 
speeches. They’re saying the same things they said for the last 
three years. They have nothing new, they have the same old 
tired lines, the same old political whining that we’ve become so 
used to. They have no new ideas, no policies — nothing. How 
sad for a political party, how sad for a political party that once 
had a vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a member for just over two years now. 
It’s been an interesting and learning experience, first as 
legislative secretary to the Minister of Education, the member 
from Weyburn, and working primarily in northern education. It 
was an education itself, meeting and talking with the dedicated 
teachers in the North, and education officials working to design 
curriculum that is more aware of the northern social and cultural 
history. And during this past year, Mr. Speaker, I’m a 
Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health. This too has 
been a positive experience, as the minister and I met with health 
groups throughout the province to discuss their needs and talk 
of new ways to solve old problems. 
 
And the interesting thing is, is that when one travels out in the 
country, you find that the folks out there really do understand 
what the problems are. They really do have ideas. They want 
the opportunity to express their  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

89 
 

opinions. They have some innovative and creative ideas. Small 
towns that formerly would . . . you wouldn’t dare going into the 
small town and take a girl out in that other town; there would be 
a war. The hockey games are vicious fights. 
 
But now the small towns of Saskatchewan are saying, hey, what 
can we do together to solve this problem we have? Why don’t 
we work together? Why don’t we come up with creative new 
ideas, some innovative ideas to solve some of these problems 
that we have? The nice thing is that it’s happening and it’s 
really exciting. And when I go with the Minister of Health to 
these small towns, I learn these things. They know what the 
problems are. All they want to do is have the opportunity to 
listen to them. 
 
But the NDP, for some reason, have tried to discourage this 
government from proceeding with a health care commission. 
But we found that people of the province want to talk about the 
challenges of the future because we are all in this together. And 
if we talk about it in a non-political, non-partisan manner, we 
will together take on the challenges of the future in health care, 
just as we will meet the challenges in education, in world trade, 
the challenges in social issues, the challenges of the 
environment that are so prominent today. 
 
It’s a wonderful, rewarding experience, Mr. Speaker, to listen to 
all the imaginative and innovative expressions of confidence 
that come from the young people of this province. I’ve learned 
to listen a great deal in this province, Mr. Speaker, as I travel 
around listening to the young people. 
 
I had an opportunity, just the other day, to be over at the 
University of Regina and listen to what some of the kids, some 
of the children had to say. I felt very comfortable being over 
there, Mr. Speaker, because it is, after all, part of my 
constituency, and one of our daughters is going to school there 
now. It was fun. I mean, obviously the students don’t all agree 
with my political thinking, but a great majority of them did over 
there. So it was a good experience. I must say I enjoyed it. 
 
But you know, it’s not only interesting to listen to the bright, 
young minds of the young people, but it’s more interesting, I 
think, in some ways, to learn from the elderly, to go into the old 
folks’ homes, the elderly special-care homes and talk to the 
people. They’ve seen and faced remarkable changes in their 
lifetime. They have the experience that most of us don’t have. 
 
The youth have the energy, and we all have the will; the seniors 
have the experience. We all have the desire to face the 
challenges of the 21st century. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, our top priority, as outlined in the Speech from the 
Throne, is health care. That’s obvious. This government 
believes in top quality, accessible health care, and will continue 
to work in co-operation with the people of Saskatchewan to 
pave the way for improved developments in the health field for 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in the time remaining to me this evening, I’d like 
to just go back over some of the positive developments that 
have occurred in the health field by this government during the 
last few years. So if you’ll bear with me, I’d like to explain 
these. I think it’s important that the public know this, Mr. 
Speaker. I think too often we don’t . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . well I will talk about the dental plan; I can hardly wait to 
talk about the dental plan, because I’ve had an opportunity to 
open five or six dental clinics in this province. I opened dental 
clinics in Turtleford, all over the province, so I will get to that. 
So if the member from Elphinstone will just be patient, I will be 
more than happy to talk about it in just a moment. 
 
Let’s first of all talk about hospital services. Funding for 
hospital services has increased 72 per cent since 1981-82, 323 
million in 1981-82 — this is funding for hospital services — 
323 million in 1981-1982, to 555 million in 1988-1989; 1,336 
new replacement beds built; 740 new nursing department 
positions — 749 new nursing department positions; CAT 
scanners in all six base hospitals; expanded open-heart surgery 
program in Regina; increased day surgery in Saskatoon, which 
has done much to decrease the hospital waiting lists in 
Saskatoon — as I said earlier, they are down 25 per cent, and 
you must be delighted about that in Saskatoon. Established 
centres of excellence in Saskatoon hospitals; established a 
pediatric intensive care unit at the University Hospital, and the 
assessment unit for high-risk babies at the Regina General; 
establishing a provincial organ donor program; dietetic 
counselling services in rural Saskatchewan; integrated facility 
concept for small rural hospitals. 
 
As I said just a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, some of the most 
imaginative thinking that’s going on in this province is 
occurring in the hospital boards in rural Saskatchewan who 
recognized the problems long before many people in the city 
did, I’m sure, because they’ve been confronted with it faster 
than the people in the city have. And they are the ones who are 
coming up with some of these good ideas, and that’s why the 
health care commission, health commission, is out into the rural 
areas to talk with the people to hear what they have to say. 
 
Let’s talk about the cancer foundation. Operating grants to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation have increased by 73 per cent 
since 1981-1982, and they were 10.2 million in 1981-82; 17.7 
million in 1988-1989; funding construction of the new 70 
million Saskatoon cancer clinic; enhanced funding for cancer 
research and scientific development; provided 5 million over 
five years for new equipment; funding 37 new staff positions 
for the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I made reference a little earlier in this speech 
when I was talking about Her Honour Lieutenant Governor 
Sylvia Fedoruk and her contribution to the cancer clinic and to 
those families in Saskatchewan who probably understand better 
than most the value of cancer treatment, radiation, etc. And I 
have not had an opportunity publicly to say how much our 
family appreciates the work of the cancer technicians who are 
so dedicated to their work. 
 
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

90 
 

And so I think when we’re talking about listening to some 
boring statistics which are often not terribly interesting, but I 
think it’s important that the people who are listening understand 
that you have to take it in the context of the overall program and 
bear in mind that all these things are going on in the province. 
 
Ambulance services, for instance, funding for road and air 
ambulance services has increased 165 per cent since 1981 to 
’82. Funding for road and air ambulance services has increased 
165 per cent since 1981, 1982; replaced old per capita grants 
with new funding mechanism; introduced new legislation; 
capped cost for seniors at 150 per road ambulance trip; limited 
air ambulance charges to $250; expanded training for 
ambulance attendants. 
 
Now I’d like to talk about long-term care, Mr. Speaker. Special 
care homes, increased funding for special care homes by 57.2 
per cent since 1982. I mentioned that earlier. Nearly 2,000 new 
and replacement beds constructed. This of course was a 
response to the NDP moratorium that they placed on in 1982 
when they weren’t going to build any more special care homes, 
no more senior citizens’ beds, and this is a response, it’s catch 
up. I mean, we got behind because they refused to fund it; we 
got a way behind. So as a consequence, the last seven, eight 
years this government has been trying very hard to try and catch 
up. And we’re getting there, Mr. Speaker — not enough, but 
we’re getting there. Two thousand new beds over these last few 
years has made a big difference. 
 
What it has meant, of course, is that 2,000 more senior citizens 
have beds now that wouldn’t have if we’d continued with the 
moratorium that they introduced back in 1982. 
 
Home care: 77 per cent increase in funding for home care; 13.3 
million in 1981; 23.6 million. Fully implemented a home care 
program in all 45 districts in 1984. Adjusted funding in 1986 to 
better recognize the special needs of people over 75 years of 
age. 
 
Rehabilitation: introduced new programs to combat drug and 
alcohol abuse among youth, including community-based 
services, and Whitespruce, the first centre of its kind in Canada. 
 
Now those people said earlier, there’s nothing new; this 
government’s done nothing. If we had done nothing but build 
Whitespruce — if that had been the only thing government had 
done in the last seven years, that would have been enough. This 
is the first adolescent alcoholic drug treatment centre in Canada. 
There’s only two or three in North America, to my knowledge. 
And we always had to send our youth down to Mandan, North 
Dakota, or other places in the United States, at great cost. 
 
But this government, under the directorship of Gordon Currie 
and the enthusiasm of the Deputy Premier and the Premier, 
have built Whitespruce, the first adolescent treatment centre. 
And it had a little shaky start to get going, but it’s off and 
running now, and it’s going full bloom. We could probably use 
more space, and I’m sure in the future we probably will. 
 

That is a very important initiative by this government. And how 
the people across there cannot stand up and applaud the 
Whitespruce initiative in this province, by this government, is 
beyond my reckoning. I can’t understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well we established a new children’s 
rehabilitation centre in Saskatoon; completed construction of 
the therapy wing of the $50 million Wascana Rehabilitation 
Centre in Regina. You can see it out the back door — beautiful 
place. 
 
Doubled the number of speech therapy positions serving rural 
Saskatchewan; established a community therapy program; 
increased enrolment in the School of Physical Therapy by 50 
per cent — I think we need to increase that even more, and I 
think we probably will. 
 
Developed child sexual abuse protocol, and new treatment 
programs for wife-beaters. One hundred and fifty-three per cent 
increase for Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living. 
 
Prevention: nearly tripled funding to Saskatchewan Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission. Significant increases for public 
health in Regina. Trained over 150 volunteer community 
speakers as part of the AIDS education program. Enriched the 
school-based dental education program. 
 
Okay, here we go. The member from Elphinstone said, okay 
what about the dental program? Let’s talk about the dental 
program. This is what I tell people when they say, what about 
the dental program? Why did you destroy the dental program, 
they say? Well what we did, Mr. Speaker, was we recognized 
that the people of rural Saskatchewan were not getting the kind 
of dental care that could be available to them, and there are 
several reasons for this. 
 
We have a dental college in Saskatoon that graduates a number 
of dentists every year. Well the dentists that were graduating 
from Saskatoon were all going to the bigger cities like Regina, 
Saskatoon, or Moose Jaw. They weren’t going out to rural 
Saskatchewan because there was nobody to work on. They 
didn’t have . . . If you don’t have the young children to work 
on, you don’t have a dental practice. So we couldn’t get dentists 
to go out into rural Saskatchewan, so all the dentists were being 
centred in Regina, Saskatoon, North Battleford, Prince Albert, 
and Moose Jaw. 
 
The only way to get dentists out into rural Saskatchewan, to 
take our educated dentists, was to get them out into rural 
Saskatchewan, or they’re all going to Vancouver, Edmonton, or 
Calgary, or some other place. We’re educating them; they’re 
leaving the province. We educate them; they leave the province 
because there’s no place for them to practice. 
 
So we said, how can we get dentists into rural Saskatchewan? 
The only way you could do it was to give them the opportunity 
to work on the young people. So we did that. We introduced a 
program where we now have  
  



 
March 13, 1989 

 

91 
 

something in the neighbourhood of 35 new dental clinics 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. Ninety-one per cent — 91 per 
cent of the young people in rural Saskatchewan now have 
access to a dentist. First time in 26 years that there’s a dentist 
now in Stoughton. I’ve had the opportunity to open, as I say, 
several of them, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, one near your 
constituency, as a matter of fact. It’s so gratifying to get the 
feeling of the people in the community when they realize that 
now they’re going to have a dentist who will work on their 
children’s teeth. That’s why it was done, Mr. Speaker, and it 
has been eminently successful. 
 
Well let’s just talk for a moment about the Everyone Wins 
program to promote healthy living, and this has been going on 
for over a year now. I wouldn’t be surprised if the pace is 
picked up a bit this summer as we tell people that they have to 
eat right; they have to keep fit; they have to reduce stress; they 
have to quit smoking, Mr. Speaker; combating alcohol and drug 
abuse; avoiding accidents; preventing communicable diseases. 
 
Well I had occasion to use my new plastic health card the other 
day, Mr. Speaker, and I couldn’t believe how well it worked. I 
had to go see the doctor. I came home and I had this rather 
nasty condition that I still have — a head cold and a virus and 
all the rest of it. So the doctor said, well, you’d better get some 
. . . gave me a prescription. I took my plastic card into the local 
drug store. Pharmacist ran the thing through — zip, zip — paid 
my money, walked out, and there it was. It was just beautiful. I 
mean, it was just great. Great. Got my bill. So now I still have a 
long way to go to use up my $150, Mr. Speaker, but it was 
extremely successful. The people like them, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re handy. 
 
Well in addition to the new plastic health card, Mr. Speaker, we 
negotiated Saskatoon agreement to eliminating extra billing by 
the doctors; 79 per cent increase in medical care insurance 
costs; established northern medical services unit with the 
University of Saskatchewan to expand physician services in 
northern Saskatchewan; 35 new rural dental practices since the 
spring of 1987. Well I can’t say that often enough, Mr. Speaker, 
restructuring the prescription drug plan to contain costs and 
abuses and extend full coverage of palliative care patients and 
to provide out-of-province benefits. 
 
Let me just finish off, Mr. Speaker, with a discussion on the 
capital expenditures: 1,336 new replacement hospital beds built; 
130 million has been spent on completed projects, on hospitals, 
on integrated facility projects; redevelopment of the University 
Hospital; renewal and expansion of St. Paul’s Hospital; 
completion of package three at Regina General Hospital; 
therapy wing of Wascana Rehabilitation Centre; new Saskatoon 
Cancer Clinic. Mr. Speaker, it just goes on and on: 68 per cent 
or $510 million increase since 1981-1982 — a 68 per cent in 
health care expenditures since 1981-1982. Enhanced 
consultations through several ministerial advisory committees 
and the Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health 
Care. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, in the time remaining, I would like 
to encourage the people of the province to be  

involved in making their submissions to the special . . . the 
Saskatchewan Commission on Directions and Health Care. It’s 
important that the people of the province say what they feel, get 
their ideas into the commission on health care so this 
government can make the decisions that they want them to 
make concerning health care. Obviously some changes must be 
made as we face new challenges every year and on into the 21st 
century, and these changes can only be made with the support 
of the people of the province. It’s critical that they do that. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that having had the opportunity this 
last year to work with the Minister of Health, the member for 
Meadow Lake, it has been an exciting and enlightening 
experience for me to learn the extent of the health care coverage 
the people of this province have. I’ve known for a long time 
that we have the best health care system in the . . . probably the 
best health care system in the world. I didn’t realize that it is as 
extensive as it is. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 10 o’clock, this House now 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


