


















































March 8, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 8, 1989 
 

1 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 
open the third session of the twenty-first legislature at 2 o’clock 
p.m. today, the 8th day of March, 1989. 
 

2:03 p.m.  
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the third session of the 
twenty-first legislature. 
 
I am honoured to be here today to deliver, for my first time, the 
Speech from the Throne and to represent Her Majesty the 
Queen, at an event so central to our tradition of parliamentary 
democracy. 
 
Saskatchewan is founded on the strong determination, courage, 
and perseverance of its people. We have worked together to 
adapt to each new challenge, often finding unique approaches to 
world-wide problems. 
 
My government has been an agent of change and progress. 
Innovative social and economic policies have provided a solid 
base to protect our people and promote growth for the future. 
 
My ministers are committed to building on this co-operative 
foundation to ensure our future prosperity and to continue to 
meet the needs of our citizens. It is especially critical that we be 
poised to take advantage of the global opportunities and 
challenges presented by new world trading patterns and rapidly 
expanding technology. 
 
The protection of the health and well-being of the people of this 
province is the first priority of my government. Saskatchewan’s 
reputation as a world leader in health care will be strengthened 
and excellence will be maintained. 
 
My government looks forward to the findings of the 
Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care. 
Professionals and the general public are responding to the 
commission hearings and identifying changes required to meet 
the province’s future health care needs. Many creative ideas are 
being presented, such as proposals to enhance the role of rural 
nurses as front-line medical personnel. Additional information 
from other sources such as the joint report of medical 
professionals and the government, which shows a marked 
increase in the utilization of health care services since 1977, 
will provide critical data for the consideration of the 
commission. 
 
These and other findings will help us to plan appropriate health 
services for the next century. In the meantime, 

initial consultations of the commission have raised crucial 
matters which we must not delay, such as specialization and 
community involvement in health care services. 
 
Through a voluntary community care program, communities 
will be encouraged to focus health services at the local level. 
Health boards and communities will identify, integrate and 
co-ordinate delivery of health services to meet their specific 
regional requirements. 
 
The integration of nursing homes and hospitals has proven to be 
an innovative delivery mechanism for comprehensive health 
services in rural areas. The expansion of integrated facilities 
will provide effective hospital services and the most efficient 
use of professional staff and resources. 
 
The new co-operative partnership of the Saskatoon hospitals 
will create centres of medical excellence for northern and 
central Saskatchewan. Measures my government has taken have 
already improved access to health services in Saskatoon. 
Twenty-five hundred more surgical procedures were performed 
in the past year. Additional action will be taken throughout the 
province to ensure that nurse staffing levels are increased. 
 
Such measures are important for the better co-ordination and 
utilization of our precious medical resources. These 
developments, along with other findings of the commission, 
will provide directions for the future to maintain and improve 
our health care system. 
 
My ministers remain committed to strengthening rehabilitation 
services with facilities such as the new state-of-the-art Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre, expanded rural community therapy, and 
enhanced mental health rehabilitation programs. Improved 
treatment facilities for alcohol and drug abuse at both 
Whitespruce near Yorkton and the Calder Centre in Saskatoon 
will provide programs to help youth and adults recover from the 
devastating effects of addiction. 
 
New Year’s Day marked a new era in health care 
administration. Saskatchewan plastic health card technology 
simplifies patient accessibility to benefits, and improves 
management for health care professionals and the government. 
The first application of the card constrains double doctoring and 
prescription drug abuse. In consultation with professionals, my 
government will build on this success and apply the technology 
to the management of other health services. 
 
My government knows that the best long-term answer to stress 
on our health care system is preventive programs and an 
increased role in assisting and encouraging people to stay 
healthy. In co-operation with voluntary groups and institutions, 
the "Everyone Wins" program will continue to promote healthy 
living for individuals and families. 
 
As part of this commitment, a new screening program will be 
designed with the co-operation of the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Foundation and others, to assist women to identify breast cancer 
at an early stage. The program will  
  



 
March 8, 1989 

2 
 

be available to women in high-risk groups throughout the 
province. 
 
Other preventive health programs will address seniors and 
northern residents. My government is very concerned about 
modern day threats to good health and will continue public 
education in the prevention of AIDS and drug and alcohol 
abuse. 
 
Saskatchewan students have always competed and been 
successful on a world-wide scale. The challenges of the future 
demand that we maintain our standards of excellence and 
prepare our youth to seize the unique opportunities of the 
twenty-first century. 
 
Last year, my government initiated measures to ensure that our 
students acquire basic skills in reading, writing and arithmetic. 
Creative thinking and computer literacy are also being 
emphasized so that students know how to adapt to the changing 
needs of the future. New developments in the areas of career 
counselling, business education, and work experience will be 
incorporated into the educational process. 
 
Schools and teachers play a major role in the growth and 
development of our young people. We all have a responsibility 
to assist teachers in this critical task. Therefore, my government 
is seeking ways to increase parental involvement in the school 
system and improve communication and co-operation among 
schools, homes and communities. 
 
My Minister of Education will introduce new measures to 
encourage students to remain in high school and will work with 
parents and school boards to make every effort to lower the 
drop-out-rate. The goal is to have all students, as far as possible, 
complete their secondary education. 
 
My government is committed to increasing educational 
opportunities. Regional colleges, universities and the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
deliver programs across the province. The availability of first- 
and second-year university classes, outside of Regina and 
Saskatoon, will enhance educational choices in rural 
communities and improve access, at a lower cost, to students 
and their families. My government will seek the co-operation of 
the universities in the establishment of a credit transfer system 
to facilitate the movement of students between our universities. 
These measures will help to prepare students of all ages for the 
challenge of changing labour markets. 
 
Technology presents even greater opportunities to provide 
expanded access to education. Through the Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network, to be known as "SCAN", 
my government will deliver educational television by cable, 
fibre optics and satellite to all areas of the province. Distance 
learning technology will have a wide application as a learning 
tool for families and, in particular, will expand educational 
opportunities for women and single parents. Educational 
television will enable professionals, such as nurses, to maintain 
and improve their qualifications without leaving home. Health, 
agricultural, business, and cultural programming will be 
provided on this network to meet the information  

needs and interests of all segments of the population. 
 
Saskatchewan’s future role in the world points to the 
importance of communication skills in international languages. 
The language training institute at the University of Regina will 
expand on the Summer Centre for International Languages 
Study to provide basic and advanced training in the key trade 
languages of Europe, Asia and Latin America. 
 
The protection of individuals, families and children is the 
foundation upon which my government’s policy agenda is built. 
 
My ministers’ commitment to family support and child 
protection will be highlighted in The Child and Family Services 
Act and The Children’s Law Act. 
 
My government recognizes the critical role of foster-parents in 
providing a supportive family environment for children in need. 
In co-operation with the Saskatchewan Foster Parents’ 
Association, the foster care program is being restructured to 
provide a comprehensive, standardized training program for 
foster-parents with a compensation system to reflect skills and 
training levels. 
 
A new Adoption Act will expand the open adoption service and 
enhance adoption alternatives. The Child Care Act will address 
services for infant care and for children of teen-age parents with 
a continued emphasis on parental involvement. Recognizing 
differences in child care needs, my government will introduce a 
range of options for working parents and rural families. 
 
The community living plan will enter its third phase this year. 
More residential programs and vocational opportunities will be 
established in communities throughout Saskatchewan. The 
unique partnership with the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living will be continued. My government’s policy 
of integrating the disabled into the community enhances 
rehabilitation and the quality of life for all concerned. 
 
The successful partnership with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rehabilitation Centres demonstrates the valuable 
contribution the disabled can make when given the opportunity 
to demonstrate their abilities. To protect those who are unable 
to take care of themselves, you will be asked to consider 
guardianship legislation. The mentally disabled will be 
protected from discrimination by amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
 
Welfare reform initiatives introduced by my government will 
continue. Emphasis will be placed on work search training and 
job placement for all employable clients of the welfare system. 
Parents will receive training in proper nutrition, parental skill 
development, and consumer life skills. 
 
The New Careers Corporation will provide more innovative 
work training projects in the north and elsewhere. The recent 
Cumberland House agreement also provides a model for future 
co-operation in the North. My ministers will continue to 
participate with  
  



 
March 8, 1989 

3 
 

northern communities and the mining industry in a range of 
social and economic initiatives, including community 
agreements and resource development. 
 
My government maintains its leadership role in interprovincial 
matters and has placed family issues on the top of the national 
agenda. Saskatchewan will host a national symposium on the 
family this summer which will focus on diversity, change and 
stress in modern family life. 
 
Protection for the people of Saskatchewan extends beyond basic 
needs to include public safety and the quality of life. 
 
Alcohol, illicit drugs and the crimes associated with them 
impose heavy cost in wasted human potential, family stress, 
injury and death. My government will build on effective 
awareness programs to combat the use of drugs. It will 
encourage the involvement of parents, teachers, law 
enforcement agencies and the general public to help our youth 
confront modern day threats to their health and well-being. 
 
Protecting our people from crime, while caring for victims and 
rehabilitating offenders, are matters of concern. My government 
will co-operate with communities to seek alternatives to 
incarceration for non-violent crime. Skill training programs will 
be pursued as a constructive use of funds in the rehabilitation of 
offenders. Legislation will be placed before you to provide for 
services and recovery options for victims of crime. 
 
The protection of workers is key to the maintenance of the 
labour force and, for this reason, my government will undertake 
a public review of The Occupational Health and Safety Act this 
year. Legislation which addresses the rights and obligations of 
employers, unions and employees, and enhanced working 
conditions for part-time workers will be placed before you. 
 
Legislation will also be introduced to implement the 
federal-provincial consensus on pension reform. Amendments 
include increased eligibility, improved survivor benefits, and 
greater portability. 
 
My government was the first in North America to introduce a 
pension plan for home-makers, part-time workers and the 
self-employed. Our people, particularly women, have been 
quick to recognize the value of this initiative as an important 
building block for their future security. The plan has 
forty-seven thousand members of whom 80 per cent are women 
and 40 per cent are home-makers. You will be asked to consider 
legislation to improve and add flexibility to the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. 
 
My ministers’ efforts to protect senior citizens will continue. 
Special attention will be paid to the changing housing and 
health care needs of seniors and to maintaining independence 
for as long as possible. My government is committed to 
building more enriched housing units as a preferable and 
efficient alternative to long-term care facilities. Seniors in 
Saskatchewan will receive the support necessary to allow them 
to live with  

dignity and independence. 
 
Seniors represent a wealth of expertise upon which the province 
is building. Seniors teaching other seniors is but one example in 
a wide range of voluntary effort. My ministers will encourage 
seniors to participate actively in various community activities 
and will provide them with the opportunity to contribute 
whenever possible. 
 
The protection and enhancement of our global environment 
depends on the active participation of government, the private 
sector, local communities and individuals. People world-wide 
share this responsibility. 
 
My government has improved the regulation of mines, and 
mine waste containment systems have been installed at all 
Saskatchewan mines. In addition, mining companies are now 
required to undertake ongoing reclamation of mined land. 
 
My government also introduced a new Clear Air Act to control 
air emissions from industrial plants in the province and to 
protect against pollutants which contribute to acid rain. My 
government’s commitment to this problem will be demonstrated 
by the introduction of the most up-to-date environmental 
technology in the new Shand power plant. My government will 
introduce new legislation to complement the initiatives of the 
federal and other provincial governments to protect the earth’s 
ozone layer. In addition, legislation will be also be placed 
before you to increase fines levied under our existing provincial 
environmental statutes. 
 
We must find new and innovative ways of dealing with 
environmental matters. My government has led in the 
development of an aluminum can waste recycling program 
which is already serving as a model for other provinces and 
states. This initiative has led to a co-operative approach among 
the four western provinces to find additional mechanisms to 
deal with other recycled products. Legislation will also be 
introduced to allow a tax on environmentally unsafe products to 
encourage industry to develop environmentally sensitive 
technology for the delivery of these products. 
 
The management and enhancement of our environment requires 
that we develop a long-term comprehensive strategy which 
must integrate economic decisions. For this reason, my 
government is committed to a "Saskatchewan Round Table on 
the Environment and the Economy" which will meet for the 
first time this spring. 
 
In co-operation with our universities and high-tech industries, 
my government will be undertaking new initiatives to deal with 
a number of important environmental issues, including the 
management of hazardous waste, pesticide container disposal 
and biological agents in farming. 
 
My ministers are pursuing a water management and irrigation 
strategy which pays specific attention to drought control and 
soil management. The Luck Lake project, with a projected 
capacity for 30,000 acres, will be pumping water for the first 
time this spring, and a similar state-of-the-art irrigation project 
is proceeding at Riverhurst. In addition, my government will 
enter into a  



 
March 8, 1989 

4 
 

major accord on soil and water conservation and development 
with the federal government. 
 
My government remains committed to the preservation of our 
natural surroundings which add quality to our lives. The recent 
creation of the Saskatchewan Upland Protection Enhancement 
and Restoration program and the Integrated Forestry Wildlife 
Habitat project will co-ordinate new and existing conservation 
programs to protect natural resources, water-fowl, fish and 
other wildlife in our province. The Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Weyerhaeuser Canada Limited, Wildlife Habitat 
Canada, and the Saskatchewan Natural History Society will be 
partners in these new environmental endeavours. Legislation 
will be placed before you to facilitate the creation of the 
Grasslands National Park in south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
My government will increase the promotion of Saskatchewan 
tourism at home and through our overseas offices. Communities 
will be encouraged to participate in Saskatchewan’s tourism 
industry. Theme holidays, northern adventures and cultural 
events will be highlighted. The province will host the Canada 
Summer Games this year, an event which will attract many 
visitors to Saskatchewan and enhance our profile in the sports 
world. 
 
My ministers will also present legislation to establish 
Wanuskewin Provincial Heritage Park. The unique sites of our 
province’s pre-history — older than the Pyramids of Egypt — 
will draw visitors and international specialists. These resources 
will be developed as a first-class tourist facility yet serve as a 
reminder of our unique heritage and as a valuable educational 
resource. 
 
The successful development of our Provincial Parks, in 
co-operation with communities and the private sector, will be 
continued with tourist destination potential as the goal. 
 
Agriculture remains the foundation of the provincial economy. 
The impact of the drought of the last year cannot be 
underestimated. My government responded by introducing feed 
and drought relief programs to ease the worst financial 
difficulties faced by farmers and ranchers. This winter’s 
snowfall, coupled with better world grain prices, is cause for 
some optimism in Saskatchewan rural communities. 
 
Legislation for protection and mediation services for farmers 
was consolidated last year in The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Act. In this session, you will be asked to consider consolidating 
farm finance legislation with new and innovative farm 
financing options. The Farm Finance Act will expand the 
mandate of the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to provide loans to producers to purchase their 
home quarter and to re-establish viable farm operations. A pilot 
project on equity financing will also be introduced. These 
measures will present alternative means of stabilizing the 
financial status of many young producers. 
 
A new department of Agriculture and Food will provide a 
mechanism for moving Saskatchewan into the agri-food sector. 
Employment in agriculture will expand as we  

build on our grain and livestock base by processing agricultural 
products for consumption here and internationally. 
Saskatchewan will grow, process, package, market and ship 
products to consumers in traditional and emerging markets 
throughout the world. This is a natural expansion of our efforts 
to capture new markets for crops and livestock while 
diversifying the agricultural economy. 
 
The Agricultural Development Fund will be extended and 
strengthened. The fund will be mandated to co-operate with the 
private sector in agriculture biotechnology research. With the 
recent establishment of Ag West Biotech, my government will 
focus on applied technology in agriculture. An enhanced centre 
for agricultural medicine at the University of Saskatchewan will 
have new capacity to respond to the specific medical problems 
of the farm chemical sector such as toxicity, chemical handling 
and related diseases. 
 
Legislation will also be introduced to consolidate existing 
agricultural activities in regulation and inspection, covering 
areas such as livestock and crop production, chemicals and pest 
control. 
 
The historic signing of the Canada-U.S.A. Free Trade 
Agreement marks the beginning of an exciting new growth 
period for the economy of this province and the nation. The 
Free Trade Agreement is important for the province since 
almost forty per cent of Saskatchewan products are sold to our 
closest neighbour. 
 
The province continues to look outward to pursue world-wide 
trade and investment opportunities. My First Minister recently 
strengthened our links with the Asia-Pacific market. Interest in 
buying our agricultural products, natural resources, rural gas 
technology, and fibre optic telecommunications is expanding. 
This is a rapidly growing market with trade opportunities which 
cannot be ignored. My government will continue to promote 
Saskatchewan and our export sector. Measures will be 
introduced to better equip our businesses to compete 
internationally. 
 
Saskatchewan has a large stake in the successful resolution of 
the current Uruguay round of trade liberalization measures. My 
government must continue to promote our interests in the 
GATT and multilateral trade negotiations with the European 
Community, the U.S.A. and the Asia-Pacific Rim. My First 
Minister is seeking more joint ventures to position 
Saskatchewan to take full advantage of the trade opportunities 
in the Asia-Pacific Rim today, and the opportunities to be 
created by the 1992 European trade bloc. 
 
My government will work with small business to develop a 
business loan associations guarantee program to improve access 
to credit. In addition, a broader range of financial services will 
be made available to small businesses to further take advantage 
of export opportunities. 
 
The public, private and co-operative sectors all contribute to the 
building and diversification of Saskatchewan. Examples include 
the partnership in the NewGrade Energy Heavy Oil Upgrader, 
rural gasification  
  



 
March 8, 1989 

5 
 

through SaskPower, and the development of our high-tech 
industries by private, co-operative and public sector companies. 
 
Saskatchewan’s natural resource sector is in an excellent 
position to take advantage of the changing demands of 
international markets. Planned gas well development will 
generate new economic activity and ensure our continued 
self-sufficiency in, and sales of, natural gas. Potash production 
and sales are expanding, and opportunities in Saskatchewan’s 
mining industry are increasing. 
 
My government remains committed to the decentralization of 
services through the province. The rural service network has 
already proven a valuable stimulus to rural economic 
development. Rural development corporations and 
municipalities will provide further opportunities for 
diversification in rural areas. 
 
The Buy Saskatchewan program will maximize the opportunity 
for local business to compete on private, government, and 
Crown corporation-sponsored projects. A wide range of new 
product lines such as hospital beds, motorized kitchens for the 
disabled, metal fabricated products and Saskatchewan-made 
furniture have been created. The program will also promote the 
range of opportunities available for the supply of government 
services by all small businesses in the province. 
 
Public participation will continue to chart a new course for 
economic growth, diversification, and job creation in 
Saskatchewan. Designed to meet the specific needs of our 
province, it expands upon our history of co-operative ownership 
in business, community involvement, and the delivery of public 
services. 
 
Public participation initiatives through employee ownership, 
such as the Meadow Lake Sawmill, will be further encouraged. 
New savings opportunities in Crown corporation bonds allow 
Saskatchewan families to save locally while earning a 
favourable return and building economic activity in the 
province. Public participation is leading to the creation of a 
capital market in Saskatchewan which mobilizes local savings 
rather than borrowing only from international finance markets 
at high interest rates. 
 
My ministers will prepare for public share offerings in several 
of our Crown corporations, including the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, SaskEnergy, and the general insurance business 
of Saskatchewan Government Insurance. Legislation relating to 
these initiatives will be placed before you for your 
consideration. 
 
The Future Corporation has been established to highlight 
Saskatchewan’s contribution to world development in new 
inventions, ideas and products. The Future Corporation will 
focus upon Saskatchewan’s role as a quality producer of high 
technology and the application of technology to change and 
development. This initiative enables communities and 
individuals to participate in the plan for our future as we launch 
Saskatchewan in the world and into the twenty-first century. 
 

I am pleased that, at this time, Their Royal Highnesses the Duke 
and Duchess of York have accepted our invitation to visit 
Saskatchewan. Prince Andrew and Sarah, Duchess of York, 
plan to spend five days in our province in July. The focus of 
their tour will be on children, our native peoples, and the North. 
I know that the people of Saskatchewan will extend a warm 
welcome to our Royal Visitors. 
 
Our province is well-placed, with forward and outward-looking 
policies, to meet the challenges of the future. My government 
will continue to protect the citizens of this province while 
acting as an agent of change for economic growth and social 
progress. 
 
My government’s priorities for this session are health, 
education, agriculture, the environment, families and children. 
Economic development and diversification of Saskatchewan 
will contribute to the development of these priorities. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the session, with full 
confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 
responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 
 

2:33 p.m. 
 

Prayers 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Pro Forma Bill 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 
the administration of oaths of office be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I now wish to inform the Assembly that the 
pages for this session will be as follows: Greg Bateson, Brett 
Burlock, Larry Mathieu, Lisa Mitchell and Heidi Wong. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Kindersley: 
  



 
March 8, 1989 

6 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
be taken into consideration on Thursday, March 9, 1989. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Kindersley: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, 
that he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person 
but such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before adjournment, the music you have been 
listening to this afternoon was provided to us by the Regina 
Police Junior Band. They are playing under the direction of Mr. 
Brent Ghiglione. I want to say how very much we enjoyed 
listening to the band and their music. Our thanks to Mr. 
Ghiglione for his fine selections and to the band on a fine 
performance. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to invite all present to the 
Speaker’s tea which will be held immediately down the hall in 
room 218 and in the Legislative Library. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:39 p.m. 
 
 


