


















































May 30, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 30, 1989 
 

1471 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Gleim, from the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations, presents the third report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

 Since the committee’s last report on March 23, 1988, your 
committee held 13 meetings during the second session of the 
20th legislature and five meetings after the session adjourned 
during the week of February 6, 1989. 
 
 Your committee completed consideration of the following 
reports of corporations: 
 
 Advanced Technology Training Centre, 1987 
 Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, 1987 
 Agricultural Development Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
1987 
 Crown Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan, 1987 
 Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Auto Fund, 1987 
 Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation 
 Saskatchewan Development Fund, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Government Printing, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Telecommunications, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 1987 
 Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 1987, and 
 Souris Basin Development Authority, 1987. 
 
 Your committee has not completed its review of the 
following corporations for the 1986-87 year: 
 
 New Careers Corporation, and 
 Saskatchewan Government Insurance Corporation, 1987. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina North West: 
 

 That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it gives me particular pleasure today to introduce to you, and 
through you to other members of the Assembly, 50 grade 8 
students from Rosemont Elementary School in the constituency 
of Regina Rosemont here in Regina. They are seated in the east 
gallery and are accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Wendy 
Allison and Mr. Marty Krause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me particular pleasure to introduce this 
group because due to an administrative mix-up last year I was 
unable to meet with the group from Rosemont School, so I’m 
glad to see that they’re back again for a second year. We will be 
meeting after question period out on the stairs of the legislature 
for pictures, and after that for drinks and an interesting and 
informative discussion. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great 
deal of pleasure that I introduce to you and to the Assembly, 
some 22 grade 4 students from White City School. White City, 
perhaps not familiar to members in the Assembly, has one of the 
most imaginative programs in the province, Mr. Speaker, in 
recognition of the importance of the Asian peoples and the Asian 
markets to Saskatchewan, have a very aggressive 
correspondence and relationship with a school in the People’s 
Republic of China. They are accompanied by their teacher 
Marjorie Gross, chaperons Mrs. Zytaruk and Mrs. Hill. I would 
ask all hon. members to join with me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming 
the students from White City to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the 
House, a national debating champion. This past week, the week 
of April 30 to May 7, the Saskatchewan Elocution and Debating 
Association hosted the Canadian Student Debating Federation 
national debate seminar. 
 
For a week, students from across Canada dramatically 
demonstrated the potential of Canadian youth, and not 
unexpectedly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan students did well. As 
a matter of fact, a young man who is a student at Campbell 
Collegiate, Anshu Prasad, who’s up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
in the right-hand side towards the top, took top honours, winning 
the top national debating award. Mr. Prasad is with us today in 
your gallery accompanied by Mr. Rolf Pritchard, executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association, 
one of the principle organizers of the national event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would all members please welcome and applaud the 
efforts of Mr. Prasad and Mr. Pritchard. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1472 
 

Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning, earlier this morning at 10:30, I had the privilege of 
meeting with some 22 students from Grandview School in 
Grandview, Manitoba. And we had some excellent questions 
from our visitors from Manitoba, and I too would like all 
members of this Assembly to join with me in greeting these 
students from Grandview, Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — It’s my pleasure also to take this opportunity to 
introduce some guests from my constituency. In the Speaker’s 
gallery we have 65 students from Lestock School, and I believe 
the two students on the floor behind the bar are also from 
Lestock. Are you? Yes, I believe they are; they’re included. 
 
These students are composed of students from the town of 
Lestock and district, and also from the Muskowekwan reserve, 
which is adjacent to the town of Lestock. They’ve come here to 
tour our building, to sit around question period, and also I look 
forward to meeting with them at 3 o’clock to have a short 
discussion on today’s proceedings. 
 
I ask my colleagues to please welcome these students and their 
teachers, which I have neglected to inform you their names, but 
I do so now — Mr. Cuir, Mrs. Woodward, Ms. Lindquist, and 
Mr. Davies, who also happens to be the mayor of Lestock and 
who regularly brings students to the Legislative Chambers — and 
also the bus drivers, Morris Wolfe and Daryl Leonard. Please 
welcome all these people to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Possible Conflict of Interest with Chairman of SEDCO 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation. And, Madam Minister, it’s now been 
almost two weeks since your government said it would study 
whether or not Larry Kyle, the chairman of SEDCO, and his 
relationship with the Northern Lights game farm was in conflict. 
Can you tell the House today if you have reached the same 
conclusion as the rest of the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan; that is, that Mr. Kyle, operating as a solicitor for 
the company, which received a SEDCO loan, was in a clear 
conflict of interest. Can you tell us what steps have been taken to 
date, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, clearly Mr. Kyle is the 
chairman of the SEDCO board. Clearly Mr. Kyle, acting as 
solicitor for a private company, was not in conflict because the 
matter did not come to the board of SEDCO. And I should point 
out to the member, only issues of over $500,000 come to the 
board level; loan approvals in excess of two and a half million 
dollars must come to the cabinet board. It’s clearly stated in the 
Act, Mr. Speaker, 

that if a matter of which of a member of the board may have an 
interest, he or she must excuse himself from that meeting. 
 
I will reiterate that the loan to Northern Lights farm was not at 
the level that it would even come to the board for a decision. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, same minister, Mr. Speaker. I 
find that incredibly hard to believe, Madam Minister. If there was 
ever a clear-cut case of conflict of interest, this is one of them. 
 
Your government has clear-cut definitions of conflict of interest 
for members of the public service. For instance, in your Conflict 
of Interest Guide-lines for public employees, in section E6, it 
gives some general examples of what would be considered a 
conflict of interest. And I would like to just quote from that: 
 

where the public employee may influence the decisions of a 
ministry in respect of a particular company or municipal 
body which is applying to a ministry for a loan, grant or 
other advantages, when the public employee has a 
significant responsibility in the affairs of the applicant . . . 
 

What is your definition of this? If this doesn’t fit Mr. Kyle to a 
T, what is the situation, Madam Minster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a clear example of 
the tactics of the NDP, the tactics of smear, innuendo. It’s the 
politics of fear, the politics of innuendo, and the politics of hate. 
Clearly, Mr. Kyle was not in conflict. Clearly, Mr. Kyle — I will 
repeat — was not in conflict at all. Read our Act, please. Read 
our Act. 
 
Mr. Kyle, as chairman, representing a firm who may have 
dealings with SEDCO, is not in conflict. If the matter had come 
to the board, Mr. Kyle, as required by legislation, would have 
excused himself from that board meeting. Because the loan was 
of such a little amount, it doesn’t come to the board for approval. 
The loans officer can approve that amount. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Madam Minister, new question. We’re dealing 
with public money, and if you call $220,000 a little amount, you 
have a different definition of “little amount” than the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I realize that Mr. Kyle does not come under the 
guide-lines that I quoted from for the Public Service Commission 
in the province. If he did, then you’d have no choice but to take 
action, including his termination of services. 
 
What I want to know, Madam Minister, is that if somebody in 
Mr. Kyle’s position was subject to the same stringent rules of 
conduct, say a mid-level public employee in the province, I’m 
sure that you would have pounced on the individual as you have 
in other cases,   



 
May 30, 1989 

1473 
 

because they disagreed with you. But when it works to your 
advantage, you protect and uphold even though there’s a clear 
conflict of interest. Where is your government’s sense of fairness 
and honesty, Madam Minister, in a conflict of interest like this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the 
member opposite that the average loan made by SEDCO last year 
was in the neighbourhood of $156,000 — $156,000. The vast 
majority of the loan approvals didn’t even come to the board 
level because they were not high enough that it was required to 
go to the board. 
 
I will say again, in defence of Mr. Kyle, Mr. Kyle is an energetic 
member of Saskatchewan, citizen of Saskatchewan, good lawyer 
in the city of Regina, very astute lawyer in the city of Regina, and 
clearly Mr. Kyle, whether you will believe it or not, or you’re 
going to continue this, this smearing campaign of yours, aided 
and abetted by your leader, I will say again, Mr. Kyle was not in 
conflict at any time on this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Madam Minister, maybe in your opinion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Do you have a 
supplement or a new question? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
we’re happy that you’re proud of this individual and are 
defending him today here in the legislature. 
 
Can you confirm then, if you won’t admit there being a conflict 
of interest, can you confirm that this is the same Larry Kyle who 
has been instrumental in putting together the Gigatext scandal 
that your government is involved in with your unscrupulous 
friends, and is this the same Larry Kyle who was quoted in the 
Montreal Gazette about the Gigatext scandal. Can you tell us that, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible, 
Mr. Speaker, for the French language office, members opposite 
may remember, Mr. Speaker, that several months ago . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . Well I don’t know if they’re 
interested in hearing the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, several months ago there 
was a Supreme Court decision that imposed on Saskatchewan the 
requirement to translate statutes into French. At that time, Mr. 
Speaker, there was a piece of legislation brought before this 
House, and I think, as I recall, members opposite in fact 
supported that piece of legislation. 
 
And at that time, Mr. Speaker, we took the view that it was a 
very, very costly exercise to simply translate statutes into French, 
Mr. Speaker, and so we went looking for easy 

and inexpensive methods to do this very thing. And we did that, 
Mr. Speaker, we did that. 
 
And we found a technology, Mr. Speaker, that at least I still have 
a very high degree of confidence in. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
conducted all of the normal investigations into the principals who 
owned this technology and we formed a joint venture, Mr. 
Speaker. We formed a joint venture between CMB and Nohrlus. 
Twenty-five per cent of that joint venture was held by CMB, Mr. 
Speaker, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The minister, I’m sure, realizes 
he’s taking quite a long time to answer the question. I’d like to 
ask him to get to his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m taking some 
time in answering the question is members . . . I’m not sure who 
members opposite are going to try and defame next, so I’m trying 
to get the record straight, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the fact of 
the matter is the principals in the Nohrlus organization found 
themselves some time later in an international lawsuit in 
Montreal. When that became apparent, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve allowed a great deal of time 
for the minister. 
 

Problems with Gigatext 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I have to give this minister an 
opportunity to tell us all about Gigatext, so I’m going to ask him 
some questions. I had originally intended to go to the minister 
responsible for SEDCO, but I take it that we are to go to the 
Deputy Premier for answers to this developing scandal. 
 
Minister, you mentioned that the government, through the Crown 
Management Board, has a 25 per cent interest in this company, 
Gigatext, and I want you to confirm that your government put up 
$4 million for that 25 per cent interest, and that Mr. Guy 
Montpetit of Montreal, who’s the president of Gigatext and who 
is currently the subject of the major lawsuit, or one of the actors 
in the . . . one of the parties in the major lawsuit that you referred 
to, and University of Manitoba professor, Douglas Young, were 
given the other 75 per cent interest in Gigatext in exchange for 
their software technology that they were to bring to the business. 
And secondly, while you’re on your feet, will you confirm that 
Mr. Montpetit, as president of the company, had sole authority 
for signing cheques and disbursing payments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the last question 
first, whether he was the sole signing authority, that’s been 
indicated to me that that’s a fact. As it relates to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well, Mr. Speaker I’m not involved in the 
day-to-day operations of the company, nor would anybody 
expect me to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the $4 million investment, CMB 
(Crown Management Board) did spend $4 million, invest $4 
million in this technology for 25 per cent of the company, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1474 
 

As I said earlier, when it became apparent that there were 
principals involved in the joint venture that were involved in an 
international court action in Montreal, this government moved 
immediately to turn the whole matter here over to the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police for investigation. That was done, I 
believe, in October or November of last year. The matter is still 
the subject of that investigation, Mr. Speaker, and because it’s 
the subject of that investigation, and because, Mr. Speaker, it is 
a matter before the courts, I think it’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s not before the courts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s certainly before the courts in 
Montreal, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a court. That’s a court, maybe 
not one that members opposite have respect for, but it is a court. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite frankly not prepared to get into any 
detail relative . . . that may in fact put in jeopardy the RCMP 
investigation or the court matter that’s going on in Montreal, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
interesting that this matter has been referred to the RCMP, but it 
does not absolve this minister of the responsibility of answering 
questions in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — He has confirmed, I believe, what ought to be 
a matter of public record, and that is that CMB (Crown 
Management Board of Saskatchewan) have a 25 per cent interest 
in the Gigatext company which they purchased for $4 million. 
And I would ask him to confirm that the other 75 per cent of the 
company went to Mr. Montpetit and the University of Manitoba 
professor, Mr. Young, in exchange for the software technology 
that they brought to Gigatext. That’s the first question. 
 
And while you’re on your feet, Minister, will you also confirm 
that it was Mr. Ken Waschuk, a former aide to the Premier, who 
initiated the contacts between officials of your government and 
Mr. Montpetit? 
 
And, thirdly, will you confirm that Mr. Waschuk made these 
contacts at the urging of Michel Cogger, a Tory senator from 
Quebec who has himself been linked to the highly questionable 
practice of receiving some $110,000 from Mr. Montpetit to lobby 
for Mr. Montpetit’s firms with the Mulroney government? Can 
you confirm those three things? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm nothing as 
it relates to Mr. Ken Waschuk. I have no knowledge of Mr. Ken 
Waschuk’s involvement in any way, shape, or form. Mr. Speaker, 
I will confirm that we invested $4 million in this joint venture 
project for a computer agent translation technology, one that we 
have, and continue to have, a high degree of confidence in; one 
where, Mr. Speaker, I believe there is great opportunity beyond 
the translation of statutes. 
 

As an example, is recently a $21 million contract for the 
translation of the frigate manuals, Mr. Speaker, was awarded to 
a firm in New Brunswick. 
 
There are literally hundreds of millions of dollars worth of 
translation opportunities in Canada alone, Mr. Speaker, and we 
saw this, and continue to see it, as an excellent opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the minute that this court action in Montreal, that we 
became aware of that, we moved to protect the investment of the 
people of Saskatchewan. We moved to protect the investment 
and, Mr. Speaker, we have 100 per cent control of that company 
today — 100 per cent control, Mr. Speaker. The shares of the 
other principals have been put in escrow, put in escrow, Mr. 
Speaker. And the government, through SEDCO, is keeping the 
company going, meeting payroll, etc., for an agreed-upon period, 
Mr. Speaker, that I think ends in June, for the purposes of 
determining once and for all whether the technology is suffice to 
do the job; and number two, Mr. Speaker, to see what other 
applications can come from the technology. 
 
This is an excellent opportunity for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s unfortunate that it got unravelled in this court case in 
Montreal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. I’ll bet it was unfortunate it got unravelled in this 
lawsuit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I wasn’t clear on your answer, Minister, with 
respect to Mr. Ken Waschuk. Are you saying that you don’t know 
that he was involved in the initial contact between Mr. Montpetit 
and this government? And do you know, Minister, that Mr. 
Montpetit, in this lawsuit in Montreal, claims to have made a loan 
of some $150,000 to that same Mr. Waschuk while the two were 
playing golf here in Regina, and that that money was transferred 
to a Bermuda company? Do you know that, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, not only have I not read 
the transcripts of the trial in Montreal, but I once again say, Mr. 
Speaker, I have no knowledge of Ken Waschuk in any way, 
shape, or form making any initial contact with this government 
and one Guy Montpetit. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I want to address 
two more questions to the minister in this regard, which he can 
answer at the same time. In connection with Mr. Waschuk, is the 
minister aware that Mr. Waschuk was, and I believe is, on the 
board of directors of the Gigatext company? 
 
But while you’re on your feet, answer this question, Minister. 
Are you aware that Mr. Young, that’s Professor Young of the 
University of Manitoba, who claims to have developed the 
translation software program that Gigatext is to be using, wrote 
a memo last October 20, which is in the possession of the RCMP, 
in which he expressed his concerns about financial error and 
mismanagement at   



 
May 30, 1989 

1475 
 

Gigatext? 
 
And thirdly, Minister, are you also aware that in that same memo 
Mr. Young alleges that Mr. Montpetit spoke of spending 
hundreds of thousands of dollars paying considerations to 
Saskatchewan people who helped arrange the deal? Are you 
aware of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the first 
question: yes, I am aware that Mr. Waschuk is on the board of 
Gigatext. As it relates to the second question — and my 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that he was asked to serve by the 
principals of Nohrlus, the joint venture partner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as it relates to the first question, am I aware of the memo 
from Mr. Douglas Young to whoever it was sent to: yes, I have 
had that memo, or the contents of that memo, made known to me. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely — precisely — one of the 
reasons that at that time we turned the whole matter over to the 
RCMP. 
 
Precisely, Mr. Speaker. And the RCMP have been conducting its 
investigation actively, I understand, since October or November, 
and I await their conclusion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister. It’s been 
almost a year since your government helped to set up for this 
Gigatext company. Can you tell us, Minister, during that year 
how many Saskatchewan statutes have been translated into 
French since this company started operations and since you 
poured $4 million into its operations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, one of the 
reasons that we found this technology, if you like, is that we were 
looking for an easy, inexpensive way to comply with the 
Supreme Court of Canada ruling that we must translate all of our 
statutes into French. We got this technology, Mr. Speaker, and it 
is now being improved and proven, improved and proven. 
 
There is some question, Mr. Speaker, as to whether or not statute 
law will be received as being appropriate or proper through 
machine translation, Mr. Speaker. It’s a little different than 
translating Tom Mix for members opposite to read. 
 
And so the answer to the question: it’s the opportunity . . . the 
opportunity for this technology goes well beyond statute 
translations. The opportunity goes into the hundreds of millions 
of dollars of all kinds of translation. Today, Mr. Speaker, there 
are somewhere between 22 and 25 people working at Gigatext 
here in Regina — 22 to 25 people that otherwise probably 
wouldn’t even be in the province, Mr. Speaker. So the answer to 
the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Deputy 
Premier. I want to ask him: are you aware that most computer 
experts . . . most computer experts would have said that the 
project was doomed to failure from the outset? 
 

For instance, Jaimie Carbonell, director of the Centre of Machine 
Translation in Pittsburgh, said the technology is 20 years away 
from doing what this company claims it will do, and that Mr. 
Montpetit told a court hearing in Montreal that Young fudged the 
demonstrations of his technology to produce accurate results. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier: what minister or 
ministers approved this deal that blew in excess of $4 million of 
taxpayers’ money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, had that member been 
around advising Orville Wright in the days of the Silver Dart, we 
probably wouldn’t be flying today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 
the fact of the matter is there are people who do have confidence 
in the technology, including the Department of National 
Defence. Mr. Speaker, the Department of National Defence has 
awarded a contract, a contract of $21 million to a similar 
technology in New Brunswick, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. The minister 
has been having quite a few interruptions and having difficulty 
answering. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . a technology, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t 
as far as advanced as this one. And for those who say that 
applications of this technology are still 20 years away, they are 
simply not familiar with how far advanced this new technology 
is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further question, new question to the minister. I 
want to ask you, Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the 
government not only blew 4 million bucks but have taken over 
the full operation, are paying as much as $50,000 a month to run 
this company which is unable to translate one single statute? Is 
that not the situation? Haven’t we spent over another 300 to 
$500,000 on this project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member had been 
listening about four or five questions ago, I said precisely that. I 
said that the government moved immediately, the 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. The minister’s been 
asked the question, and unfortunately he’s being asked several 
more. Let’s give him the opportunity to answer the question he 
was formally asked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The government moved immediately to 
protect its investment, Mr. Speaker, the investment of the people 
of Saskatchewan, and in fact took 100 per cent control of 
Gigatext, Mr. Speaker. And in taking 100 per cent control, they 
have in fact met payroll and day-to-day operation costs, Mr. 
Speaker, precisely to keep the company alive to see if we can 
capture the opportunity that this technology presents us,   



 
May 30, 1989 

1476 
 

Mr. Speaker — the opportunity of literally hundreds of millions 
of dollars of translation services that are being demanded by 
governments, by private sector, here and abroad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Waste and Financial Mismanagement of the Provincial 
Government 

 
The Speaker: — While normally it would be the government’s 
turn for motions under rule 16, since they did not have their 
motion in on time . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. We will now proceed with the 
opposition’s motion, unless some previous arrangement has been 
made. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It would appear, Mr. Speaker, that if we got 
a new wrist-watch for the member from Melfort, that would go 
some distance towards solving government mismanagement, 
because he was 11 minutes late handing in the motion, as I recall 
it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to respond on a 
point of order, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, what is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there are times 
in the legislature that you go beyond what is strictly adhered to 
or written down in the rules. And Mr. Speaker, I admit, and I take 
responsibility on behalf of all of my colleagues for being late. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I simply raise the point that in the traditions of 
parliamentary democracy, normally an opposition willing to 
co-operate might say, Mr. Government, certainly take your turn. 
This is representative, Mr. Speaker, of an uncooperative 
opposition and, Mr. Speaker, it goes far beyond this little point. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that is not a point of 
order. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, all that the member, the Deputy 
House Leader over there, is trying to do is cover up for the fact 
that this government, after day 46 of this Legislative Assembly, 
has been so inept and so preoccupied with some other agenda 
called privatization that it has not even brought forward 
legislation to be debated in the legislature; so preoccupied that 
the member opposite doesn’t even know when he is to bring in a 
motion to be debated under rule 16, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Until the government is prepared to provide some leadership and 
take its responsibilities seriously about making sure that they 
bring forward the business of the people of Saskatchewan, it is 
clearly in order that the 

member from Regina Centre continue with his motion as he is 
proposing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order and 
the response from the opposition. As I indicated earlier, first of 
all it’s not a point of order, the issue the member raised. 
Secondly, the agenda can only be changed with some previous 
arrangement or leave, which has not been granted; therefore, the 
motion proceeds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If I could be as generous as I could, to the 
member from Melfort, and assume that he meant some of what 
he said — one can only assume this is a continuation of the 
problems that you’ve had, Mr. Acting House Leader, in that you 
think you can change the rules unilaterally and retroactively. That 
is what you’ve been doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that we’re dealing with a 
question of fiscal mismanagement and waste at a time when the 
government’s displaying that. They have sometimes displayed, 
and we have sometimes seen, government mismanagement and 
waste due to this government’s greed, due to the greed of their 
friends. 
 
Today, however, I think we’re seeing mismanagement and waste 
in this session because this government is: (a) blindly tied to a 
privatization program that the public of Saskatchewan have said 
they don’t want, and we see the session not dealing with the 
issues that should be dealt with. We see mismanagement in this 
session on a scale which I have never seen before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues which should be dealt 
with. We have a crisis in agriculture. We have a federal 
government which has imposed a budget which has imposed 
some very severe burdens on Saskatchewan people. We have 
some unresolved issues with respect to the national sales tax, as 
businesses will now have goods which attract taxes under four 
different scenarios. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these issues demand attention. How does this 
government manage those issues? First of all, it proceeds with an 
arrogance; and secondly, once it’s rebuffed by the public of 
Saskatchewan, it becomes petulant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one can find instances of waste and 
mismanagement in quite a number of different areas of this 
government, but perhaps foremost among them is the manner in 
which this session has been managed. This session has been 
mismanaged. Our government has proceeded upon a tack which 
the public of Saskatchewan said they don’t want. This 
government has got stubborn, having been defeated . . . having 
suffered at least a set-back, they then get petulant; insists on 
proceeding with a unilateral change to the rules, which is without 
precedent in this House. 
 
The first bit of management we need, Mr. Speaker, is better 
management of this Legislative Assembly. That   



 
May 30, 1989 

1477 
 

entails a co-operative approach, and it involves this government 
recapturing some sense of what the public want. 
 
(1445) 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, have visited a fair number of people. You know, 
I haven’t had one person say, gee, I sure hope you deal with those 
rule changes — haven’t had anyone say that. Had a fair number 
of farmers talk about assistance with respect to the debt on 
agriculture, have had a fair number of business people ask us 
what we’re going to do with respect to the national sales tax, and 
so on, but I’ve had no one impress upon me the importance of 
dealing with the rule change before anything else is dealt with. 
 
So the first bit of management we need is different and better 
management with respect to this session. We need this 
government to recapture some sense of what the public want. 
They are so woefully out of touch that they will insist on dealing 
with the rule change when other problems cry out for attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s mismanagement, now in old age 
when the government’s long in the tooth, seems to stem from 
stubbornness, from being out of touch, setting its own agenda 
rather than the agenda which the public of Saskatchewan would 
have them set. They’ve become stubborn, arrogant, and out of 
touch. Thus we see them sticking to the rule change, insisting that 
it be passed when there’s patently more pressing issues. 
 
It wasn’t always thus, Mr. Speaker. This government was born in 
mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. This government began in 1982 
. . . indeed the Premier campaigned on the slogan that he could 
mismanage Saskatchewan and still come out ahead. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he’s half-right; he’s certainly proved he could 
mismanage Saskatchewan. What he didn’t prove was that he 
could ever come out ahead. He hasn’t, of course, come out ahead. 
 
When this government took office, this province had a surplus of 
a few hundred million dollars and a multi-billion-dollar series of 
Crown corporations which were largely free of debt — SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) being one exception to that, 
but the rest of them were largely free of debt. Those Crown 
corporations turned over handsome profits to CIC (Crown 
investments corporation of Saskatchewan), which in turn paid 
dividends of some 50 or $100 million a year. 
 
This government took over. We now have a debt on the operating 
side of around $4 billion. We have Crown corporations which are 
now burdened by debt. Virtually every one of the Crown 
corporations lost money, some of whom had never lost money. 
 
I think it’s accurate to say that SaskTel had never lost money until 
this government took office. SPC had lost money on occasion, 
but on rare occasions. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
made very large profits so long as it was managed by competent 
management, so long as those in office wanted the corporation to 
succeed. Under the tutelage of these people, virtually every 
Crown corporation that Saskatchewan owns has lost money. I can 
think of no exception to that. The only two exceptions 

I can think of are Sask Minerals and Saskoil which you’ve sold, 
and sold for a fraction of what they’re worth. 
 
So we’ve seen waste and mismanagement, not only in the 
operation of the Crown corporations but in the privatization of 
them. This government has privatized and continues to privatize 
corporations which make money. Those which lose money 
remain in the public sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most single, serious, and the most single 
important cause of waste and mismanagement in this government 
has been patronage. We saw it again today in the form of 
Gigatext, an operator from Montreal whom I don’t know well 
and won’t comment on, but I will comment on his practices. 
 
He comes to Saskatchewan offering considerations of some 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, and apparently in the 
Conservative ranks opposite, not among the members of this 
Assembly, but in those who work directly with them, found some 
ready takers. He found some people who were prepared to take 
that money and to ask no questions with respect to this 
government’s participation in the corporation. 
 
What we now have is some individuals who have made a great 
deal of money. And as I say, none of them . . . there is no 
evidence of anyone in this House doing that, but certainly people 
such as Mr. Waschuk, who at the relevant time was on the 
Premier’s staff, accepting large sums of money. What is the 
taxpayer left with? Well we’re one year late on translating the 
statutes. The member from Souris-Cannington, one could tell by 
the hesitant and rather sombre way he answered those questions, 
he knows as well as we do that that technology won’t work, that 
they’ve sunk $4 million into a technology which is not here, 
which is very, very complex. 
 
Translating ideas from one language to another is a very complex 
task. There are not a whole lot more — particularly when it’s 
statutes — there are not a whole lot more tasks more exacting 
than the translation from one language to another. Language 
reflects a culture, different cultures. People think differently and 
ideas do not translate precisely. It’s a very difficult task. It is not 
one that even with the advanced state of computers now you can 
ever leave to a computer. 
 
Most computer experts — and a whole lot who aren’t computer 
experts — know that. Computers basically deal with numbers, 
not with something as subtle and as subjective as a translation of 
a language. Most all computer experts know that; so do a whole 
lot of amateurs who are interested in the subject. 
 
You ask how on earth did this government get involved in such 
a hare-brained proposal. They got involved in the hare-brained 
proposal because of greed by those who worked for the 
government, outright patronage, outright corruption, and because 
this government simply does not ask enough questions, does not 
thoroughly think something out. 
 
I was amused that the member from Souris-Cannington 
suggested that had the Wright brothers had his assistance,   



 
May 30, 1989 

1478 
 

or had our assistance, they might not have succeeded. One will 
recall that the Wright brothers were two business people who 
spend a long time studying what they were about to do. They 
spent many years researching it before they tried it. They were 
careful, thorough people who analysed the problem very 
carefully. They were not fly-by-night operators who woke up one 
morning, thought it was a heck of an idea, and tried it. This 
government’s knowledge of history is as weak as its knowledge 
of economics or the principles of public administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has been involved in patronage 
right from the very beginning; from 1982, there’s any number of 
instances of it. The former . . . and one can pick from ranks, one 
can pick from among the Conservative ranks. In his book written 
after his incarceration, Colin Thatcher complained of the large 
number of executive assistants hired at what he described as 
obscene salaries. 
 
The government began . . . The mismanagement, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, really began when this government decided that the 
public service was an NDP plot. They began by firing large 
numbers of dedicated public employees who had been public 
employees, and professional public employees, from the 
beginning. 
 
Well some of the people that the members opposite have harassed 
have done fairly well. I recall one member that members opposite 
decided to send to Prince Albert, went to Prince Albert for a 
couple of months, but now occupies an honoured position in this 
Assembly — the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
If the member opposite wants to discuss some of the people you 
fired and the success that they have made of themselves since, 
that would make a very interesting speech. I’m not sure, Mr. 
Speaker, it would be entirely on point, but if the member from 
Meadow Lake wants me to discuss what has happened to the 
people they have fired, most of them, Mr. Speaker, have gone on 
to make a very considerable success. 
 
One of the people he complains about is a Mr. Doug Archer. Mr. 
Archer was fired by this government, went on to become mayor 
of Regina and, I think, a very competent one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am nearing the end of the 15 minutes allotted to 
me. I’m therefore going to move, seconded by the member from 
Athabasca: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the waste and financial 
mismanagement of the provincial government which has 
caused an alarming provincial deficit, an ever increasing tax 
burden on Saskatchewan families, and a reduction in 
spending on health, education, and employment programs. 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure today to speak to this motion, 
the motion of waste and financial mismanagement by the 
Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

I want to turn to some of the mismanagement and waste that we 
see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, up in northern Saskatchewan. And first 
of all, I want to speak about the situation that we have in Green 
Lake where the Conservative government has decided to sell the 
Silver Lake Farm to outsiders, outside of Green Lake. 
 
And I want to put that on the record what type of waste and 
mismanagement we’re really facing there in that farm. On 
December 9, 1988, I wrote a letter to the Premier, as the Minister 
of Agriculture and also as the Premier, asking him to intervene 
and not to privatize or sell the Silver Lake farm. At that time it 
was decided that the government was going to get rid of the 
central farm and were going to turn that over to the community 
of Green Lake. And I had no opposition to that. 
 
But to put the Silver Lake farm out for public tender, this is what 
I was opposed to. I wrote the Premier on December 9 asking him 
to reconsider that, and if they were still going to go ahead I asked 
him if he would consider entering into some arrangements with 
the community of Green Lake and/or the employees with respect 
to the Silver Lake farm. Now what I was saying to the Premier 
was, give the local citizens of Green Lake an opportunity to 
purchase that farm. 
 
When we take a look at the waste and mismanagement that has 
taken place there in selling it off to a private entrepreneur, I just 
want to give you a little bit of history of what has taken place in 
the Silver Lake farm. This is a large farm, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
a large farm with approximately 1,000 head of bred cattle, 
pure-bred cattle. That is worth a lot of money. And there is acres 
and acres, there’s thousands of acres of land that have been 
broken up, put into hay so that they can feed these cattle. 
 
Now what I want to point out to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
here’s where we get into the waste and the mismanagement and 
the unfairness of this deal, who created this here Silver Lake 
farm? Well I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was the workers 
from Green Lake who were working on that Silver Lake farm 
who built that farm up to a point where it was. 
 
And there’s rumours going around that that farm has been sold 
for $3 million. Now if that is the case, I tell you that the citizens 
of Green Lake are not getting any credit for that. It was the 
manager of the Silver Lake farm at Green Lake and the 
individuals who worked on that farm that built the land, that 
picked the roots and the rocks, put the fences up, and built that 
herd of cattle up to where it is right now, worth in the 
neighbourhood of $3 million. 
 
They did that, and now the farm is at a point where it can make 
money and it can break even, and your government, sir, has 
decided in their wisdom that they are going to sell it, not give an 
opportunity to the workers who are working on the Silver Lake 
farm, from Green Lake. They should have had first opportunity. 
 
And there’s no way that the Conservative government shouldn’t 
have signed a promissory note for them. You had no trouble 
signing a promissory note for Weyerhaeuser for $250 million 
worth of assets. You had   



 
May 30, 1989 

1479 
 

no trouble signing promissory notes to Manalta Coal to take over 
the coal-mines and the drag-line. You had no trouble with Peter 
Pocklington signing the promissory notes. And you had no 
trouble with signing the promissory notes for two Alberta 
companies that are supposed to come in and build two pulp mills 
— one in Meadow Lake and one in Hudson Bay. No problem 
with that. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why could this government 
not sign the promissory notes and give the workers who built up 
that Silver Lake farm, the citizens of Green Lake, an opportunity 
to take over that farm? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Give them the same opportunities that you’re 
giving the big multinationals from Tacoma, Washington, and 
Edmonton, Alberta, and Whitecourt, Alberta, and Calgary, 
Alberta. You signed those promissory notes. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, it’s about time that we started 
dealing with the citizens of Saskatchewan and give them an 
opportunity. They are the ones who did the work; they’re the ones 
who stood up and fought to keep that farm going. And now 
they’re all going to lose their jobs, they’re going to lose their 
future, and this asset that should stay in that Meadow Lake-Green 
Lake area is going to be gone to some business people in Prince 
Albert. 
 
I say that’s wrong. And I want to go on to say here are some of 
the comments by the minister of privatization: 
 

As I travel the province (and I’m quoting from the minister 
of privatization) people are telling me overwhelmingly that 
the government should not be using taxpayers’ money to run 
those farms. 
 

Well I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I say in all sincerity 
to the minister of privatization, that it took many, many years to 
build those farms up to where they are today so that you could 
put them out on the market and sell them for the type of money 
that you’ve got. There was a lot of work went into it, and it’s 
local work, Saskatchewan citizens. And I say . . . and I doubt 
whether there was people all over this province telling you that 
you should be out selling those farms. I just don’t believe that. 
 
Another statement that the minister has made, and I’m quoting, 
quoting out of the Meadow Lake Northwestern Sun of May 15, 
1989, and the minister of privatization, he says: 
 

I don’t know why Green Lake should have two farms when 
other communities only have one. 
 

Well that’s the kind of attitude that this government has — I don’t 
see why that they should have two farms because they’ve already 
got one. They’re both farms that belong to Green Lake. They’re 
both farms that were developed over all these years by 
individuals who were born and raised in 

Green Lake and are still operating these farms. 
 
And the minister of privatization goes around the province 
saying, well I don’t think Green Lake deserves two farms; they 
only deserve the one farm, so we’re not going to give them the 
opportunity that we give to Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington and 
Manalta Coal. We’re not going to give them the opportunity to 
purchase that farm. 
 
Then he also . . . he says that the farm is running in debt, and I 
say that that farm is not running in debt. That farm was built up 
over many years and there’s a lot of sweat equity that went in 
there from the citizens of Green Lake. And the minister of 
privatization says, well that farm is going in the hole, and who 
are we blaming? Workers have become unionized; since then the 
farms have been costing us a million dollars per year. People 
have asked to use the land for the benefit of the community. 
 
Now he wants to blame the unions because the individuals who 
have been working on that farm, some of them for 19 years, 
they’re getting good wages, they have a future, they belong to a 
union, and the minister says: they’re losing a million dollars a 
year. I doubt if they’re losing a million dollars a year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’ll tell you, they’re not losing a million dollars a year. 
 
That Silver Lake farm is at a point now where it’s going to start 
making money. When you take a thousand bred cows, pure-bred 
cows, and all their calves, let me tell you that is worth a lot of 
money. And there is over 2,000 acres that were broke, and that 
was broke and cleared by the sweat of the individuals from Green 
Lake. 
 
And for the minister to go around and blaming the fact that 
they’re in the union, saying that individuals around this province 
are saying, oh no, we can’t give them an opportunity to own the 
Silver Lake farm because then they would have two farms in their 
possession in Green Lake. They already have one, the central 
farm; we can’t give them the Silver Lake farm. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a wrong attitude. I’m 
sure they don’t do that in Shellbrook in the community that you 
come from. They welcome as many farmers as they can get, and 
that’s the way that Saskatchewan gets ahead. 
 
The same is applying in La Loche, in the road between 
McMurray and La Loche, a main artery that should be put 
between the two provinces so that we can get the tourists and the 
economic development that we need between the two provinces, 
and especially for communities like La Loche in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what does this government do? And we found out this 
morning in Crown corporations, there’s no agreement between 
Alberta and Saskatchewan. The Department of Highways have 
no agreement with the Department of Highways in Alberta to 
build that connection. Not a bit. The way that road is being put 
in right now is through welfare . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1480 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
question we have here before us is a motion from the opposition 
alleging waste and financial mismanagement. And certainly the 
operations of this government have to be the furthest thing 
possible from waste and mismanagement. We have to examine 
the type of government that has been delivered and the 
circumstances under which this government has operated. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us go back and determine 
what has been the basic industry of Saskatchewan — agriculture. 
For generations and generations the basic industry has been 
agriculture. And then under the members of the opposition, but 
primarily under Premier Thatcher, we diversified into resources. 
 
Now members of the opposition followed along with what 
Premier Thatcher started in the construction of the potash mines 
and they reaped the benefit for a short period of time. They shut 
in our gas and told me, when I was growing up as a little boy, 
that we had no gas, and they bought gas from Alberta. 
 
While prices of oil were high, the members of the opposition 
purchased assets such as holes in the ground, interests in packing 
plants that already existed. They were on a campaign to buy up 
Saskatchewan at the same time the province of Alberta also 
benefitted from an oil boom. But what did the province of Alberta 
do? The province of Alberta diversified the economy of Alberta. 
 
When I grew up in this province, educated under the system that 
the members opposite set up, they taught me half-truths. They 
taught me we had no gas; they taught me that we were too small 
to manufacture. On the contrary, under this government in the 
past year 40 per cent of the new jobs created were in 
manufacturing. That is diversification, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
this province, because we cannot rely only on agriculture and 
digging up resources. We have to compete in a modern world that 
has valued added. 
 
The members opposite did not diversify this province, and this 
government took over an economy based on agriculture and the 
raw, crude productions of resources. And when this government 
was put into a position of having to diversify this province, the 
price of agricultural commodities and raw resources dropped off, 
and now they accuse this government of waste and 
mismanagement. Even under these circumstances, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the population of this province grew to exceed one 
million people. 
 
I can tell you what examples of waste of mismanagement will do, 
what a lack of diversification will do. I believe the records will 
show that the province of Saskatchewan had approximately 
941,000 people in 1931. After a socialist government in this 
province that went on for years and years and years — I was 
nearly 20 years old until we were rid of that the first time — 
under that kind of a system the population went down 
continuously. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, under this government the population has 
gone up to one million and exceeded that 

value. Is the population increasing today? Not very much. Why 
is it not increasing today? Because the members opposite did not 
diversify Saskatchewan when they had the opportunity to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The members opposite talk from both 
sides of their mouth. Yesterday they wanted to co-operate. Today 
they won’t even go to a government motion because the 
government has filed their document 11 minutes late. It’s not 
crucial to the people of Saskatchewan. It is only an example of 
the kind of co-operation the members opposite are agreeing to 
provide to get on with the duty of governing this province and 
providing for the people what is necessary. 
 
I can give you other examples. You talk about waste and 
mismanagement. We are where we are today primarily because 
the members opposite, when the interest rates went to 22 per cent, 
bought holes in the ground instead of lending money to farmers 
at a reasonable rate. I was there, Mr. Speaker. I told them not to 
do that, and they didn’t listen to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite also increased spending with 
fictitious figures. An example would be that when inflation was 
as high as 12 per cent, they increased spending by 17 per cent. 
And what did they do to cover their real deficit? — they now talk 
about a deficit — what did they do to cover it? They took 
dividends from Crown corporations out of profits that didn’t exist 
and they ran up the debt. And now the members opposite will 
come to you and say, oh no, that’s not true; there was no debt. 
 
Not only was there debt, but the debt was in the hands of bankers 
in New York, Zürich, and eastern Canada. Not one citizen of 
Saskatchewan had a direct opportunity to lend their own money 
to their own Crown corporations. This government has issued 
bonds so that the citizens of Saskatchewan could transfer that 
debt from foreign countries to their own province. 
 
Yes, there is still debt in those Crown corporations, but it all 
started because the members opposite took dividends to cover 
their deficit so that they had no deficit. And I know these things, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; I was there. And it’s because of these things 
that I left and came to join this party and this government to 
provide better government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — But the members opposite could get away 
with that kind of behaviour because the price of wheat was high, 
the price of oil was high, the price of potash was high, and they 
wallowed in the people’s money and squandered it. And now we 
have to pay the price in this province. Now when the prices are 
low, when we have drought, this government has to clean up the 
mess. 
 
They alleged Tory times are difficult times. Yes, they are because 
they’re always cleaning up a socialist mess. That’s why Tory 
times are difficult times. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1481 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It is very difficult to govern in this 
province, to clean up the mess that those members made. I told 
them not to make that mess. The Leader of the Opposition says 
he doesn’t recall me telling him. That proves he wasn’t listening, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is where the waste and 
mismanagement were, and now it comes upon us, the heavy 
burden of cleaning up that mess. 
 
I can tell you about the mess. Was there a Heritage Fund when 
this government was elected? Yes, in name only. Sixty per cent 
of that Heritage Fund was invested in holes in the ground; $87 
million of that, or 8 per cent, was in actual cash — 8 per cent of 
that billion dollars was in actual cash. 
 
Now members opposite gloated about a Heritage Fund, but 
would they lend one cent of it to a farmer so that those farmers 
would not go broke? Not one cent. Instead they advocated 
inheritance taxes. That was really good for farmers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They advocated and followed and taxed farmers with 
gift taxes so that if a farmer gave to his son or daughter a quarter 
of land, they taxed him for giving his land to his children, instead 
of lending him money so that the children could buy it at a 
reasonable interest rate. 
 
That was the attitude of that government. Those are examples of 
waste and mismanagement that we now have to live with in this 
province. And then on top of all that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
have the audacity to say in this motion, a reduction in spending 
on health, education, and employment programs. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a look at this year’s budget will 
tell you that the expenditure on health increased by 
approximately $130 million this year. The expenditure on 
education increased by approximately $52 million this year. Let 
us put that in perspective. That is the equivalent of 3 per cent 
sales tax just on the increase in health and education. Did we raise 
that sales tax 3 per cent? No, we did not. 
 
(1515) 
 
The problem is that the members opposite built a social system 
that cannot be maintained by ordinary taxes in ordinary times. It 
can only be maintained by either borrowing or extreme luck 
when you have high prices of oil and potash. The members 
opposite built for us a social system based on the best possible 
scenario that you could ever get in the economics of 
Saskatchewan, and in ordinary times it is unsustainable. That is 
the legacy left to us and this government to try to solve. 
 
This government spent . . . of government spending last year, 
health took up 32 per cent; education, 19 per cent; social services, 
8 per cent. Total expenditure on health, education, and social 
services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 69 per cent of the budget — 69 
per cent of the budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, once again I want to remind this Assembly of 
the nature of the motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the waste and financial 
mismanagement of the provincial government which has 
caused an alarming provincial deficit and ever increasing 
tax burden on Saskatchewan families and a reduction in 
spending on health, education, and employment programs. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question before the House, I would say 
to you, is this: is that when those members on that side of the 
House get up to speak, they have to refute the truth of that 
statement. Is there anything that is in that statement that is untrue 
in regards to this government’s waste and mismanagement, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? And I would submit to you, quite with all due 
respect, sir, that there is absolutely not one bit of untruth in that 
statement, unlike the statements of the members opposite who 
are filled with untruths, innuendoes, and half-truths. 
 
And we have just seen that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have just 
seen a graphic demonstration of that particular technique 
exhibited by the member from Melville who, Mr. Speaker, is an 
example of someone who is living in the 1970s, and who since 
1982, memory represents nothing but a black hole of 
forgetfulness into which evidently he and the other members 
have tumbled. 
 
They have been the government of this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for the last eight years. They, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
the ones who are responsible for the waste, for the 
mismanagement, for the deficit, and for those things which now 
lie on those shoulders. Did the NDP government of the ’70s 
commit sins of one sort or another? Yes, they did; some of them 
minor. I would submit, however, that you could put all the 
failures of the government between 1971 and 1982, put them 
together in a basket, and let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all 
those errors together would not match one week’s errors of this 
government in terms of waste and mismanagement of the 
taxpayers’ dollars of the people of this province — not one, not 
one week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen today an 
example of that kind of waste and mismanagement. And I want 
to, before I go into that example, outline for you the notion of 
what waste and mismanagement consists of. Now most people 
would think of waste as the expenditures of money in 
unnecessary projects. 
 
Well we have seen that from day one with this government, and 
we’re talking about the kind of waste of Supercart, a great 
economic initiative of this government. Supercart International, 
whose owner, Mr. Bob Silzer, finds himself in the same place 
that many other Conservatives find themselves, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is, before the courts of this country, before the 
courts of this country in regards to a case relating to fraud. Seems 
to be a general Tory habit to end up in court charged with fraud 
like Mr. Silzer and those who ran the Supercart   



 
May 30, 1989 

1482 
 

International scam. 
 
Or how about those Tories who ran the scam in regards to Joytec, 
who find themselves before the Security Exchange Commission 
in British Columbia under investigation of fraud, another 
economic initiative entered into joint partnership with the 
Government of Saskatchewan which turned out to be nothing 
more than a scam to drain the taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Another example of the kind of waste and mismanagement, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, another example of the kind of waste and 
mismanagement that these people are known for. Waste, Mr. 
Speaker. Waste of taxpayers’ dollars. And who pays for it? Who 
pays for it? The workers and the farmers and the small-business 
people of this province. They pay for it. They pay for that kind 
of waste. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question of mismanagement is an 
interesting concept. Mismanagement implies incompetence. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we only have to look at today’s proceedings 
to see that this government is the epitome of administrative 
incompetence when they can’t even put their own agenda 
forward to the Legislative Assembly of this province. We hear 
the members opposite snivel and whine, snivel and whine, due to 
the fact that they forgot to bring a motion here today to be debated 
— their own motion. 
 
Well that’s an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of incompetence. 
And I want to congratulate the member from Melfort for having 
the kind of courage to stand up and take responsibility. It’s that 
kind of courage that we on this side of the House wish that, for 
example, the member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, 
would have taken when he went out and did the hatchet job on 
the Provincial Auditor. At least the member from Melfort’s got 
the guts to stand up and admit it when he makes a mistake. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, mismanagement implies incompetence 
and an inability to administer programs and the affairs of the 
government. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this case 
mismanagement implies more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it implies 
more. 
 
In this case it implies corruption because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that government over there, as we have seen today with Gigatext, 
as we have seen today going back into their first term in regards 
to the sale of the SGI building; when we look at the kind of Joytec 
scandal; when we look at the Pioneer Trust scandal; when we 
look at the Principal scandal; when we look at the Supercart 
International scandal; when we look at the northern game farm 
scandal; when we look at the scandals that will be unfolded in 
this House in the days and weeks and months to come. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me tell you this. This mismanagement is 
not ordinary mismanagement. This is the kind of 
mismanagement that leads to the iron bars of jails clanging shut 
just as it has done on Tories across the country, and just as it does 
on Tories who have sat in this House, and I have to go no further 
than the to raise the 

name of Colin Thatcher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I predict that as events unfold in this legislature and 
in this province, that we will see that this government is engaged 
in a kind of mismanagement which is nothing more — nothing 
more or nothing less — than the deliberate picking of the pockets 
of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in order to line their own bank 
accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw in this province not very long ago an 
example of the kind of morality, the kind of morality, which 
permeates that side of the House; the kind of morality which 
would lead a cabinet minister, like the minister from Melville, 
like that minister from Melville, a cabinet minister who makes 
$78,000 a year, and what does he do? 
 
Does he take the money that is given to him by the Legislative 
Assembly to hire people in his community who are unemployed? 
No, Mr. Speaker. What does that member do? He pays a 
company called G-Luck Enterprises, a company which just 
happens to be owned by his wife, to provide secretarial services 
for him; and to also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only to provide 
secretarial services for him, but in fact to pay the mortgage on a 
building that he and his wife own, that happens to contain not 
only his law office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but also happens to 
contain his MLA office. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, all of which — all of which — all of which 
is legal. Mr. Speaker, all of which, within the very meaning of 
the law, is probably legal. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What are you doing with yours? You can 
talk to Rosemont on what you’re doing with your money. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And if the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 
wants to get up and talk about my office and wants to examine 
my affairs and my office, he’s certainly well to, because, Mr. 
Speaker, my office reverts back to the Crown after I become an 
MLA. Does his office, does his assets, and do the assets of the 
member of Melville revert back to the Crown? You bet your 
bottom dollar they don’t. You bet your bottom dollar that those 
taxpayer moneys goes to provide the security, the financial 
security for the member from Melville. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to look any further than another 
example — another cabinet minister who is doing the same thing 
— the member from Indian Head-Wolseley. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
bring those examples forward because it is that they are perfect 
examples of the kind of thinking which permeates that 
government. It’s the kind of thinking which leads people like 
Larry Kyle to fill . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve been 
listening with some interest to the previous speakers talk on and 
on about waste and mismanagement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can 
say with utmost certainty that when we came to office in 1982 
we found waste and mismanagement by the bucket load, second 
to none. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1483 
 

And I’m often very fond of talking about my own constituency. 
And if you want to talk about waste and mismanagement, let’s 
talk about the need for nursing homes which, in our budgets, have 
been built for people, provided services for people. We’ve 
increased spending on health, as the member from Melville 
pointed out. We built nursing homes. 
 
In the previous government’s budget there was an item there, 
whatever line it was, and it said $350,000 for liquor board stores. 
No nursing homes, but liquor board stores. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if you want to talk about the pot calling the kettle black, 
I think we have an example of it here today. 
 
Another example we saw earlier today was where we had a 
requirement to file a motion. So 11 minutes late, 11 minutes, not 
11 days, not 11 months, but 11 minutes — count them, count 
them, 11 minutes — 11 minutes past the time for filing, the 
motion is finally put in place. 
 
The members of the opposition were asked to provide a little bit 
of understanding and go along with it and we’d have been on our 
motions today. Instead they said, no, no, you were 11 minutes 
late; gotcha. I wonder how they’d feel, Mr. Speaker, if, on 
making a mortgage payment or meeting a commitment to a 
financial institution, they came in 11 minutes late and were told: 
sorry, we’re taking your house; we don’t want the payment, no, 
can’t do it; no, that isn’t one of the rules. Too bad, tough luck; 
we’re going to take your house. They would be the first to stand 
up and cry foul, foul, misunderstanding, horrible, terrible. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they only are conscientious when it 
suits them. Sanctimonious is too good a word to describe them. 
When it suits their purposes, they’re holier than thou. When it 
doesn’t, they say, oh, the rules say such and such and so and so, 
and we have to live by those rules. 
 
They don’t want to have Bills debated in this House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we see as in some debate here. And when you talk about 
mismanagement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have an opposition that 
states that it is going to be obstructionist and make this province 
ungovernable, is definitely — definitely — mismanagement 
instigated by members of the opposition, not by members of the 
government. 
 
When you take a look at the number of dollars that were spent 
when members of the opposition went out on strike, it’s unreal, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They took their bells and went home, so to 
speak. They said, no, we don’t want to talk about that Bill; we 
don’t want to see things managed properly; we don’t want to see 
orderly business carried on; we don’t want to stand in the 
Assembly and debate the Bill before them at that time. And they 
walked out, a wildcat strike. 
 
Well I could see it happening at some places. Some of their union 
bosses, I’m sure, applauded them, and they probably got a bonus 
for being innovative or something like that. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it certainly did not help this province, the fiscal 
management of this province 

to have members opposite wandering around out on the street, 
kowtowing to Barb Byers and the big union bosses when they 
should have been in this Assembly speaking on the Bill that was 
before them. 
 
So you talk about waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hundreds of 
thousands of dollars went down the tubes because members 
opposite took their bells and went home. And it’s another 
examples of what I heard one person refer to as “Roy’s Radicals.” 
Now if that’s exactly what they are . . . 
 
(1530) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. You’re making reference 
to other members in the House. You’re not to use members’ 
names. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Well, we could debate, Mr. Speaker, who Roy 
may be. It may be Roy . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. A member cannot do 
indirectly what he cannot do directly, so I’d ask the member to 
refrain. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize if I have 
offended you or this Assembly in any way. 
 
When we look at the rest of that motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
talk about, you know, the tax burden. Well let’s talk about 
protection for Saskatchewan people and tax benefits. Let’s take 
a look at what we’ve got. 
 
The province does not tax utilities. Taxpayers save about eleven 
and a half million on their electric bills and about twenty-one and 
a half million on their gas bills. That’s 33 million annually. I 
mean, that just shows we have a fair tax policy. 
 
And the poor tax, the NDP poor tax. The member from Melville 
referred to the inheritance tax as death taxes. Well the members 
opposite when they were in government charged sales tax on 
clothing — on clothing for needy people, for people who were 
on social assistance, for poor people, for widows, for the 
disadvantaged. They took money out of their pockets and said, 
well we’re going to do that and we don’t care about you. And 
then this big, bad Tory government came into place and did away 
with the poor tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of the removal of that tax, 
over $47 million a year stay right in taxpayers’ pockets — right 
there, out there where they can use it for whatever they want. But 
this government does not believe in taxing unfairly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; 47 million for people to spend on clothing or the 
necessities of life that would have otherwise gone into a tax 
regime, as it did under the NDP. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do care about low income 
families, low income people. We’ve got sales tax credits in place. 
When they buy something, on their income tax they get a tax 
credit for it, and we chose that method of doing it. We choose to 
be up front about it. We don’t just stand up and go on with 
rhetoric and ramble on about what wonderful people we are and 
put our arms around   



 
May 30, 1989 

1484 
 

someone and say, we care about you and it’s okay and we’re the 
defenders of the poor, and all the rest of it. 
 
I mean, just take a look. Premier Blakeney, how many years was 
he a member of this Legislative Assembly? How many years was 
he a premier? How many years did he represent Elphinstone? 
And Lord God, there’s still poor people there. Well he must have 
had some influence and tried to do something in his own riding. 
 
I mean, let’s look at my riding. Fred Dewhurst, a Speaker of this 
Assembly for years and years. Highway 35 was the laugh of the 
province. We had Fred Dewhurst, we had Neil Byers, and 35 
Highway was still the laugh of the province. Well finally, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you can drive up and down on that highway. 
Even a lowly back-bencher like myself can go to the Minister of 
Highways and say, sir, we really need a highway here; I mean, 
it’s a main thoroughfare and there’s a lot of traffic on it; maybe 
you’d do something about it. It comes through. 
 
So you would have thought that the Premier of the province — 
Mr. Blakeney at the time — would have been able to do 
something for those poor people in Elphinstone, unless maybe he 
did not want to or care to. 
 
So the NDP, as you see clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says one 
thing, puts their arm around people and said, yes, we’ll look after 
you, don’t worry about it; we’ll we make you feel good about 
being poor and taxed, and oh, we’re the defenders of the poor. 
They’re great at having public meetings and walking out on this 
Assembly and saying, aren’t we good guys; we’re fighting the 
good fight. But the truth is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s only 
rhetoric, because if they would have been serious, they would 
have not taxed people a health tax, education tax on clothing. 
They would have provided a tax regime that would have helped 
those people. 
 
Well let’s take a look at what else happens under the protection 
and tax benefits. If you look at benefits to farm families, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, farmers. Farm machinery and repair parts, tax 
savings — roughly $40 million. Livestock investment tax credit, 
not just to protect but to diversify the province — to diversify, as 
the member for Melville pointed out earlier. Livestock facilities 
tax credits to encourage people to invest — ordinary people, 
people like folks in this room whom members opposite say 
shouldn’t invest in anything and shouldn’t partake in anything 
and shouldn’t be part of the province’s economic movement. 
 
But you’ve sit back in here, collect our little salaries or whatever 
it is, and pontificate upon the problems of the day. But don’t take 
part in the real world. Don’t go out there and find out what’s 
happening. Stay under the dome and don’t learn anything. Don’t 
participate in business. That way you won’t have to comment on 
it, and you can plead ignorance when somebody questions you 
about it. 
 
If you’re looking for investment in the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you can find it quite easily. We’ve provided measures 
whereby people can buy shares and bonds in Crown corporations 
and other companies that governments have had interests in right 
here in the 

province. A very reasonably priced bond can be available 
through SaskTel, SaskPower. We’re talking about Sask gas, 
SaskEnergy. Members opposite say, oh, we don’t want to do that; 
that’s awful; that’s terrible. We don’t want people taking a direct 
role in how they run this company. We don’t want people 
understanding economics. We don’t want people being able to 
look after themselves, because if they could, then the NDP 
philosophy falls through, which is that big government is 
supposed to look after you right from cradle to grave. And I don’t 
agree with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do agree with my 
government’s moves to diversify the province. 
 
I think that when we looked in 1982 when we came to office . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is my privilege to participate in the debate this 
afternoon, a motion put forward by the member from Regina 
Centre which basically condemns the government for waste and 
financial mismanagement and has wrong priorities in governing 
this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in listening to the last speaker, I think he 
has proven the rumour, he has proven the rumour that the 
member from Kelvington and the member from Melville came 
about as a result of an archaeological find some years ago. Their 
thinking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their thinking is so far in the past, 
is so far in the past, Mr. Speaker, that you really can’t identify 
with it. You really can’t identify with it. 
 
The member from Kelvington takes pride in saying that they 
reduced taxes to individuals by $33 million. He didn’t indicate, 
however, that the Minister of Finance in this last budget, in his 
last budget, increased the taxes to individuals by $145 million — 
$145 million — and he takes pride in saying, oh well, we have 
forgiven taxes of 33 million. Thank you very much. We have just 
socked you another $112 million, and the people are supposed to 
be thankful. That kind of thinking, you know, is just foreign to 
the people in this province. 
 
The member from Kelvington said, well, big government, he 
doesn’t need big government to take care of him. Well no, I 
believe that, because the members on the opposite side make sure 
that they are well taken care of by this government. And the 
member there — the member there — is no exception. The 
member there is no exception. Just look at the Public Accounts; 
he is no exception. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion that is before us condemns this 
government. All you need to do is look at the records. What did 
they inherit in 1982? They inherited a government that had a 
surplus of 140 million. They had the fastest-growing economy — 
the fastest-growing economy — in Canada. We had more 
investment, private investment, coming into this province than 
they have had in any of the years since they have been 
government — any of the years. Private investment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the record of this government is atrocious. 
It is atrocious. And I think it is true, they   



 
May 30, 1989 

1485 
 

couldn’t even manage a candy store on the corner; they’d run in 
the hole. This government has built up a deficit of $4 billion — 
4 billion — just the deficit in their current account. And on that 
deficit they have paid out in interest alone over $1 billion — $1 
billion that would have not been necessary had they not been the 
government. 
 
And the Premier, the Premier of today, said some years ago, oh, 
this province has so much going for it that you can mismanage it 
and still come out ahead. Well I’ll tell you, this Premier has been 
noted for many, many sayings and many, many phrases, like: 
give her snoose, Bruce; or, we are going to bring those children 
back home again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t say whoa in a mud hole. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And don’t say whoa in a mud hole. That’s right. 
But I’ll tell the member from Regina South that you guys have 
been in a mud hole for so long that there’s no way that you can 
get yourself out of it. No way. 
 
What we need is new management. We need a government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that looks to the future, that is able to manage. 
And the group opposite have proven themselves that they are not 
able to do so. 
 
All I ask the members opposite is, look at the latest Provincial 
Auditor’s report. Look at the Provincial Auditor’s report. There 
are simply dozens, dozens of occasions where the Provincial 
Auditor says that there is misappropriation of funds. He can’t 
find the money. Dental equipment that has been sent over from 
the Department of Health to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, and we can’t find the money. 
 
Today in question period, a question directed to the member from 
Maple Creek, and she refers to a sum of money of a couple of 
hundred thousand as that “little bit of money.” A couple hundred 
thousand dollars to farmers mean a lot of money. And if that is 
the thinking of the members opposite, what’s a couple of hundred 
thousand dollars! Is it any wonder, is it any wonder, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we have run this province into the ground. We are 
now the most heaviest debt per capita of almost any province 
here in Canada, and our interest rates on the current debt alone is 
$380 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that wouldn’t be so bad if they hadn’t 
mismanaged the Crown corporations as well. Now the Crown 
corporations have a debt of about 8 or $9 billion. That debt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was less than $3 billion when they took over. 
We now have an accumulated deficit, an accumulated long-term 
debt of close to $13 billion, close to 13 billion. 
 
That $380 million that we’re now paying out in interest because 
of your waste and your mismanagement and your patronage 
would come in very handy for education. Maybe those 500 
students who were denied entry to university this last year, 
maybe they would have been able to go to university had you 
made more moneys available to university. 
 
As the president of the U of S said at convocation the other day, 
his big regret was that in two years’ time from now 850 students 
would not be graduating because they were 

denied access to university, not because they weren’t qualified, 
but because the government simply didn’t provide the funds 
necessary so that the university could admit them to their courses. 
 
That’s a sad indictment of this government. SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
Kelsey Institute alone, one out of every five students that applies 
at Kelsey is only accepted, not because they’re not qualified, but 
because there are no spaces available. This government simply 
has not made sufficient moneys available. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could understand that, if they were 
short of money. But it doesn’t make any difference. When this 
government wants to give money to their friends, there’s lots of 
money. Recently when Gormley became unemployed because of 
the federal election, what happened? The minister of 
privatization, not only does he hire him, but provides him with a 
nice office in Saskatoon, and what for? Purely for political 
purposes. Money for their friends, but no money for the ordinary 
folk. 
 
The Minister of Education has simply failed. He has failed in 
convincing his colleagues in cabinet to provide adequately, not 
only for elementary and secondary schools but also for SIAST 
and also for the universities. 
 
(1545) 
 
These students, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are no longer in 
Saskatchewan. They have now moved to other provinces. In 
February alone, 6,000 people left this province — 6,000 people 
— because there are no opportunities available in this province. 
Of that 6,000, I am told about 2,500 of those are young people. 
 
They are now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the province of Alberta, 
the province of British Columbia, or the province of Ontario. 
That’s where they are, and the vast majority of those young 
people will not be coming back. They will not be making their 
contribution here in Saskatchewan. They will be contributing in 
other provinces. 
 
Why? Because this government, this government has refused to 
make moneys available for employment. This government has 
refused to make adequate sums of money available for education 
so that these students could find an opportunity to improve 
themselves right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they stand condemned. They 
stand condemned in this province. And the people in this 
province will make a judgement whenever you call the election, 
and that judgement will find you people either outside of this 
House, or very few on this side of the House. The people simply 
will not stand for that. We have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, long 
line-ups, long waiting lists in Saskatoon hospitals. We have long 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’ve been listening to the opposition members   



 
May 30, 1989 

1486 
 

over the last hour and I can’t believe what I’m hearing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, concerning government waste and financial 
management. And I would have to say that I will take the 
comments of the Investment (Dealers) Association of Canada 
over the economic experts of the NDP opposition benches here. 
 
I’d just like to read what the shakers and movers of our financial 
community are saying about Saskatchewan. Mr. Kniewasser, in 
the Leader-Post of May 19: 
 

Canadian investors are being told Saskatchewan’s economy 
will have the highest growth rate of any province this year 
— provided crops receive a normal amount of rain. 
 

If we can get an average crop, we’ll have an eight and a half per 
cent increase in GNP (gross national product). 
 

The Investment Dealers Association of Canada on Thursday 
released a report predicting the province’s economy — 
given normal rains — will grow by 8.5 per cent in 1989. 
 
“And what we’re telling the world (Mr. Deputy Speaker), is 
that Saskatchewan has its affairs in order,” Andrew 
Kniewasser, president of the investment dealers association, 
told reporters. 
 

Saskatchewan has its affairs in order, coming from the 
Investment Dealers (Association) of Canada. 
 

Members of the association, serving as a watchdog and 
think-tank for the investment industry, account for 95 per 
cent of Canadian investments. 
 

And: 
 

Mr. Kniewasser said it conducted its own research before 
drawing the positive Saskatchewan scenario which is passed 
along to investors. 
 
If anybody had to be careful and prudent, you’re looking at 
them (he says). 
 
 

So here we are with the investment group from across Canada 
picking Saskatchewan as the leading province in our country for 
1989 in economic development. And here we are listening to the 
opposition about this terrible financial mismanagement that has 
evidently taken place over the last seven years according to the 
NDP. 
 
Another, on the economic outlet of Saskatchewan. The economic 
base in Saskatchewan has diversified steadily in recent years; 
potash, uranium, and oil and gas contribute significantly to the 
resource sector. Manufacturing and services account for an 
expanding share of economic activity. The manufacturing sector 
accounted for 40 per cent of all new jobs created last year, and 
the province has achieved tight control of its fiscal position, 
moving closer to a balanced budget. This was accomplished 
during two successive years of economic adversity. 
 
Now here’s the brains of our country speaking in their 

annual reports, and we have to listen to what we’ve been listening 
to for the last hour. So I wonder if the people of Saskatchewan 
can say who is right and who is wrong. 
 
I look back at 1982 when we were told there was a billion dollars 
in the Heritage Fund. How many dollars did we find in there, 
fellas? Not very much; not very much. All of it sunk into holes 
in the prairies, of potash mines which didn’t create one extra job 
for that 8 or $900 million that was spent. 
 
And they talk about the debt in our Crown corporations. I can 
remember when I was in charge of the Sask Power Corporation 
in 1982, and the holier-than-thou group over there saying that 
there was no debt. Do you know how much debt I found in 
SaskPower in 1982? One point two billion dollars — $1.2 billion 
and you have the audacity to say that there was no debt when you 
folks were in power. 
 
And we look at the SaskPower — and I can talk from experience 
— at the rates, the electrical rates and the gas rates that we had to 
experience in our manufacturing firm in the 1970s, going up by 
25 per cent every three months. And then what did they do? They 
started stripping the money from SaskPower to try and balance 
their budget. And here was the debt starting to build over in 
SaskPower. Massive increases in gas and power rates over that 
period of time. And we see about the tax burdens, the gas tax, a 
sliding tax that every time there was an increase in oil, the tax 
automatically went up. 
 
And what did we do? We took the gas tax off, ladies and 
gentlemen, so that we in the province of Saskatchewan, our 
residents are still not paying gas tax today. And I would presume 
that that NDP group across got back in, the sliding gas tax would 
be right back on again. And they are talking about excessive tax 
burden on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another item that we had a lot of problem was the estate tax. And 
that bothered us at our company in Yorkton, the private person 
that had a company. And we complained to you about the estate 
tax. So you sent out a group of people around the province, 
headed by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I believe, 
at the time. And we had a meeting in our plant with that particular 
group. 
 
And what was the response, Mr. Speaker, that we were given by 
that member that was in charge of that committee? He said, if 
you are worried about it why don’t you sell out to John Deere? 
That’s all they worried about. Sell out to John Deere. They had 
no worry about the plant staying in operation. They would have 
wiped us out with the estate tax that you folks had — $150,000 
exemption, if I remember correctly, on a multimillion operation. 
Big deal — $150,000. 
 
We’ve been listening for months and months about the reduction 
in health funding. How does 750,000 up to 1.4 billion move into 
the fact that it’s a cut in health care? You’ve got the wrong kind 
of calculators over there. I think maybe you should try something 
different, because it’s sure different from the school that I went 
to. The same with education — massive cuts in education. And 
where’s education gone? It’s doubled from what was   



 
May 30, 1989 

1487 
 

there in 1982 — doubled! And that’s still considered a cut? I just 
can’t believe it. 
 
We’ve been hearing, and the member from Saskatoon South just 
mentioned the massive 6,000 people that left the province in 
February of this year. I went back about 1971 — a little bit further 
back than that — 1968, there was 960,000 population in 
Saskatchewan; 1969, there was 958,000 people; in 1970 it 
dropped to 941,000 people. Then the NDP got elected, and it 
dropped to 914,000. That was a 12,000 drop in 1971-72. Then in 
1973 it dropped from 914,000 down to 904,000 — a 10,000 drop 
in 1973. And these are in the good years, 1970, the crops and so 
on. Then in 1974 we got down into the 800,000 level — 899,000. 
Then, credit to them, it started to come back. 
 
From 1977 when it was at 977,000 . . . 1982, pardon me, the year 
that we got elected, 977,000 people. By two years later, by 1984, 
we hit the million population mark. Never in Saskatchewan’s 
history were we over the million people. And it has climbed in 
1985 to 1,008,000; in 1986, to 1,010,000; 1987, to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
there’s one comment that I might make in summary on this 
question, I think it is almost highly irrelevant, whatever it is that 
the government members might have to say and whatever it is 
that the opposition members might have to say about waste and 
mismanagement and how it affects the people of Saskatchewan. 
The bottom line is how it affects people outside Saskatchewan 
and what they might have to say about Saskatchewan. Not 
investment dealers looking at the future, being highly influenced 
by their Tory connections, but the actual fact of the matter . . . 
and the fact of the matter is Saskatchewan’s credit rating. We 
have seen Saskatchewan’s credit rating drop seven times in seven 
years. That’s the fact of the matter. 
 
And when Saskatchewan people go outside of Saskatchewan to 
borrow money, the investment dealers and the bond raters look 
at Saskatchewan and say, look at the waste and mismanagement, 
look at the deficit. You’re going to have to pay more to borrow 
money now than you ever did in the past. That’s the fact of the 
matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — That is the thing that needs to concern us 
when we talk about waste and mismanagement and something 
that the government members need to begin to own up to. Again, 
whatever we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend an Act to incorporate St. 
Margaret’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Biggar) 

 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clause 2 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I know it’s not considered legitimate to ask 
detailed questions; that’s done in the committee. We would 
however appreciate from the member from Biggar a general 
explanation as to what this Bill is designed to accomplish. So we 
ask the general question, not expecting enormous detail, Mr. 
Member. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Baker: — Mr. Chairman, basically the Bill is designed to 
change the name of the hospital at Biggar. It’s been in process 
for about three years now, and we finally got it to the committee, 
and I see nothing wrong with the name change. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend an Act to incorporate St. 
Margaret’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Biggar 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 3 — Crisis in Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my comments today, I’m going to be moving a 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its arbitrary, unilateral, and harmful 
cut-backs and changes to health care services, which it has 
imposed without public consultation, and which are causing 
a crisis in Saskatchewan’s health care system; and further 
condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its failure 
to develop and pursue a long-term strategic plan for the 
positive improvement of Saskatchewan health care services. 
 

That will be the motion that I will be moving, Mr. Speaker, at the 
end of my comments, which will be seconded by the member 
from Regina North. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at what has happened in the 
past with respect to health care, this province has been a leader 
in health care for decades. But in the recent years we have seen a 
series of cut-backs and underfunding in the health care area by 
the PC government that has resulted in a rapid deterioration of   



 
May 30, 1989 

1488 
 

our health care system. This is evidenced by long hospital 
waiting lists, by understaffing in our hospitals, cut-backs to 
prescription drug plan and the dental plan, for example. And 
these cut-backs have been made, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government has no real commitment to health care — no real 
commitment whatsoever. And they do not believe in socialized 
medicine. They do not believe in socialized medicine. 
 
What we’ve witnessed in the Legislative Assembly since this 
session began is a right-wing agenda of privatization of all sorts 
of services, including our public utilities, notwithstanding the 
government promised not to privatize public utilities. 
 
Privatization is foremost in their minds. It is their paramount 
objective in this Legislative Assembly, and because of this 
ideological bent, because of the fact that they’re wild eyed about 
privatization, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the way they feel, this is 
the reason why they are not committed to socialized medicine. 
They are not committed to medicare because it does not fit into 
their philosophy of privatization. 
 
So what has been their response to a crisis in the health care 
system. What has been their response to the fact that we are 
running short-staffed in our hospitals? Well we saw a number of 
cut-backs in ’87-88; for example, a cut-back of some $18 million. 
 
We have seen planners in the Department of Health leave. I’m 
not sure whether they have a planner in the Department of Health 
any more, but I have been advised that many of the planners, 
long-term strategic planners, have left the Department of Health 
as a result of this government’s lack of priority to good health 
care . . . lack of commitment, rather, to good health care, lack of 
commitment to a long-term, strategic health care plan in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They have absolutely no vision 
whatsoever when it comes to health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The development of health care has had a long and volatile 
history, I might say, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes it’s been very 
exciting and very emotional. For 20 years after the CCF came to 
power in 1949 this economically poor, sparsely populated and 
isolated prairie province led the way for the whole continent in 
its development of medical services. The establishment of our 
medicare system was accomplished despite great odds, despite 
great odds, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan people can be proud 
of that system. 
 
We should remind ourselves of some of those accomplishments 
today. The first union hospital district legislation, 1916; the first 
municipal doctor legislation, 1919; the first free tuberculosis 
treatment, 1929; the first province-wide hospital plan introduced 
by Tommy Douglas and the CCF, 1947; the first province-wide 
medicare plan implemented by Woodrow Lloyd and the New 
Democratic Party, 1962. 
 
And finally, during the 1970s, Allan Blakeney and his New 
Democratic Party government expanded Saskatchewan’s 
medicare system with a number of new programs, including the 
school-based children’s dental 

program, the prescription drug plan, Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living, and the Saskatchewan hearing aid plan. That 
is our history in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The introduction of medical care insurance 
meant for patients that all necessary physician services were 
available to them regardless of their ability to pay. And for 
doctors it meant treatment decisions could be made on purely 
medical grounds, Mr. Speaker. So medicare, in effect, removed 
financial barriers to those seeking services and to those providing 
the services as well. And this was done with enormous effort and 
dedication on behalf of thousands of people in the province. 
 
But I must say that the results were enormously gratifying, Mr. 
Speaker. This province pioneered a system which became a 
model for the rest of North America. But the events of the last 
few years have resulted in a serious deterioration of medical care 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and this has largely been due to 
the fact that there has been no long-term planning by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and ad hoc cut-backs, arbitrary 
cut-backs to health care, and underfunding of our hospital 
system. 
 
There has been absolutely no vision on the part of the PC 
government with respect to health care in the province, no 
long-term strategic planning, and no consultation with the public. 
When the PC government made cut-backs to the dental plan, 
there was no consultation with the public, no consultation with 
the dental workers. There was no consultation about cut-backs to 
the prescription drug plan. There was no consultation with 
respect to cut-backs in public health. There was no consultation 
when they decided to launch on a massive integration of hospitals 
in Saskatoon. 
 
That’s this government’s record, Mr. Speaker — cut-backs and 
underfunding with no consultation with the public and no 
development of a long-term, strategic plan in the area of health. 
 
And why has the government done this? Why has the government 
responded to the problems that they’re having in health care as a 
result of their underfunding? Why have they responded in this 
fashion? Because this government, through its mismanagement 
and its waste and its patronage, has created a huge deficit in this 
province that is unprecedented in the history of this province — 
a deficit that’s in the vicinity of $3.85 billion, I believe, at this 
time in our history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’ve created it through mismanaged government funds 
and through waste and patronage. And now they’re saying to the 
people, because of our waste and mismanagement, you have to 
pay. You have to pay through increased taxes, and I’m referring 
to the flat tax, and I’m referring to this rebate on the gas tax that 
makes it difficult for many people to even claim the rebate. I’m 
referring to increased taxes throughout the entire system of many, 
many fees and charges that are levied on people, increases in 
taxes that are unprecedented in the history of this province. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1489 
 

And how else do people have to pay, Mr. Speaker? They have to 
pay through cut-backs in their social programs and cut-backs in 
their health care programs. And we witnessed the member from 
Melville earlier today talking about how the government couldn’t 
afford the social programs that were developed by the New 
Democratic government. The government couldn’t afford all the 
social programs and the health care and the education. 
 
We witnessed the member from Melville saying that while this 
government has $9 million for a birthday party that nobody 
wants, and this government has tens of millions for their friend 
Peter Pocklington and for their friend Weyerhaeuser, and they’ve 
got money to blow $4 million on some sort of questionable 
enterprise with Gigatext that we heard about today, Mr. Speaker, 
but the member from Melville and his cohorts on that side of the 
House continue to say there’s no money for health and all our 
social programs. 
 
We know where their priorities are, Mr. Speaker. We know 
where their priorities are. Their priorities are with big business 
and their Tory friends and not with the people. And now after 
their waste and mismanagement, after their give-aways to big 
corporations and Tory friends, they’re coming back to the people 
and they’re saying: we’ve got to pay off this deficit; we’re going 
to increase your taxes; we can’t afford health care; costs are 
spiralling out of control so we’re going to cut back in the health 
care area. That’s where their priorities lie. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that their priorities are all mixed up. 
 
(1615) 
 
At the same time that they levied a gas tax on the citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan, they also levied a flat tax. They cut 
back on prescription drugs. They cut back on the school-based 
children’s dental plan, and where we used to have 338 dental 
clinics in rural Saskatchewan, we have some 34 or 35 or . . . I’m 
not sure exactly how much it is; it may be slightly larger than 
that, but nevertheless substantially less than what was there 
before, Mr. Speaker — substantially less. 
 
And I understand as well that a number of these clinics are 
closing down, that they’ve created in the past, and that they claim 
are a testimony to their great policy, that a number of these clinics 
have actually shut down in the last . . . and I think there’s a list of 
four or five that I have that have disappeared and no longer exist. 
 
The cut-backs on dental plan, to the school-based children’s 
dental plan, the destruction of that school-based children’s dental 
plan has cost rural residents a substantial amount of money, Mr. 
Speaker — substantial amounts of money. And I’ve heard about 
it across the province as I travelled throughout the province in 
the last few months, about parents having to take their children 
into the city or into a town where there is a dentist. They have 
paid for gas; they have paid for meals; in some cases they have 
paid for overnight because they needed to be there for more than 
one day for the dental care for their children. And this has cost 
them money. 
 
So this is an example of how the government is privatizing health 
care and transferring the cost to individual 

citizens, Mr. Speaker, which I will deal with in more detail a little 
later. As a result of these cut-backs to the dental plan, we saw 
400 dental workers, most of whom were women, Mr. Speaker, 
fired by this government and who remained unemployed for a 
long period of time. 
 
Many of them had to seek retraining. Many of them left the 
province and were a part of those statistics of massive 
out-migration of young people from this province which resulted 
as a result of Tory policies. Many of those dental workers fall 
into those statistics, Mr. Speaker. They were forced to leave their 
homes and they were forced to leave this province because this 
government wanted to privatize the school-based dental plan, and 
400 dental workers meant nothing to them in their privatization 
agenda and their privatization mania. 
 
But meanwhile, while they’re firing some 400 dental workers, 
they have $9 million for a birthday party in what may very well 
be an election year. And they’ve got high-priced salaries for their 
former PC candidates and MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we witness cut-backs to the prescription drug plan. 
Prior to the cut-backs, people paid a dispensing fee and that was 
it. And then we saw a situation where they were having to pay 
100 per cent up-front costs and apply for a rebate. Sometimes it 
took months to get these rebates. Some people were spending 
hundreds and hundreds of dollars every month if they were on 
multiple medication or if a number of their family members had 
drugs to take. We saw hardship created, hardship suffered by 
Saskatchewan men, women, and children as a result of their cruel 
and heartless cut-backs. 
 
And the government paid the political price for that. There was a 
hue and cry across this province because of the way that they 
unilaterally and arbitrarily cut back on the prescription drug plan 
without any consultation with the people who would be affected 
most by that, the sick and the elderly — without any consultation. 
Unilaterally slashing a first-class program. 
 
And then in order to rectify . . . They didn’t do this — and no one 
fools themselves into thinking this, Mr. Speaker — out of good 
will for people who were suffering. They did it to protect their 
political hide. They came out with a plastic card. And now 
they’re trying to claim that somehow this is a great innovation, 
and oh, they’re really in the forefront in health care. But they 
neglect to say, Mr. Speaker, that before they put in their 
cut-backs, this plastic card was not necessary. 
 
And what about the people who are still on the hospital waiting 
lists? The last time I had an opportunity to count, it was almost 
9,000 people, the last time I looked. And the government has no 
money for people on long hospital waiting lists or for people who 
need medication, but they have lots of money for Peter 
Pocklington and their big-business friends. 
 
And we witness cut-backs to public health nurses where the 
government decided to twin health care regions. And as a result 
we find public health nurses looking after a region that’s twice as 
large in some cases, with many, many more clients. And we find 
our public health nurse   



 
May 30, 1989 

1490 
 

supervisors being involved solely in administration as a result of 
this ridiculous move on behalf of the PC government, involved 
solely in administration instead of working with the clients and 
working with the people, which is what they were trained to do, 
Mr. Speaker. And that all as a result of PC government cut-backs 
that were made in an arbitrary fashion and as a result of the total 
lack of any vision or long-term strategic plan on the part of the 
PC government in the health care area. 
 
And we see mental health getting no government support, Mr. 
Speaker, virtually no government support. People suffering from 
mental health might very easily be characterized in this province 
as the forgotten constituents. We see in the area of mental health 
insufficient services, and when there is a crisis situation, many 
times people suffering from mental illness cannot get urgent 
needed prompt attention as a result. 
 
We see gaps in services such as long-term supervised care, and 
crisis intervention is just not properly covered by the PC 
government. We see a lack of continuity of care. There’s no 
continuum of care in the area of mental health. Families are 
frustrated. There’s an array of systems, and they simply don’t 
know how to access many of these systems that are there. We see 
inadequate number of trained staff in this area. We see 
underfunding in this area. Absolutely no creativity on the part of 
the government to solve the problems that exist in the area of 
mental health in Saskatchewan, and no vision on the part of the 
government. 
 
Home care in this province has been grossly underfunded. Home 
care which is real preventative health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan, for people needing long-term care, and for our 
elderly people, our seniors. Home care which can help people 
who are physically disabled and people who are elderly to remain 
independent and to stay in their homes where they want to be, 
has been grossly underfunded by this government — grossly 
underfunded. This entire area needs vision and revamping and 
proper funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One does not want to do this simply because of the costs that you 
save, but the fact of the matter is that if we can keep someone in 
their home and out of the long-term care facility, we save 
considerable funding. But we want to do it first of all because of 
the fact that it preserves human dignity and self-esteem and 
self-respect for our people who are physically disabled and our 
people who are elderly. That’s why we want to do it. And if we 
save costs as a result, that’s even better. And I predict, Mr. 
Speaker, that we will save costs in that area when a New 
Democratic government forms this government and we 
implement proper funding for home care. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan is met with appalling health care 
conditions. They’re deplorable, Mr. Speaker. There’s low levels 
of education and high levels of unemployment and poverty. We 
have overcrowded, substandard, unserviced housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan residents have a poor health status, Mr. 
Speaker. They have high mortality, high infant mortality and 
morbidity rates. There are high rates of suicide and homicide in 
northern Saskatchewan, poor 

nutrition. Services for infants and elderly care continue to lag far 
behind that available to the general provincial population, Mr. 
Speaker. Many communities in northern Saskatchewan don’t 
have sewer and water today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These needs must be addressed. They are urgent and they require 
immediate urgent attention. I urge the government to do 
something about the problems that northern Saskatchewan 
residents are facing. 
 
But the current system fails our northern Saskatchewan residents 
and there’s nothing forthcoming from the government except for 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. They have lots of money for George Hill 
and Paul Schoenhals, but nothing for northern residents. 
 
Government underfunding and cut-backs, Mr. Speaker, have 
affected disadvantaged groups the most. And this was pointed 
out by the public health association in a brief that was done some 
time back where they stated that a number of disadvantaged 
groups such as the elderly, the people who are sick and require 
drugs, people who are mentally ill, Northerners, young children, 
are being affected by government cut-backs, by the government 
hacking and slashing away at health care and social programs. 
 
And why have they engaged in this form of tactic? Well they did 
it deliberately, Mr. Speaker, to make the people pay — those who 
can least afford it — pay for their mismanagement, their waste, 
their patronage, and their deficit. And now they try to sell the line 
that costs are spiralling out of control. They try to say that costs 
are spiralling out of control, but we know that’s not true. In fact, 
the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association has said as much in 
their brief to the health care commission. And I might just quote 
from the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association brief, Mr. 
Speaker, which says: 
 

 In terms of current dollars and taking into account the 
consumer price index, Saskatchewan Health’s real 
expenditures over the past decade reflects a growth rate of 
approximately 4.5 per cent compounded annually. While it 
is not a rate to be ignored, it is not a rate that can accurately 
be described as out of control. 
 

I would like to add that the association goes on to say: 
 

 To serve the people of this province, any examination of 
the health care system must not be conducted with the 
intention of reducing costs or expenditures. It must be done 
with a view to improving the effectiveness of health care 
programs for Saskatchewan residents. Our priority setting is 
best done through consensus seeking at the grass roots level. 
 

Well the government has hardly done that, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has hardly sought consensus at the grass roots level. 
Instead, while their own health care commission is meeting, they 
have engaged on a massive integration of hospitals in Saskatoon 
without any consultation even with their own commission on the 
issue, not to mention many of the doctors in Saskatoon.   



 
May 30, 1989 

1491 
 

And as far as I’m aware, not even the mayor in Saskatoon knew 
it was going to take place. There has been no consensus with the 
public on all of their major initiatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the government will say, well we’ve put in a massive 
injection of government funding into health care in this last 
budget. That’s what the government might argue. But, Mr. 
Speaker, if you take a close look at their statistics and remove the 
supplements that were in there from last year, if you take a look 
at that, you take a look at the money being paid to the property 
management corporation, and you take a close look at their 
statistics, you will see that the increase is substantially less than 
what they said. And the Minister of Health himself told the press 
that most of it was going to be taken up in back pay and salaries 
for health care professionals. 
 
So it hardly becomes him at this point to suggest that they have 
remedied the wrong that they wreaked on the province of 
Saskatchewan and the men, women, and children of this province 
as a result of their heartless and cruel cut-backs in earlier years, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact the increase in this year doesn’t even address 
the accumulation of cut-backs and lack of funding in the previous 
seven years, Mr. Speaker. They have not made up for the damage 
that they have done. 
 
So let’s just summarize some of the implications of this arbitrary 
and unilateral approach to health care with respect to their 
cut-backs and underfunding that has been displayed by the 
present government. There have been limitations on service. One 
of the most obvious effects of government cut-backs has been the 
limitation of health care services under the auspices of cost 
containment. 
 
(1630) 
 
They’ve pursued strategies, PC strategies, that have resulted in 
manpower shortages throughout provincial health services. The 
direct effect has been increased work-loads for remaining staff, 
inconsistency in staff levels throughout the province, and 
expanded waiting lists — waiting lists that are unprecedented in 
the history of this province, and totally unacceptable. Cut-backs 
to health care agencies have forced them to reduce manpower, 
shorten hours of operation, and centralize operations, and create 
or increase user fees. 
 
Lack of rural services, facilities and medical staff are continuing 
problems that are expressed by rural residents, Mr. Speaker. 
Rural communities have been hurt by restrictions on dental care 
by centralization of hospital services away from rural centres and 
by program reductions in rural areas. 
 
For example, shortages and geographical maldistribution of 
physicians and allied health professionals has created a serious 
problem in rural Saskatchewan. There is an immediate need for 
rehabilitation therapists, speech therapists, respiratory 
technologists, medical social workers and critical care nurses, 
Mr. Speaker, in our rural communities. 
 
Waiting lists are expanding for hospital admissions, surgery, 
special care homes, home care, and mental 

health care. Preventative health care services have suffered. The 
school-based children’s dental plan, which was a model of 
preventative health care, has been destroyed — privatized, I 
might say, Mr. Speaker. Its elimination has meant a reduction in 
the utilization of the plan on the part of rural residents in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s been a reduction in the number of public health nurses. 
The twinning of the health care regions that I was describing 
earlier is another example of preventative health care services 
suffering in Saskatchewan, because public health nurses are your 
front-line workers in the area of preventative health, and any 
cut-backs to public health and public health nursing staff is a 
cut-back to preventative health care, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
serious shortage of qualified public health inspectors across the 
province, and this ultimately means, Mr. Speaker, increased risk 
and compromised public safety. 
 
And let’s just compare how this . . . let’s just take a look at how 
this compares to other provinces, Mr. Speaker. I think that that 
might be in order. And the most recent statistics that I have from 
StatsCanada shows as follows that Saskatchewan’s commitment 
to a high quality health care system has been slipping in recent 
years. 
 
Saskatchewan ranks seventh in Canada in total hospital 
expenditure per patient-day. Saskatchewan ranks seventh in 
Canada in paid nursing hours in hospitals per patient-day. There 
are close to 9,000 people on our hospital waiting lists, and this 
problem is not caused by doctors keeping our people in hospitals 
for unreasonably long periods of time, because Saskatchewan 
ranks ninth in average length of hospital stay. Saskatchewan 
ranks ninth in Canada in total hospital operating expenditure per 
capita. And total hospital operating expenditure per approved 
bed, Saskatchewan ranks tenth. 
 
And I believe that those figures demonstrate very clearly that the 
current provincial government has not made health care a 
priority, Mr. Speaker. It’s not made health care a priority. 
 
So rather than developing a long-term, strategic plan and making 
health care a priority, as the residents of this province have 
repeatedly told the government, we see the government 
transferring costs to the people, because that’s what cut-backs 
and underfunding mean, Mr. Speaker. They mean a transfer of 
costs to the people. Because, in effect, the ultimate goal of the 
cost-cutting agenda of this government is to reduce its funding 
commitment to health care because health care is not their 
priority. 
 
Individuals, families, and communities will have to increase their 
contributions, so costs are effectively shifted by creating or 
increasing user fees, by withdrawing service commitments in 
areas of high demand and need, and by not funding health care 
agencies for the cost increases of inflation and growing 
case-loads. Some examples of this are in the prescription drug 
plan, for example. This has serious long-term health care 
implications if people cannot afford what is now a 20 per cent 
deductible of 125, plus 20 per cent of the costs. 
 
We see studies from other provinces that show that   



 
May 30, 1989 

1492 
 

seniors and the elderly people, because of cut-backs that have 
taken place in those provinces, seniors and elderly people begin 
to ration their prescription medication, contrary to their doctor’s 
orders. Well this can only have serious health care implications 
for the people of Saskatchewan and it will mean further costs, 
more expenditures in the future. It is better to spend a few dollars 
on that prescription medication today than to pay for huge 
hospital bills in the future. But of course that may be too much 
for this government to understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other examples of the transfer of costs to the people are fees to 
home care clients . . . were increased by 60 per cent. There’s a 
monthly charge to residents of special care homes — increased 
some 14 per cent. Local ambulance boards have had to increase 
their fees in order to meet increased levels of service. Community 
fund raising is now everyone’s business as they strive to maintain 
programs and facilities within their regions. 
 
And we find people who have been providing social programs 
across this province that may not be directly health care, that may 
be not be under the heading of health care, finding it very difficult 
to raise money for their particular social program such as the 
Family Service Bureau in Saskatchewan . . . in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because what has happened is government underfunding has 
forced hospitals and health care organizations to raise their 
money through lottery and bingos and fund raising in that fashion 
and, as a result, money is being spent there. And these other 
programs are suffering because they don’t have access to this 
funding any longer because it is being used for health care 
purposes when the government should be taking its responsibility 
and properly funding those health care programs. The 
government should be taking that responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what does this do when the government transfers costs? What 
does that mean when they transfer costs to individual citizens? 
Well in effect what this means is that the government is trying to 
tell us that they cannot afford health care. And we heard the 
member from Melville say as much today in the Legislative 
Assembly, that we couldn’t afford social programs, that the New 
Democrats had created programs that could not be supported. 
 
What they are telling us is that in effect it is no longer 
economically viable for this country to support a universal, 
accessible, comprehensive public care system, and that we can 
no longer afford a universal system, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
the government is trying to tell us. And I say that’s hog-wash. 
 
The government is trying to tell us that we must accept cut-backs; 
that funding does not keep pace with inflation, so in effect 
privatization of health care should occur which would, as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, result in a two-tiered system of health care 
where people who could afford to pay, would receive better 
health care than those who could not afford to pay. That’s what 
such privatization does. 
 
And the government will say, oh no, we’re not going to 

privatize. And I say, Mr. Speaker, don’t you believe them for one 
minute. Don’t you believe them for one minute. They said they 
would not privatize public utilities and what have we witnessed 
in the last few weeks but a major initiative on the part of the PC 
government to privatize SaskEnergy, the most effective . . . that 
component of SaskPower that makes the money, Mr. Speaker, to 
in effect privatize one of our major public utilities. That’s what 
this government is doing, even though they said no, they’d never 
do it. 
 
So don’t you believe them for one minute, Mr. Speaker, when 
they say no, they’re not going to privatize . . . do more 
privatization I should say, because they’ve already started in the 
area of health care. You can bet that if they ever were so lucky as 
to form government yet another time, which I don’t believe for 
one moment they will, that that would be one of the first things 
on their agenda, as well as every other public corporation that is 
making money and serving the public in this province — serving 
the public by paying for health and education and social 
programs. 
 
And so I have described some of the inequities that exist as a 
result of government underfunding — inequities to communities 
in northern Saskatchewan, inequities for the elderly, for the 
mentally ill, for rural communities and rural families — 
inequities created as a result of long hospital waiting lists. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that is as a result of this government’s policy. 
 
But there’s one other area I want to touch on, and that’s the 
erosion of health professions that is occurring in this province, a 
terrible erosion of the health care professions, because this 
government for the last seven years has chose to pay for their 
deficit by cutting and underfunding health care. 
 
No other group, in addition to the specific client groups in health 
care, have been more affected than health professionals. Health 
professionals have been demoralized by the lack of consultation 
by the provincial government and through cut-backs in the health 
care system. For example, quality, experienced health 
professionals are leaving this province because of the poor 
climate for constructive health care planning. And I’m just going 
to refer you to an article dated February 24 in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix which quotes Dean Macdonald as referring to this 
specific problem. 
 

Macdonald says the school’s 8.2 million research budget 
should be doubled if the university is to compete with other 
provinces. 
 
Macdonald doesn’t buy the government’s view that there’s 
no more money available. He says it’s a matter of priorities. 
For instance, why don’t they put at least part of the nine 
million allocated for Saskatchewan’s 85th Anniversary into 
an endowment fund for medical research. 
 

And the article goes on to repeat the similar comments: 
 

Cut-backs in the health care system are affecting the Faculty 
of Medicine at the university and resulting in a shortage of 
specialists and health   



 
May 30, 1989 

1493 
 

care professionals across this province. 
 

Another article, February 17 in the Leader-Post: 
 

The delivery of specialist health-care services in Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan has been put in “severe jeopardy” 
by a “critical shortage” of manpower . . . 
 
“The delivery of speciality health care in southern 
Saskatchewan is like a card house ready to come tumbling 
down with the next prairie breeze,” . . . 
 
There are shortages of specialists in heart disease, internal 
medicine, infectious diseases, respiratory disorders, blood 
diseases and many others . . . 
 

And the article goes on to say: 
 

. . . there is a nationwide average of one cardiologist per 
37,000 population, but there are only five (cardiologists) in 
Regina . . . 
 
There are two respiratory specialists in Regina serving a 
population of 500,000 south of Davidson . . . 
 
. . . the national average is one (respiratory specialist) per 
86,000 population. 
 
Regina has half as many internists as Saskatoon and (about) 
one-third the national average on a per capita basis . . . 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to look just at the new Wascana 
Rehab Centre. A newspaper article, February 19: 
 

Wascana Rehabilitation Centre faces serious staff shortages 
in its new multimillion dollar facility, says executive 
director, Gren Smith-Windsor. 
 

Another example of cut-backs. And I could go on and on reciting 
the examples of cut-backs in this province and underfunding that 
have resulted in a specialist shortage in Saskatchewan. These 
unilateral and harmful cut-backs and changes illustrate a dismal 
record for this government, a dismal record. And it is going to 
take a very substantial commitment, Mr. Speaker, by the 
government in order to attempt to repair the problems that have 
been created through seven long years of neglect by the PC 
government — seven long years of neglect. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am simply going to wind up my comments at this 
point by referring to the fact that the health care commission has 
not handed in its report yet, the fact that the Health minister 
announced a major initiative to specialize services in Saskatoon 
hospitals and apparently said it was a fait accompli without any 
consultation. And I want to reiterate that, because here’s a 
government that at the very same time is drafting a budget where 
they talk about community involvement, and at the same time 
they are precluding the community, precluding their own health 
care commission from any input into this massive 

initiative in Saskatoon. 
 
So it’s clear you can’t believe what this government says; you 
simply can’t believe it. If this government were truly serious 
about future directions, they would develop and pursue a 
far-sighted master plan for health care in Saskatchewan. A 
province-wide strategic plan for all levels of the health care 
system is required — all levels of the health care system. It’s not 
good enough to just pay lip-service to consultation and 
community involvement. It’s not good enough to pay lip-service 
to preventative health care, and cut and slash and underfund 
public health nurses and home care and many of the other 
preventive health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the conclusion of my remarks I wish to move the 
motion that I read earlier. I don’t believe I have to read it again 
at this point. It’s seconded by the member from Regina North. 
I’d like to so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleague, the 
member for Regina Lakeview, has outlined what this 
government’s health cuts have meant to, for instance, the Regina 
mental health association, to the home care system throughout 
the province, to public health nurses, to public health inspectors, 
the cuts and changes in the prescription drug plan and how they 
have hurt families. My colleague has outlined how the firing of 
400 dental plan employees has gutted what was once the finest 
children’s dental program in the world. My colleague has also 
spoken about the very lengthy hospital waiting list that is a result 
of the actions of this government, the lack of long-term health 
care planning, the lack of movement towards a strategic plan for 
Saskatchewan’s health care. 
 
I want to add to that, Mr. Speaker, some points that my colleague 
did not raise, and that is that there’s been much talk about 
deterrent fees. There’s been much talk about there being a 
two-class health care system. And I submit to you, sir, that we 
already have a two-class health care system right now in this 
province. These government members opposite have slipped it in 
through the back door, slipped in deterrent fees. 
 
And I want to explain how it happened for the handful of people, 
particularly on the government benches, who have not used our 
hospital system in the last half-dozen years. The situation with 
regard to staffing — I’m referring to nursing in hospitals — is 
critical. There are wings of 30 patients that have at times one 
nurse only responsible for entire wings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact, I was just talking last week with a constituent of mine 
who had to hire a private-duty nurse to be with this constituent’s 
wife while she was in the hospital convalescing because the 
nurses that are in the hospital are so overworked they are run 
ragged, literally run off their feet. If they have one patient in a 
ward that’s in trouble, all of the other patients will get ignored 
until that trouble is taken care of. And as I’m sure you can 
appreciate, it is not always possible for a nurse to leave one 
patient simply because another one rings the bell or lights up the 
light, calls for help, calls for assistance. 
 
  



 
May 30, 1989 

1494 
 

So increasingly we have got those with money, people with 
money, paying for private-duty nursing. Those without money, 
of course, don’t have that option. People without money are 
required to accept, in Saskatchewan’s case now, the lowest 
common denominator, in other words, whatever nurse is 
available, is on staff. They simply have to wait, and at times 
patients are waiting in excess of an hour. It is unusual to wait that 
long, but it is certainly not unheard of. I’ve had some firsthand 
experience with waits — waits, plural — in excess of an hour, 
simply for a nurse to be able to come and help a patient with some 
much needed care. 
 
So the question we have to ask with this two-class health care 
system is: are you wealthy? If you are, it’s no major burden as 
long as you’re wealthy. But what if you’re a welfare recipient, 
Mr. Speaker, or what if you’re employed, but at a low-paying 
job? What happens is clearly we have a two-class health care 
system. There’s no up-front deterrent fee when you go into the 
hospital, but it’s certainly there, if you expect to get reasonable 
nursing care, in far too many instances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hospital waiting lists are incredibly long, and then 
when you get in there, hospitals are understaffed. It’s a tragedy. 
Nurses are leaving the province — understandably so. They don’t 
like working at a job that is so desperate, at a job that they clearly 
cannot fulfil their duties as they would like to. I am sure that 
nurses, as people in every walk of life, want to provide the best 
possible service they can. But you can’t make a silk purse out of 
a sow’s ear, and nurses find that out all too often. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the children’s dental program gutted. 
We’ve seen 400 dental plan workers fired, outright fired by the 
government members opposite — fired. Then in recent days, 
when the Provincial Auditor escapade or fiasco has come to the 
light, we ask questions about what happened to the $2 million 
worth of dental equipment that was sold after these 400 dental 
plan workers were fired, and we were told in this very Legislative 
Assembly, in answer to those questions, that well, some of the 
equipment has been transferred to other departments. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely ludicrous for government 
members to have sold $400 million worth of Highways 
equipment and replaced it with dental drills that should be used 
for repairing children’s teeth. I have this wild visual image in my 
mind of Highway’s workers out there with the drills, trying to 
patch our province’s highways — drills and bubble gum. And of 
course we’re seeing the result in our highways. But the topic 
today is that of this government’s lack of long-term planning, 
lack of health care priorities. 
 
We see the government saying, well, we’re spending more 
money than ever before on health care. And, Mr. Speaker, you 
know as well as I do that it is an absolute myth. What has 
happened is the government has transferred costs that previously 
were in other departments into health care and then they say, oh, 
we’re spending all this money on health care. 
 
Over the last several years the government has shifted 

many of these programs out of government departments to the 
Department of Health. Some examples would be: the continuing 
care expenditures which used to be funded through Social 
Services; the minister’s salary, which used to be funded through 
Executive Council, now funded through the Department of 
Health; and the routine support services which used to be funded 
through supply and services, now done through the Department 
of Health. 
 
These transferred items, Mr. Speaker, amount to more than $240 
million per year. And then we have the government saying, oh, 
but we’re spending so much more than ever before on health care. 
And it’s just a sham; it’s just nothing but smoke and mirrors. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deal with it daily. People of 
Saskatchewan know that the health services have gone 
backwards. 
 
They know that the prescription drug plan, as it used to be, was 
set up to get people well. The emphasis was on wellness. When 
you’re sick, if the doctor prescribes medication, certainly you 
should be taking that medication. So the prescription drug plan 
was to provide, at a nominal, very nominal fee, prescription drugs 
for those people, with the intention that once those people were 
well they could get off of that medication. 
 
We have seen major changes to that, and we’ve seen the number 
of prescriptions being filled in Saskatchewan drastically 
dropped. Government members would have us believe that it’s 
because people are no longer filling unneeded or unnecessary 
prescriptions, but what they’re really in effect saying is that, well, 
doctors were prescribing unnecessary prescriptions. I don’t 
believe that. 
 
I think that what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that families who 
know they don’t have enough money for food, they know that it 
is pointless to take or to go to a doctor and seek a prescription or 
seek whatever medical help, because what’s the purpose of 
getting a prescription written out if you don’t have the money to 
fill that prescription? And there are many, many, tragically many 
people out there throughout Saskatchewan that do not have the 
money for the prescription drugs. 
 
The stress and the financial hardship that that has caused on the 
thousands of families is just indefensible. It will be interesting 
later to hear any government member try and stand up and defend 
the indefensible. It is a task that I don’t envy them because I don’t 
how in the world you could defend the indefensible. 
 
We have a government that has got $9 million for a birthday party 
that nobody wants, or maybe I should say, it’s going to be a 
farewell party because it’s in what is normally an election year. 
And it’s going to be the biggest farewell party this province has 
ever seen — 9 millions of dollars spent to say, goodbye, PCs, 
goodbye; welcome, NDP. 
 
We have a government that has squandered away $40 million 
worth of Highways equipment — $40 million gone. Should have 
been, instead of worrying about   



 
May 30, 1989 

1495 
 

privatizing, instead of this plunge into privatization, this 
ideologically driven push for privatization, instead of that, 
government members should have been paying attention to 
health care, should have been listening to your neighbours, 
listening to your friends, listening, indeed . . . I’m sure that out 
of the number of Conservative MLAs that were elected, some 
have got some illness in their families. Listen to the people in 
your own families who are ill. Listen to what they say about 
health care, and then act. Have the courage to act on it. 
 
We have a government that has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, the House now stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


