


















































April 10, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 10, 1989 
 

649 
 

April 10/89 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is to the Minister of Finance, and it has to do with Friday's 
meeting in Ottawa with his federal counterpart and provincial 
counterparts pertaining to, as I understand it, a number of fiscal 
problems facing the country, including the possibility of a 
national sales tax which Mr. Wilson wishes to impose upon the 
people of Saskatchewan, and as I understand it, you and your 
government are prepared to co-operate. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance is: did that meeting 
produce a mechanism as to how this tax will be applied; 
namely, will it be collected separately, the 7 per cent provincial 
and the 9 per cent federal, or is it going to be rolled into one, 
16, 17, 18 per cent? What is the mechanism with respect to the 
national sales tax, and why is it, sir, that you did you not oppose 
this tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — One, at no time has the Government of 
Saskatchewan indicated to anyone that it was prepared to 
participate or co-operate in the national sales tax. What we have 
made clear, and the position has not changed, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we want to see the proposals for the national sales tax. We 
have not seen the proposals. We certainly have the general 
concept of the national sales tax, and the position is exactly the 
same as the one we communicated to both this House and to the 
people of the province a year ago when the matter first came 
about. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the specific question that the Leader of 
the Opposition asked, no, no detailed proposals were put 
forward by the federal government. And it was, again, 
discussions of general policy questions, but no consensus was 
reached, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, the question which I asked, I 
thought was straightforward, and I must say I'm a little bit 
puzzled by your answer, because here you have 11 Finance 
ministers from all across Canada, presumably to discuss the 
question of the next taxation regime for Canada as it impacts on 
our province, in fact all provinces. 
 
Are you telling this House that two weeks before the announced 
budget date, April 27 or thereabouts, that you, sir, as Minister of 
Finance, and the Premier of this province of Saskatchewan do 
not know the details of what Mr. Wilson and Mr. Mulroney 
have in mind when the press widely reports that they 
contemplate a 9 per cent national sales tax to be integrated and 
added on top of our own 7 per cent sales tax? Surely that's not 
the position. What in fact was put forward on the table in this 
regard, and what specifically was Saskatchewan's  

response? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Saskatchewan's response has been, was, 
and as it has been consistently, until such time as we see 
proposals, we are prepared to consider the operation of the 
national sales tax, but we are not taking any such position until 
we see the detailed proposals of the federal government. No 
rates were discussed. 
 
Let me suggest to the hon. member that the interpretation that 
he puts on the combination of rates may or may not happen. We 
don't know exactly what the proposal is going to be with the 
federal government. We don't whether it's going to be a lower 
rate, whether it's going to be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A higher rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, we have no indication as to what the 
rate is going to be. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, no provinces 
were committed to participating in a national sales tax, and the 
option very clearly is still there for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and will continue to be there, not to participate 
in a national sales tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read the paper. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, again 
to the Minister of Finance. 
 
I note, parenthetically, that the Minister of Trade says that we 
should read the paper, and I guess we should, judging by the 
answers, because we get as much from The Globe and Mail as 
we do from the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is very simple. We may not 
know the details of this, but we certainly do know that there is a 
proposal for a national sales tax, the net effect of which has got 
to be a higher taxation level on the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the net effect of which has to be that 
questions as to what is exempt and what is not exempt are going 
to play an important part for farmers and consumers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Surely, do you not have enough details now to be able to take a 
position in principle with respect to this scheme, a position of 
principle which, I would submit with respect, should be a 
principle of opposition to increasing the taxes from our 7 per 
cent to, say, 16 or even higher. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With all respect to the Leader of the 
Opposition, the national sales tax can be imposed in ways 
which mean a reduction for farmers, a reduction for our 
resource industries and, in fact, a reduction for many people in 
the province. And that's precisely the type of information that 
we want to get before we can make that decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The details have not been given by the federal government; 
rates have not been given by the federal government. Whether 
we can expect the rates to be given  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

650 
 

in the federal budget, that is not something that the federal 
Minister of Finance was prepared to tell the provinces. 
Certainly the federal government has made it clear that it is 
actively considering and, I suspect, very likely to go with a 
national sales tax. I don't know for sure whether that is the final 
position of the federal government. If I knew that, I would be 
quite prepared to let the Leader of the Opposition know. 
 
Secondly, we cannot take a position, and I think quite properly 
so, until we have from the federal government questions like 
rates, the broadness of the base of the tax, what the exemptions 
to the tax are going to be, what are going to be the expenditure 
offsets; in other words, what expenditures are the federal 
government prepared to pay to offset the tax on, particularly, 
lower income levels. Until we have that type of information, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be both unwise and certainly 
improper for a government of a province to take a position on it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final question to 
the Minister of Finance. And I might just say as a brief preface 
that I find it incredible that the Minister of Finance of Canada, 
according to our Minister of Finance provincially, two weeks 
before the budget is to be announced, apparently neither has the 
details of the scheme nor the proposals of the scheme firmly 
fixed in mind; or if he does, he's not prepared to tell you or the 
provinces as to what he does have as an approach. I find that 
just incredible, given the fact that we've got two weeks to go 
with respect to the budget announcement. 
 
I'll ask one question specifically: what is going to be exempted 
from this proposed national sales tax? What is your 
government's position? Do you support the Consumer's 
Association of Canada, which says that nothing should be 
exempt, or are there to be exemptions? And what is the 
Saskatchewan government position in that regard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I hope that the Leader of the Opposition 
understands that the tax, according to even The Globe and Mail, 
would not take effect before 1991, so I would expect that the 
national government would have some time to announce its 
rates and its expenditure options and its exemption package 
well before that time. 
 
Did they give it at the meeting? I've already said, I believe on 
three occasions today, no, they did not. And until such time as 
we have that information, let me indicate to the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition that it was this government, I believe the first, or 
certainly one of the very first, that indicated that food should be 
exempt from that tax. I think that that was a position well 
stated, Mr. Speaker. But until we have the other positions, it 
would be, as I have said before, unwise and in my view 
improper to even take a position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transfer Payments to Provinces 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question to the minister is, what you 
had for lunch, what you had to drink, and what you  

did after hours, Mr. Minister? You don't seem . . . that seems to 
be all you did. I know that Ottawa is a pleasant place to spend a 
couple of days in April, but I don't think the public will accept 
the fact that you went there, spent two days in Ottawa, and 
know nothing more now than you did when you went. 
 
Mr. Minister, surely you must have discussed some of the 
realities which all Canadians recognize. One of those realities is 
that there is going to be less money in the established program 
funding in future years than there was in the past. Will the 
minister now admit that you've overestimated the amount of 
revenue you're likely to get from the federal government in the 
current year, and will you also admit that in future years it's 
going to have a much more serious effect than it will even this 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It's nice to see the opposition Finance critic 
finally participate in the budget debate, Mr. Speaker, that he 
ignored for a week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The fact is, as I have said before and I say 
again today, that we received no indication of what's in the 
federal budget, but I frankly didn't expect to. 
 
Secondly, that we have no indication that there's going to be 
any reduction in transfer payments. We have said on numerous 
occasions, and I've restated it throughout the budget debate, that 
we have no indication of a reduction in transfer payments. 
 
Thirdly, as it applies to established program funding, let me 
indicate to the hon. opposition Finance critic that it was this 
government that got the change in the national government's 
position when the EPF (established programs financing) was 
changed a couple of years back to at least have in there not less 
than the rate of inflation. And it was this government that put 
this in, Mr. Speaker; it was this government that caused that to 
happen. 
 
Should that be the case, Mr. Speaker, based on the inflation rate 
as it applies nationally and in central Canada, if we were to take 
that position, there may even be an increase in EPF. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the hon. 
Michael Wilson has said there's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Does the hon. member 
have a new question or a supplementary? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the Hon. Michael Wilson has 
warned that there's likely to be a reduction in the transfer of 
funds to the provincial government. Your own deputy minister 
has said that in Saskatoon. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you'd stop 
pretending that it isn't so. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is whether or not you took steps to 
protest this reduction in funding to the province of 
Saskatchewan; and if you did, is anyone listening? 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

651 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these were the same 
questions of a couple of weeks ago, and I made it clear at that 
time that the province of Saskatchewan has taken the position 
that, one, obviously there shouldn't be a reduction or a cut in 
transfer payments; that it is an unwise national policy to force 
the federal debt onto the backs of the provinces. It is, one, 
unfair; and secondly, the provinces do not have the fiscal 
capacity to manage the national debt. So it's a false economy, in 
our view. And that is the position that we put forward to the 
federal Minister of Finance, and I communicated that to this 
House a couple of weeks ago when the question was first 
raised. 
 
So to suggest otherwise, I think, is political posturing and unfair 
criticism, Mr. Speaker. We've stated our position. We're 
obviously . . . I'm prepared to repeat it many times today. These 
are questions that, as I say, came up a couple of weeks ago, and 
the same answer applies. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the same 
minister, and it's clear that this minister went down to Ottawa 
and came back empty-handed. How incompetent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, did you speak to Mr. 
Wilson about any cuts to our province in educational spending; 
and did you inform the federal Minister of Finance that our 
government would oppose vigorously any cuts to educational 
financing on the part of the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I hate to have to tell the hon. member 
who is fairly new to the House, and perhaps when we went 
through the debate over the last couple of years, that the policy 
has been consistent by the province of Saskatchewan for some 
years, including under the previous administration, that 
education and health are not separated out under the established 
program financing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that's a policy that was supported by the 
previous administration, and certainly one that we support. So 
they are not segmented and they haven't been segmented and I 
don't think that Saskatchewan needs to have them segmented, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Finance. As the minister knows, there's a special 
relationship when it comes to funding for social services 
between the provinces and the federal government, and that is 
that the federal government pays for 50 per cent of all social 
services' cost. Now, Mr. Minister, we've seen from your 
government, since the provincial election, consistent cuts in 
social services: four-year freeze in the family income plan; 16 
per cent cut in this budget to family support organizations. 
 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: in the course of your 
discussions with the federal Minister of Finance, did you 
discuss prospective federal cuts in transfer payments for social 
services, and if so, did you indicate squarely that you would 
oppose such cuts? Or, Mr. Minister, are we to expect that, in 
addition to your provincial cuts to the poor and to those 
dependent on Social Services in this province, we're going to 
see more federal cuts after the federal budget comes down to 
compound the injury that you've done to poor people in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I always appreciate the question from 
the hon. member who has so well articulated the NDP policy of 
bringing back the provincial gas tax with no rebates, and I like 
to remind him of that, Mr. Speaker, because that would require 
all individuals in the province. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, let me advise the hon. member . . . and 
we went through this debate in the budget debate. I know the 
hon. members don't like to admit that they lost the budget 
debate and lost it heavily — both, Mr. Speaker, in the House 
and in the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And I gather the second weekend back at 
home has brought that message to them. 
 
Having said that, having said that, Mr. Speaker, there was not 
the reduction that the hon. member refers to; in fact, there was 
an increase and he is well aware of that. The increase in 
payments to families was significant in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, and one that we are very, very proud of, that you 
opposed. So I suggest that the hon. member . . . his facts are 
wrong. His information . . . his interpretation of the facts are 
also wrong. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I've reiterated now for 
the third time today, the third time this session, that we have 
indicated our position opposing any effort by the federal 
government to move the debt back on to the backs of the 
provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization and the School Curriculum 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, at your PC Party policy meeting in Swift Current 
this weekend, your colleague, the minister of privatization, 
advanced the idea of having privatization taught as part of our 
school curriculum. Have you informed him that our class-rooms 
are for learning and not for political propaganda and that your 
department would absolutely refuse to consider such a notion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I don't 
accept at face value what the hon. member is suggesting the 
minister of privatization said. But less there be any 
misunderstanding, Mr. Speaker, quite simply, there will  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

652 
 

not be any course on public participation or privatization 
developed for use in our schools period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, just to be clear, you are 
taking the position that PC right-wing, political propaganda 
such as privatization has absolutely no place in our 
Saskatchewan class-rooms, and you will be telling the minister 
of privatization that he should no longer advance the notion that 
privatization has any place whatsoever in our class-rooms in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, 
privatization is not some kind of right-wing ideological agenda. 
And I see I've hit a nerve, Mr. Speaker. The reality is, across the 
world, communist countries, Australia, Europe, New Zealand, 
England, France — in countries all over the world of all 
political stripes, Mr. Speaker, are undertaking a course of 
greater and greater privatization. 
 
Now the NDP have ideological tunnel vision. And everything 
for them is an ideological in basis. That is not the case. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to correct that misstatement first, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As it relates to a discussion of various economic models in our 
schools, whether it be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Minister of Education. 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that you had a discussion with 
Bill Hunter on entrepreneurship? And can you confirm that Bill 
Hunter presented you with a course outline on entrepreneurship, 
and can you confirm that Bill Hunter has commissioned a 
curriculum designer to design a course on entrepreneurship in 
this province? Can you confirm that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I have met with Bill 
Hunter. Yes, he has some ideas on entrepreneurship and 
education, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you as well that Bill 
Hunter, nor does any one other person develop curriculum 
models that will go into the schools across this province. 
 
Having said all that, Mr. Speaker, is it somehow wrong that our 
young people should learn about entrepreneurship any more 
than that they would learn about co-ops, Mr. Speaker, or private 
enterprise or Crown corporations? The reality is, Mr. Speaker, 
all those things today are available to our children in our 
schools through social studies courses, through economics 
courses, Mr. Speaker, and through the highly successful Junior 
Achievers model. 
 
Now I know the word “entrepreneurship” is like a four-letter 
word to the NDP. It's the e-word, and I know they have 
difficulty with that. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, parents . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. I believe the 
hon. member is entering debate and answers become protracted 
that way. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary question. So we understand 
that you, in fact, did have a meeting with your department 
officials with Bill Hunter; that he did present a course to you on 
entrepreneurship. Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to table 
this proposed course outline to the legislature so we can see 
what kind of curriculum developer that Mr. Hunter really is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would table it if 
in fact it was going to become a course but it is not, so I . . . 
there's nothing to table, Mr. Speaker. 
 

School-based Dental Program 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same 
minister, and I want to ask the minister, or at least inform him 
that the school children in this province already know a great 
deal about privatization, Tory style. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've privatized the dental program out of the 
school, dismissed 400 workers in the process. What I want to 
know, Mr. Minister: can you tell me whether or not you have 
consulted with the school children on that basis, and the parents 
of these children, whether or not they would rather have back 
the school-based dental program or your idea of propaganda, 
PC-style privatization courses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well your question may be more 
properly answered by the Minister of Health because, as I 
understand it, in terms of dental health for our children, the 
enrolment rate and the participation rate is much higher under 
the new system than it was under the old system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I myself, Mr. Speaker, in my 
own constituency, took part in the opening up of a dental clinic 
in Stoughton, Saskatchewan, where they haven't had one for 33 
years, Mr. Speaker, and it's because we have a new way of 
delivering dental health to the province, Mr. Speaker, and we 
stand by it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. I 
want to ask you again whether or not you've taken the 
opportunity to check with the parent-teachers' associations 
around the province on this very issue; whether or not the 
public would rather have back the school-based dental program 
or your convoluted concept of Bill Hunter's argument for 
privatization forced down the throats of the school children of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all,  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

653 
 

unless I have some correspondence in my office I'm not aware 
of, I can't recall that I've had any correspondence in a long time, 
if ever, relative to the old dental plan. Point number one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Secondly, our schools have not, nor will they ever be, agents for 
dogma. Now, I know there are some in the NDP in past years, 
Mr. Speaker, that might like to have had it that way. But under 
a Progressive Conservative government such will not be the 
case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An Act to 
establish the Public Participation Program be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am glad to enter 
this debate of today because the question of privatization and 
the government's plans with respect to privatization — probably 
one of the most important issues that this House will have to 
face in this session, or indeed in any session. 
 
It strikes a chord in me, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
background of my family in this province and the experience 
that they had over the years. My father's parents, my great 
grandparents, came to this province in 1875. My 
great-grandfather was one of the first Europeans into the part of 
the country that is now represented by the member from 
Canora, and my family has lived in that area since that time. 
They have been active, without exception, from the days of my 
great-grandfather in farm organizations and in community 
organizations, and it is in the context of that life experience in 
my family that I grew up and acquired the values and the beliefs 
that I have. 
 
And I want to just state them, not that they're news to the 
House, but that I think that it's important that these matters be 
mentioned by people with the kind of experience that I have 
had, as well as others in this House. 
 
I recall, for example, the stories that my father tells about the 
establishment of the grain growers' co-operatives, culminating 
in the establishment of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and his 
stories about why that was necessary, what the problems were 
that they were attempting to overcome. And he told me the 
stories, Mr. Speaker, that are so well known to all of us, about 
the difficulties that the farmers had in getting their grain to 
market, the difficulties that they had dealing with the elevator 
companies of the day, the difficulties that they had dealing with 
the railway companies, and how this led to the establishment of 
the territorial grain growers' association and the united grain 
growers' association and, ultimately, the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool. 
 

That's important, Mr. Speaker, because it is a classic example 
and a very vivid example in Saskatchewan of how farmers, 
working together, took on the large forces with which they were 
then faced — the large grain companies and the large railway 
companies — and established their own response, established 
their own company to handle their own grain and to cope with 
the powers that be at the time, with the large forces that were 
affecting their ability to make their living, and to put in place 
their own arrangements so that they would be masters in their 
own house, so that the farmers in Saskatchewan would have 
control over their own lives. 
 
He also told me, my father also told me in detail about the 
establishment of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
office and how, prior to the establishment of that office, it was 
not possible to get fire insurance in our home town, that the line 
company simply did not provide it. He told me, and I've since 
confirmed that it's true, that that kind of fire insurance coverage 
was available in the cities from the so-called line companies, 
but it was available at prices that were thought to be away out 
of line compared to the loss experience that the companies were 
having in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so the people of Saskatchewan got together through their 
duly elected government and formed their own insurance 
company in order to provide insurance to all of them, and to 
provide it at a rate that they could afford to pay. And that was 
the Saskatchewan Government Insurance office's mandate from 
the very beginning, and a mandate that they continued to fill up 
until this time. 
 
Now we have, in Saskatchewan, insurance available to all 
people no matter where they live, no matter whether they have 
fire-fighting equipment in their home town, yet able to buy 
insurance coverage for their homes, and other kinds of 
insurance as our society has developed other kinds of insurance, 
and also to obtain it at rates that are affordable. 
 
Now that, I think, is another example of how Saskatchewan 
people acting together, in this case through their government, 
have taken a particular problem that they all were faced with 
and have found a solution, a Saskatchewan-made solution in 
order to cope with that problem. And they did it and they did it 
very well. 
 
And so we had, just to carry the example up into the modern 
days in the 1970s, the problem that the government of the day, 
the duly elected government of the day experienced in its 
dealings with the potash industry and in its ability to tax the 
potash industry. That story is well known, and how finally, out 
of frustration as much as anything else, the Saskatchewan 
government decided that it itself had to enter the potash 
industry and did so through the agency of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that is a debate which we're going to have in this House, 
as I understand the intentions of the government, when they 
bring forward a Bill to privatize that company. But there is 
another example of Saskatchewan people working together 
through their duly elected government  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

654 
 

to establish arrangements to establish a company which would 
deal with a large problem which the government was then faced 
with, and deal with it through the agency of their duly elected 
government. 
 
Now these things are just woven into the soul of Saskatchewan. 
They're woven into the fabric of this province at practically the 
point, Mr. Speaker, when you deal with questions like SGI and 
questions like the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and 
SaskTel, where it's practically in the genes. These are things 
that we have established ourselves in order to provide ourselves 
with a level of service which we couldn't otherwise have. These 
are things which we have done in order to provide ourself with 
services at prices that we could afford. And these are 
institutions which are part of our history and part of our 
tradition and part of the very fabric of our society, and we're not 
going to let go of them very lightly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And now our friends opposite come and they 
introduce this new word into the vocabulary of this province, 
this privatization word, and they tell us that all of the things that 
we've doing in this province — examples of which I've given to 
you — over all of these many years have been wrong; that it 
was a wrong-headed approach to have established SGI and have 
kept it in existence all these years; that it a wrong-headed 
approach to establish the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and 
keep it in existence for all of these years; and it was a 
wrong-headed approach, I take it, to establish the SaskTel and 
to provide the kind of service that SaskTel has provided. 
 
The examples go on and on. The Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company comes to mind. I'm one of the members in this House 
who ride the buses of this province every once in a while, and I 
have a keen appreciation of the fact that we're providing bus 
service into communities where it is not economic to do so. All 
kinds of communities in this province receive bus service as a 
result of the fact that it is run by a corporation owned by the 
people of this province. 
 
If it was owned by a corporation, the shares of which were 
owned by private shareholders, it would not be providing 
service to some of the communities which it is now providing, 
some of which are in the constituency represented by my friend 
from Melville. And these are arrangements, these are 
institutions, Mr. Speaker, which, as I say, our people are not 
going to let go of lightly, nor are they going to accept for a 
moment the notion that they were wrong in setting these up. 
And that's where the government argument is taking us. 
 
The government argument, if you listen to it carefully and 
analyse it, is saying simply that to have set it up in that way was 
wrong; you've been mistaken over all of these decades. It is 
now time to get it right and to take that ownership out of the 
hands of the public and to return it to the private sector, private 
shareholders; that is the right way. What we did over the last 40 
or 50 or 60 years is wrong and their way is better. Well that's a 
proposition, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province are 
just simply not going to accept. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And there's evidence of that all over the place. 
You just have to walk down the streets of any community in 
this province and hear people talking about how the government 
has gone too far; about how the government's plan to sell part of 
SaskPower is wrong; about how the idea that we would be 
giving away our potash resources to foreign countries and 
foreign corporations is wrong. This is all you can hear in coffee 
shops these days. 
 
It even overshadows discussions about the Minister of Finance's 
increased gas tax, or his other taxes, or his cuts in spending. 
This goes beyond that. This overshadows that and has become 
the dominant point of conversation on the streets and in the 
coffee shops and garages right across small town Saskatchewan 
and right through the cities. 
 
What's at stake; what's at stake, Mr. Speaker? Well I submit that 
what's at stake is our way, the Saskatchewan way of dealing 
with problems with which we are faced. We have in this 
province established, more clearly than any other province in 
this country, a co-operative way of approaching our problems. 
The wheat pool is an example; SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) is an example; the power corporation is an example; 
SaskTel is an example; the bus company is an example, and it 
goes on and on. And the way that we've established is to work 
together to solve these problems, and the way in which we have 
typically done that is, through our elected government, take 
ownership of it, provide our own service, prove to ourselves 
that we in this province can do these things ourselves. We don't 
have to bring in any heavy hitters from the outside. We don't 
have to bring in any multinational companies from another 
country, or from another part of this country, in order to do 
things that we ourselves can do. 
 
And that's what we've done. We've done it over and over again. 
And what our friends opposite seek to do in this privatization 
debate is to turn that upside down, to reverse it, to say say that's 
not the Saskatchewan way. They're trying, in effect, to rewrite 
history; to say that the Saskatchewan way is some other way. 
And it's nonsense, Mr. Speaker, it's nonsense. 
 
The fact of the matter is that everybody in Saskatchewan, with 
the possible exception of the people on the other side of this 
House, understands that the Crown corporations of this 
province are owned by the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The people of this province are the 
shareholders in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. They 
are. They are, Mr. Minister of Finance. The people of this 
province are the owners of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. The people of Saskatchewan are the shareholders 
in SaskTel, and so on and on. They understand perfectly. Our 
friends opposite say that's not true. They think the government 
owns it. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

655 
 

And I say to him, what is the government? The government is 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. The government is 
the persons elected by the people of Saskatchewan to run the 
government for the time being. Nothing is more certain that 
next election they're going to elect a different group to come 
and govern their affairs, but they are their affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And it is idle nonsense, and about the height 
of sophistry to come in here and try and separate the notions of 
the people's government from the people themselves. People in 
Saskatchewan are not so naive and not so stupid as to accept 
such an argument. 
 
There's another factor, Mr. Speaker, and an extremely important 
one, and it involves the question of controlling our own lives. 
Because of the factors that we're faced with in this province, 
we've had the particular history that we've had. We've 
developed our economy in a certain way. We have established 
our public corporations in a certain way in order to cope with 
these problems. 
 
And they have given us control over so much of our own lives 
that sometimes we take that control for granted. Sometimes we 
forget that in the province of Nova Scotia, for example, the 
people don't have the kind of control that they have in 
Saskatchewan, because they don't own their telephone 
company; because they don't own their electrical utilities; 
because they don't own their transportation company. 
 
As a result, they don't have the kind of control over their own 
everyday existence that we in Saskatchewan have. They are 
dependent upon decisions made by others. They are dependent 
upon decisions made by persons in the private sector who are 
running corporations for one purpose and one purpose only, and 
that is to collect a profit from it. Now there's nothing wrong 
with corporations running a business in order to recover a 
profit. But it is wrong when corporations are making decisions 
that affect me in a fundamental way in my life when I have the 
alternative of doing it myself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
And so we in Saskatchewan — to go back to my bus example, 
my transportation company example — have a transportation 
company which provides services to all kinds of communities in 
Saskatchewan, and it's an important service indeed. And no one 
could argue for a moment that if that transportation company 
had been developed by a private sector company like the 
Greyhound Bus Company, that we would have service in these 
communities, because clearly we would not. 
 
But because we've established our own corporation to provide 
that service, we have a measure of control over our own lives. 
And it's an important measure of control because it provides 
transportation services to communities which would otherwise 
be entirely dependent upon automobiles. 
 
So that's important, and that's what's at stake in this  

argument. That's what's at stake, in my mind, the degree to 
which we are able to manage our own affairs, the degree to 
which we are able to do things ourselves and keep control over 
the things that are important to us. 
 
And so, to take the example of SaskPower, if our friends are 
successful in selling off the gas side of the SaskPower 
corporation, that will mean that we, the people of 
Saskatchewan, will have lost a very large measure of control 
over the distribution and the sale of natural gas in this province. 
 
Now why would we want to do that? Why would we willingly 
want to just barge in and give up those kind of economic levers, 
those kind of arrangements which permit us to remain masters 
in our own house, Mr. Speaker — masters in our own house? 
That's a foolish thing to do. It leaves us at the mercy of others' 
decisions. 
 
Now it is no answer to that argument to say, well we're going to 
sell just a few shares to Saskatchewan people. That's no answer. 
We've heard that argument before. We heard that argument in 
the case of Saskoil. And that's right; that's what happened. 
There were a few shares sold, and most of them went to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
But in the ordinary course of market training, we know, from 
Saskoil's own corporate record now, that those shares are 
owned, to some alarming number — 75 per cent or something 
like that — by people from outside Saskatchewan. And it's not 
just a few shares any more, Mr. Speaker, because new share 
offerings have been offered, and a larger portion of Saskoil has 
been sold, and it's been sold to people from outside the 
province. 
 
So it's no answer to say, we're only going to sell shares and it's 
only going to be a few shares and we're going to sell them to 
Saskatchewan people if we can; we're going to sell them to 
employees. That's no answer because we know, from the 
Saskoil experience and from our experience generally, that in 
the end those shares wind up in the hands of the large pools of 
capital in Canada and elsewhere. 
 
Now I know where our friends opposite are coming from. 
People on this side of the House know, and a lot of people in 
the province of Saskatchewan know where they're coming from 
on this issue, Mr. Speaker. It is entirely consistent with their 
notion of a private enterprise, purely market-driven economy — 
entirely consistent with that. 
 
The picture that my leader paints of the Premier riding his 
surf-board — riding on top of the waves, saying to the province, 
well this is the way it is; I have no control over this; we can't 
deal with these forces; these are international forces over which 
we have no control. And all I can do is to somehow keep erect 
on the top of this surf-board, but I have no way in which I can 
control the waves. 
 
And my party answers to that, nonsense; there are many things 
you can do to control the waves; there are many things you can 
do to control your situation. But if you're going to sell off all of 
the levers that you have that enable you to have any control 
over your own existence, if you're going to sell off, for 
example, the gas side of  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

656 
 

SaskPower, you're going to sell off your control over the natural 
gas production, sale and distribution in this province. 
 
And why would you do that? Why would you just make 
yourself the captive of a group of private shareholders? They 
may start out as Saskatchewan shareholders, but they'll wind up 
with the bulk of those shares owned by large pools of 
investment capital in other parts of the country. And my friends 
opposite know that as certain as they're sitting there. Why 
would we do that? 
 
For us, Mr. Speaker, it makes no sense that government would 
just simply give away that kind of economic levers that they 
could well use, they could use every day for the benefit of the 
people of this province. 
 
I must touch on the potash corporation argument now, although 
I want to save that, in a specific sense, for a later day. But I 
want to deal with the potash corporation. We've been hearing 
talk from members opposite about selling or privatizing the 
potash corporation for a long time. Their enthusiasm for the 
project ebbs and flows depending upon what their polls are 
telling them, or the state of the industry. 
 
But we have always argued, and history shows, that the potash 
corporation has been a very, very profitable investment for the 
people of this province over the course of its life. It has been a 
very profitable investment. And granted, like any potash 
company, it can't make a profit while the market is away down. 
But the market for potash is a cyclical market and it's now on 
the way up. And in most years, in the vast majority of years, 
you can run any potash corporation, that is run at all efficiently, 
at a profit. 
 
The potash corporation has consistently made a profit and most 
often a large profit whenever market conditions have been 
anything like decent, and they are now. And as a result, in 1988, 
which was not a particularly good year for potash, where the 
price is still on the upswing, PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) made $106 million — $106 million. 
 
Well that, my friends, is a lot of money. That would go almost 
half-way to pay for the deficit that the government has incurred 
. . . or it expects to incur in this present year — $100 million 
will furnish a lot of schools; $100 million will pay for a lot of 
health care; $100 million to the farmers of Saskatchewan looks 
like about the size of a drought payment that they should be 
getting this year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Would pay for a prescription drug plan 
and a dental plan. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, my colleague says it'd pay for a 
prescription drug plan and a dental plan and have a lot of 
money left over — a lot of money left over. 
 
Now why would we be intent on getting rid of that, Mr. 
Speaker? Is that not the goose that lays the golden egg? And is 
not the selling of it, at this point or at any point, the killing of 
the goose that lays the golden eggs? It makes no sense. It makes 
no sense at all. 
 
So my argument, just to recap, Mr. Speaker, just to  

summarize, my argument is that it is folly, it is pure folly for the 
government of this province to be going to the people and 
saying, we're going to sell shares to you in these Crown 
corporations. The answer, and the people know the answer 
better than you and I do, the answer is that they already own 
those shares. And you're not doing us any favour when you sell 
back to us what we already own. 
 
And we're already profiting from those Crown corporations. 
When they make a profit, we make a profit. Because the profit 
that is earned is not going out of the province in the form of 
dividends on any shares, it's staying right here and is paying for 
the essential services that we have in this province that we 
require a good deal of money in order to run. And it is the 
height of folly for the government to be selling off income 
producing assets as they propose to do. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is in all of this the heavy hand of 
patronage. There is in all of this the heavy hand of patronage. 
There is in the little privatizations that we've seen, little special 
deals with this company, little special deals with that, the 
Weyerhaeuser deal being the best example that we'll probably 
ever have, where a large, thriving, important industry which had 
made a great deal of money over its lifetime, a great deal of 
money, was sold. 
 
And I put “sold” in heavy quotation marks because it was a 
different kind of a sale than we had ever seen — a very 
different kind of a sale — a sale where you . . . not only did 
they not get anything down, there was no down payment 
required. Actually, if you study the deal hard enough, you will 
find we actually paid them $7 million in order to come into the 
deal, by virtue of a little deal we made with roads. So not only 
no down payment, but a reverse, a little incentive for them to 
come in. 
 
And then to buy the whole operation, including the plant and 
the harvesting rights to all that forest, at a bargain basement 
price over a very long period of time, and the only years in 
which they're required to make a payment are years in which 
that company makes a profit, which is rarely made by any 
company in that industry. Only in times when the market is at 
its highest level can you reasonably expect to get the kind of 
profit that Weyerhaeuser has to make in order to have to make 
an annual payment under that agreement. Other than that, it was 
a good deal. 
 
Now why would we do that? I mean, talk about killing the 
goose that laid the golden eggs. Now we heard, and we continue 
to hear to this day, the kind of distorted and misleading 
advertising that we were losing $94,000 a day. The reality is 
that we were not. The reality is that that company had been 
returning a handsome profit for a long time, and the reality is 
that that operation now is returning a large profit. It's just that in 
a certain very short period of time, when the market was way 
down, the company had lost money — naturally, as it normally 
would. 
 
But in the long haul that was not a losing proposition, and my 
friends opposite know it. And when they ran their radio ads and 
make their speeches about Prince Albert pulp losing that kind of 
money, they simply know it is not  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

657 
 

correct, Mr. Speaker. They know it is not in accordance with 
the facts. 
 
Well my point is simply that it makes no sense to make that 
kind of a deal. We on this side of the House are not against a 
flexible approach to the question of public ownership. We think 
there are times where it is extremely important that the public 
sector be involved. We think there are other times when it is not 
appropriate for the public sector to be involved. 
 
It may be appropriate to get out of public ownership or to go 
back into it. It all depends on what's happening. It's a practical, 
pragmatic question requiring a hard-headed answer, but not a 
give-away and certainly not the kind of hidebound ideological 
approach that our friends opposite appear to have on this 
question when they say public ownership is bad, private 
ownership is good, and we're going to move as much public 
ownership into the private sector as the people will put up with. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what they're doing. 
 
It's not the Saskatchewan way. It's transferring wealth. It's an 
entirely inappropriate thing to do. It is an ideological and 
hidebound position that they deal from; it is an ideological and 
hidebound position that they deal from, and if they could do it 
all tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and think they could get away with 
it, they would. That's my point; that's my point. 
 
And they go out and take their polls and they learn, well, it's not 
popular to sell it off to a company like Weyerhaeuser, so we'll 
do it a little differently this time. We'll issue a few shares and 
then people won't mind that so much and, particularly if we 
offer those shares to employees, then they won't mind so much. 
But we know, Mr. Speaker, and experience has proven and, 
particularly with Saskoil, it has been shown that that kind of 
privatization is a guarantee that those shares and, therefore, 
control of this company will wind up in the hands of 
non-Saskatchewan people. And we in this province simply can't 
afford to deal away that kind of control over our own lives. We 
must remain masters in our own house. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I'll be 
opposing the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 
me today, Mr. Speaker, to enter into this debate. 
 
I listened with great interest last Friday to the member from 
Moose Jaw North, and I must say that he hasn't lost any of his 
eloquence that I've known from him before. But I think the 
public in the province don't wish to mix up eloquence and fact, 
because as I just finished listening to the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview and him talking about the roots of his 
family and that type of thing, those roots aren't much different 
than most of us in this province who've come from pioneering 
families. And I  

respect those views, the things that the member from Fairview 
talked about. 
 
But I guess where the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, get a 
little mixed up sometime, is that even though we have this 
common roots, these common bonds, these same life 
experiences as Saskatchewanians, there's only ever been about a 
third of the people in this province that have subscribed to the 
views of the member from Fairview, and that's fair, that's . . . If 
you want to get into politics, that's fair, as probably there are 
only a third of the people in this province have subscribed to the 
views of the Progressive Conservative Party or the Liberal 
Party, for that matter. 
 
But what we can't say, Mr. Speaker, what we can't say when 
we're talking about the social interaction of members of our 
community from our pioneers onward, is that social interaction 
and working together are strictly the views of the NDP Party, 
because they're not. But any of us that have lived out there in 
small town Saskatchewan on a farm know that when the Sask 
Wheat Pool or UGG or some of the farm organizations that I 
belong to to this day get together and do things for a reason, it is 
people interacting because they have a common goal. 
 
And I can think about the rink board that we used to have in my 
home town of Baildon. I can think of lots of reasons for people 
to get together, because I couldn't afford to build a rink and turn 
the lights on by myself. But when I got together with my 
neighbours and we all took a little bit out of hip national or we 
put on a whist drive or a bottle drive or we'd run a booth at the 
sports day, we raised enough money so that everyone in that 
community could have the lights on in the rink at night. 
 
And that made a lot of sense to our small community, just as it 
made a lot of sense, as the member from Fairview said, for 
grain farmers in particular to band together into organizations 
such as UGG and the pools. Because they were dealing with 
some monoliths, one railroad at that time, one or two very large 
grain trading companies that weren't even Canadian-based, it 
made a great deal of sense to try and work together within a 
system that would provide a better livelihood. 
 
And I don't think you would find anyone in this province who 
has those types of roots and who's had family members go 
through those types of experiences, would ever say no to that 
historical perspective because it was right then, as parts of it are 
right today. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, why I want to get into this debate 
today on this thing is because as I listened to the members 
opposite over the last couple of days, they keep seeming to 
want to mix the record of the NDP administration from 1971 to 
1982 with what has happened in a historical perspective in 
Saskatchewan in the years preceding that. 
 
And I find that a little bit hypocritical, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
they would take that rationalization to the point that they have. 
Because even during the years of the late premier Douglas, and 
I mean I was only a child through a great deal of that time, I 
don't ever remember so much of this mixing of what we do as a 
society and when  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

658 
 

we socially interact as we do with the hard-core tenets of 
socialism like we've had from the members opposite. 
 
And I never thought of the power lines being strung through 
rural Saskatchewan as being a nationalization thing that the 
NDP always like to talk about. That was providing a need when 
no one else was there to provide a need. That was groups of 
people getting together in rural telephone companies and going 
out and put up telephone poles and stringing wire to provide a 
need for the members of that community. And the government 
was there to facilitate the change, the technology, the change 
that those people wanted to see happen in their lives. They 
wanted electric lights and they wanted a telephone on the wall. 
It helped them in their business; it helped them in many ways. 
And by getting together they were able to achieve that. 
 
And I guess, as we went on, some people in the NDP Party said, 
well yes, this social interaction that people have had in 
Saskatchewan because of our climate and our distance to 
markets and a lot of things means that we should get into the 
direct ownership of things that were already there and working, 
in some cases by other people in Saskatchewan, and they 
happened to be people in the private sector. 
 
And I think about the nationalizations that took place during the 
1970s, and I ask myself some very basic questions about them 
and what they did for my province, and what they did for me as 
an individual, and where it's going in the future. 
 
And I think about the potash corporation which the member 
talked so eloquently about and about the returns to our 
province, and I know for a fact that it cost a lot of money to 
nationalize the potash companies. I mean, everybody knows 
that. We spent millions, hundreds of millions of dollars, I'm 
told, in U.S. funds to purchase those mines, and basically those 
funds went back to people in the United States of America. And 
I guess that's fair, if that's where the money went that's . . . so be 
it. 
 
But anyone that honestly believes for a minute that we were 
able to put out those kinds of dollars, of taxpayers' dollars, and 
we didn't have to pay interest on them, that they weren't a debt 
against the potash corporation, is living in a fool's paradise. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will take a lot more than six or 
seven years at the profits that the member talks about to erase 
that debt, because obviously he's servicing far more than the 
initial debt on the potash corporation. 
 
And I think about this . . . people, jobs. We went through this 
great exercise, we borrowed all this money, money that by and 
large didn't stay in the province of Saskatchewan, and we didn't 
create one new job by doing it — not one new job. The people 
that were working there were still working there, they were still 
getting up in the morning and taking their lunch to work, and 
their job was there, and that's commendable. At least we didn't 
lose any jobs. But there was no great creation of jobs by 
spending this 5 or 6 or $700 million — not one. 
 
What it did do was create a few jobs elsewhere because they 
took our taxpayers' money and went looking for  

places to build other mines in direct competition with the 
people that we had working in the mines here. And it might be a 
great job creation project in New Brunswick, or maybe some 
day in Manitoba, but it certainly wasn't here. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this whole exercise 
pointed out to me was that maybe we'd lost sight of working 
together as people in this province, and we got thinking more 
about political control of people than anything else. And it 
seemed to me that the basic tenets of nationalization of the 
things that the NDP Party were talking about was forgetting 
about people as individuals in our community, but saying yes, 
you will work for the Government of Saskatchewan, you will 
work for the people of Saskatchewan, but we'll exercise a 
certain amount of political control over you. 
 
And that was the part that I find so dangerous and insidious 
about the remarks made by the members opposite because what 
they're saying, when they're talking about the people, they're not 
talking about each and every one of us. Because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, an individual can go to work for me, for anybody else 
in this province, and if he isn't beholding to me for a job, he 
isn't beholding to me, he isn't going to have vote the same way 
that I do. 
 
And I think that the members opposite should think about that a 
little bit. And obviously some of them did because there are 
some well related cabinet documents, or documents from some 
of the Crowns that have floated around this Chamber, and I 
don't want to run through them again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where some members of that NDP government said after 11 
years of perspective, that hey, maybe this thing is a little bit 
more expensive than the taxpayer of this province can handle in 
a reasonable way; and yes, maybe we've made some mistakes 
on the political side because people are beginning not to feel a 
part of that social interaction which has been so common in this 
province. 
 
And they felt strongly enough about it that they wanted to 
document it, and they wanted to get into the process of 
implementing it because they realized that after 11 years that 
people were not feeling comfortable with it because people 
didn't want to be beholding for their political allegiances 
because of working for the government. People didn't want to 
be paying more taxes because the thing was not an economic 
success. 
 
And so they were willing to put their names in writing on 
documents to start that process where they indeed would do 
some of the things that members on this side of the legislature 
have been talking about for the last couple of years. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is important for 
people around this province to come out and express their 
views, as I think the member from Qu'Appelle-Wolseley has 
tried to do in public meetings around this province, because 
certainly I, as a legislator, and I believe, certainly as the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview is a legislator, neither one of 
us have all the answers and never will have in this social 
interaction which occurs in this province, because we are 
unique. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

659 
 

So I think it is important that we go out and we talk to people 
about this process, and I would hope very much that in 
SaskEnergy or some of the other things that I believe people 
should have a direct share in ownership in, that there will be 
hundreds of thousands of them. And I would hope that with the 
education and the perspective that we in this province have 
gained over the last 80-some years as we've watched the world 
evolve and as we've watched ourselves evolve in our farming, 
in our business, in every other walk of life, that people in this 
province are indeed better educated, more intelligent, and more 
capable of making decisions than they were when my 
grandmother came from England and moved into a two-room 
sod house south-west of Assiniboia in 1907. And I'm sure she's 
very proud of the fact that all her descendants through time 
have used that education system, have used our learning 
experiences, because if we do nothing as we go through life 
except learn from our mistakes, we'll have bettered ourselves. 
 
And I would like to think that as I have gone along and learned 
from her and learned from my father and learned about their 
experiences — because they were involved in those social 
interactions which we did as a society to make ourselves better 
— that we are better prepared today than we ever were before to 
make some of those decisions about how we will control and 
run our own destinies. And I would like think that I'm 
intelligent enough to take an ownership position in one of the 
things which is most basic to me — and that is heating my 
home — and that I could take that ownership position and, 
along with it, the responsibility to make sure that that ownership 
carried on into the future and it provided for me and my family 
in the best way possible. 
 
And I think the people opposite in this legislature do a great 
discredit to the vast majority of people in this province when 
they say, you are not smart or intelligent enough to act in a 
social way and control some of the things which shape our 
destinies. And when they say it has to be the government 
shaping those destinies, I think history has showed us, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, over time, that that isn't true, and there are a 
great many people in this province who don't subscribe to that. 
And those people are not traitors to their province. Those 
people have worked and built right alongside the people that 
feel the opposite way. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I think the democratic system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
these things come to an election every four years, give us the 
opportunity to voice that. But I get a little bit tired of saying, the 
government is the people — which it is — but only when it is 
the NDP who are the government. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I cannot accept. 
 
We're moving into an age . . . and I think everyone agrees that 
the pace of change is more rapid today than it's ever been 
before. Change not necessarily is always good. I think it's 
important that you cope with change and you manage change. 
And for this province to manage the change which must occur 
as we move into that next century, I want to make sure that as 
we do get into different trading situations that require 
processing plants,  

manufacturing as farming perhaps changes in some ways to 
meet those trading demands, as we look around at the world 
with other people who are talking about the same things as we 
are — and they come from all social economic structures; they 
come from all the different philosophical structures in the 
world, and many members of the Commonwealth: New 
Zealand, Australia — people that have had some of the same 
life experiences and the same social interactions that we've had 
here in western Canada, they're talking about it, as are the 
Chinese and the Soviets and the French, all through the 
European Economic Community. 
 
And this process of privatization, of public participation, of 
people — intelligent, well-educated people — interacting in 
their economies is being talked about by billions of people 
around the world. And it would be very foolish for us, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this province not to talk about it, not to 
explore it, and see if perhaps, for the taxpayer of this province, 
for the next generation of people who will follow behind us, it 
makes economic sense, and it also makes sense for those social 
things which we feel so strongly about. 
 
And I don't believe Saskatchewan is an island unto its own. The 
members opposite would like people in this province to believe 
that they are so terribly unique that they cannot fit into this 
world-wide process. And I admit we are unique in some ways, 
but we're not so unique that we can't interact with all these other 
people. And I think by interacting with them, and seeing what 
they're doing and borrowing the best, as I think we've done over 
many generations, we can go through this process and, I think, 
come out for the better. I think we can maintain our health care 
system as the best in Canada. 
 
I believe that we can maintain an education system that's going 
to prepare our children for the future and allow them to interact 
with all of these other people. 
 
And I believe we can do the things that are necessary — the 
paper mills and the alfalfa plants and the red meat processing — 
the things that others in the world have done and which are so 
applicable to this province, to generate the wealth, the economic 
well-being that will make us go into the 21st century with all of 
those things that we've come to know and love and hold dear. 
 
And so I think it's totally irresponsible for the members 
opposite to dismiss this process simply because only these 
things can be done by an NDP government, who then become 
the people. And I think that was their great failing in 1982, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because they had become the government on 
one side and the people were over here, and the people did not 
like the nationalizations. The people did not like having their 
politics dictated to them, and the people said: I am intelligent 
and well educated and I have learned from the past experiences 
of my parents, and I want to interact in this economy and I am 
not going to simply have the government dictate my place in 
this economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So I would ask simply, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as we go through this exercise, this debate on  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

660 
 

public participation, that the public out there judge it on its 
merits; judge it against what has happened in the past, most 
definitely, because our elders learned from hard experience, and 
they've applied it, and we've moved through the generations. 
 
And I would also ask that the members opposite, when they are 
talking about participating in the Saskatchewan economy, 
simply don't rule out the two-thirds to 70 per cent of the people 
that have never been hard-core members of the NDP Party and 
who wish to participate in this province, and I ask that the 
members opposite just simply give those of us who have never 
been in NDP the chance to participate and interact socially with 
our friends and neighbours in our communities. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I've 
mentioned earlier in this session, it is quite obvious that this 
Bill, Bill No. 1, the privatization Bill, is the main priority of the 
PC government. Privatization, that's their main priority, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — not health, not education. In fact, 
privatization is so important to them that they actually consider 
the possibility of putting privatization in our children's school 
curriculum. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that privatization and partisan 
politics has no place in the class-room. The PC government has 
no business tampering with our children. I believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan and the parents of Saskatchewan will 
be appalled to consider that the . . . to realize that this PC 
government is considering the possibility of putting 
privatization in the class-rooms. 
 
That's their priority, that's their priority, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
privatization. And they're bent on privatizing Saskatchewan's 
heritage no matter what the price to Saskatchewan people. And 
we've already experienced PC privatization in this province, and 
I say it's a betrayal of Saskatchewan men and women. PC 
privatization and cut-backs . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — . . . are harming the province's future 
prosperity, and let's look at the facts in this regard. In 1981, 
before the PC government started on its privatization . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member did not adjourn 
debate on Friday, was interrupted by the clock. The only way 
she could proceed with her speech is by leave of the Assembly. 
You have to ask for leave of the Assembly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Okay, I so ask for leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Westmount, what is  

your point of order? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, could you provide 
the appropriate citations for me? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. On the point of order . . . 
Order. On the point of order of the member from Westmount, 
the member for Regina Lakeview did not adjourn debate on 
Friday last. She could have come in at the beginning of the 
debate today and resumed. Another speaker was allowed to rise 
and speak in the debate. So no member may speak twice on the 
question. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I'd like to speak just briefly further on 
the point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When the debate began 
today, I believe the ruling is that the member must be present. 
 
The member for Lakeview was not present today when the 
debate began. Her first opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
speak, was when the member from Thunder Creek rose. The 
member from Lakeview was on her feet. You recognized the 
member from Thunder Creek. Now that was the first 
opportunity the member had to get back in the debate. 
 
I have yet, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It's very difficult for me to 
hear the member from Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I appreciate your comment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I have yet to hear the citation. I want to hear the 
citation on which you base your ruling. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Page 16, rule 28: 
“No Member may speak twice to a question . . .” The member 
lost her place when she was in the middle of her speech on 
Friday, did not resume debate today when the debate resumed. 
It has no reference to whether the member was in her place or 
not. The debate continues. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I want to follow up on what my colleague was talking about 
prior to being ruled out of order in terms of being able to enter 
this debate. 
 
As my colleague said, that this Bill, the Bill to create the 
privatization department is the first Bill that this government 
submitted to our Legislative Assembly in this sitting of the 
legislature. This Bill, the Bill to privatize everything in 
Saskatchewan really does indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan where this government's priorities lie. This 
government is not about our future. This government is not 
about creating new and innovative programs for Saskatchewan 
citizens. This government is about selling off our assets to their 
corporate friends and their political cronies. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government opposite created 
the department of privatization last year, about a year ago. And 
when the minister of privatization, the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley, published what he called the department's 
objectives and guide-lines, he  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

661 
 

stated that the objective of the department of privatization was 
to ensure the following. He said that the department's objective, 
number one, would be full benefit from the use of public assets 
to increase employment and create economic and investment 
opportunity. The second objective of his department was 
increased opportunities for personal and employee ownership. 
And a third objective of his department was more effective and 
efficient public services at good value for money. 
 
This is what the minister of privatization claimed to be his 
government's objectives — increased employment, individual 
ownership, and public services. 
 
Now the real question in this debate is whether or not this 
government has met those objectives since they introduced their 
privatization ideology. Have they met those objectives, or have 
they failed? 
 
Well let's look at employment. That's the first objective of 
privatization. This government privatized the highway's 
maintenance work and it meant over 400 Saskatchewan citizens 
lost their jobs. Within six months of privatization of Saskoil, 
this government allowed 25 per cent of the Saskoil labour force 
to be laid off. Within one year of the privatization of SED 
Systems, which is now owned by Fleet Aerospace of Ontario, 
over 70 SED employees in Saskatoon lost their jobs. And when 
this government privatized the school-based children's dental 
program, more than 400 dental workers lost their jobs in our 
province. 
 
So when you take into consideration all of the privatizations 
that this government has been involved in, close to 1,000 
Saskatchewan citizens have lost their jobs. That's what 
privatization has meant, and this government still has SaskTel 
to privatize, SaskPower to privatize, Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance to privatize, as well as a number of other publicly 
owned corporations. So from your own perspective that 
privatization would create employment, PC privatization simply 
isn't working. 
 
And let's look at the second objective of privatization. The 
second objective of this government is to increase the individual 
ownership of Saskatchewan. I want to review what privatization 
has meant in terms of Saskatchewan people owning and 
controlling their own companies. 
 
Privatization of Saskatchewan Minerals, which was the sodium 
sulphate plant at Chaplin, and the plant at Fox Valley along 
with the peat plant at Carrot River, has meant that those two 
companies are now owned by companies outside of 
Saskatchewan — one is from Ontario and one is from Quebec. 
 
The privatization of the Prince Albert Pulp Company has meant 
that all of the assets that were formerly owned by all of us here 
in Saskatchewan were sold to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington. Not one share of Weyerhaeuser Canada is owned 
in Saskatchewan; all shares of Weyerhaeuser are owned by 
people living in Tacoma, Washington. 
 
Now let's talk about the PC privatization of Saskatchewan 
Power. They sold off a drag-line, and they sold off a  

coal-mine to Manalta Coal of Alberta. Once again, is the 
drag-line and the coal-mine owned by individual people here in 
Saskatchewan? The answer is no. This drag-line and this 
coal-mine is owned by Fred Mannix of Manalta Coal, who 
resides in Alberta. 
 
Now within one year of privatization of Saskatchewan Oil, 75 
per cent of the privately held shares were held by people outside 
of Saskatchewan. So has the privatization of Saskoil meant 
individual Saskatchewan ownership and control? And the 
answer is obviously no. Seventy-five per cent of those shares 
are owned by people outside of Saskatchewan. And now the 
government, the PC government, is proposing to sell off the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to foreign nations. 
 
So PC privatization, which they say as one of their objectives is 
to create individual Saskatchewan ownership, is simply not 
working. We have SED Systems owned by Fleet Aerospace of 
Ontario. Sask Minerals is now owned by a company in Ontario 
and a company in Quebec. PAPCO, the P.A. pulp and paper 
corporation, is now owned by a company in Tacoma, 
Washington. And the drag-line and the coal-mine is now owned 
by Manalta Coal of Alberta. And three-quarters of the shares in 
Saskoil are held by people outside of our Saskatchewan. 
 
PC privatization means selling out Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan citizens no longer own and control their own 
companies. This government is about delivering our assets to 
their corporate friends in eastern Canada and in the United 
States, and not in ensuring that those assets stay here, in 
Saskatchewan, for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now let's talk about the privatization of public services. They 
said their third objective was to ensure that there would be more 
effective and efficient public services at good value for money 
in Saskatchewan. Well let's review the record. The PCs 
privatized the highways equipment and the highways workers. 
And what does PC privatization of highways mean? It means 
deteriorating Saskatchewan highways. 
 
This government privatized the school-based children's dental 
plan. And what does it mean? It means that people, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan, no longer have access to a school-based 
program, and they in fact have to travel many, many kilometres 
in order to get access to that service. The PC privatization of the 
dental plan has meant that those dental clinics have been closed 
in over 300 Saskatchewan communities. 
 
And now this government is proposing to privatize SaskPower 
— the natural gas side of SaskPower. And what will that mean? 
The privatization of SaskPower assets has already meant an 
increase in utility rates. The unjustifiable PC plan to split 
SaskPower into four separate corporations obviously has led to 
further increases in our natural gas rates and our electrical rates 
because we have four different bureaucracies trying to 
administer a corporation that used to be administered by one. 
Privatization of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has meant 
rate increases and steep . . . and poorer services. 
 
Let's talk about the PC privatization of our provincial  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

662 
 

parks. This privatization has led to higher service costs for 
Saskatchewan people who can't afford to go on high-flying trips 
to Saudi Arabia and Hong Kong and Japan and China and India, 
like our Premier does. Those parks have been there for 
Saskatchewan people to enjoy and use as part of their vacation 
holidays. And what has happened? We've seen those kinds of 
services increase in price and we've seen reduced services. So 
PC privatization has meant poorer services for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
It's obvious that the PC privatization in our province is failing. 
The PC privatization has failed to meet any of their own 
objectives. PC privatization has meant fewer jobs, fewer 
services, and reduced economic activity for Saskatchewan 
people. PC privatization has meant lost jobs, lost revenue, lost 
control over our own economic endeavours, and it's meant 
fewer services. 
 
Now some people would say that the PC privatization has to do 
with lowering our deficit and reducing our taxes, but let's look 
at that. In 1983 they privatized some of SaskPower's assets. The 
power rates increased and the deficit went up and our taxes 
went up and our taxes went up. In 1984 they privatized 
operations . . . or pardon me, they privatized operations, and we 
saw more assets in the Department of Highways going outside 
of our province. And what happened there? Four hundred 
workers were fired; we have deteriorating highways. They 
haven't saved us any money — the deficit has increased, and 
our taxes have gone up. 
 
In 1985 they privatized Saskoil. Once again, taxes increased 
and our deficit increased. In 1987 they privatized the 
school-based children's dental program and SED Systems. Once 
again, taxes increased and our deficit increased. In 1988 they 
privatized Sask Minerals and SaskCOMP and a major part of 
Saskatchewan telephones. Once again, taxes increased and our 
deficit increased. So PC privatization has not meant reduced 
taxes for Saskatchewan taxpayers, and it has not meant that our 
deficit has decreased; in fact, our deficit keeps going up and our 
taxes keep going up. 
 
(1545) 
 
I want to turn for a moment to some of this government's 
privatization initiatives, and I want to talk about, in particular, 
the privatization of the natural gas side of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. Now in the spring of 1988, the Deputy Premier of 
our province launched the privatization of the natural gas 
division of SaskPower. Since this government opposite took 
office in 1982, the long-term debt of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation has doubled, which they now claim is a problem. 
 
It's like the Devine deficit they have created with their string of 
deficit budgets. Their mismanagement creates a problem, then 
they announce that they realize they have a problem and they 
have to get rid of some of those assets. And yet they now 
propose to build the $1 billion political boondoggle down at 
Rafferty-Alameda. 
 
And I was pleased to hear that the federal licence has been lifted 
by the courts, and this government has been shown for what it 
is, that this government can't be trusted  

when it comes to the environment in our province. And 
environmentalists in our province have a great victory, 
environmentalists in Canada have a great victory today, because 
the federal government . . . or the federal courts have shown this 
government for what it really is, and that this government can't 
be trusted. 
 
Now I want to review the profits of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation for the past 10 years. For the past 10 years the 
natural gas division of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
has made a profit every year. That's enabled SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) to moderate the effective 
losses on the electrical side, which has suffered a loss in five 
out of the last six years under this PC government. In other 
words, an integrated Saskatchewan Power Corporation has been 
beneficial to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
Now in late April of 1988, the PC government suddenly 
announced that it had privatized Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation's natural reserves by selling 510 billion cubic feet 
of natural gas to Saskoil. That's a huge amount of gas, Mr. 
Speaker. That is about six times its total annual sales volume of 
gas. They have privatized an amount of natural gas equivalent 
to 15 years consumption by the 232,000 residential consumers 
in Saskatchewan. That's what this government's done. 
 
Now this sale was made to Saskatchewan Oil which is now a 
private corporation owned by 75 per cent of the shareholders 
outside of Saskatchewan. And the sale price announced for this 
privatization of natural gas is $325 million, but the market value 
of that volume of natural gas at the current rate is $1.93 per 
1,000 cubic feet at the Alberta border. That is $984 million. 
 
This government sold $984 million worth of natural gas for 
$325 million. This government has delivered the assets, owned 
and controlled by the people of our province, to shareholders in 
Saskoil who live outside of our province, and that simply is not 
fair and it needs to be stopped. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, I'd ask you to get the Minister of 
Education under control. He certainly would have been taken to 
task if he was in any class-room in Saskatchewan; he's acting 
inappropriately. And so I'd ask the Minister of Education to 
listen with some interest. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the provincial treasury . . . not the provincial 
treasury nor the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has actually 
received the $325 million, so-called purchase price. Now what 
they've received is about $125 million in cash. The Deputy 
Premier has tried to explain that the balance is composed of 13 
million Saskoil shares whose value is uncertain. He said that 
there's $5 million in Saskoil share purchase warrants; that cash 
flow royalties are to be paid over five years. There's a 
promissory note from Saskoil. And then they have some growth 
overriding royalty. 
 
Now that's a long bow to draw, Mr. Speaker, but for my money, 
we've got a billion dollar asset that has been given to Saskoil, 
and we've received $125 million in cash, and that's it. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

663 
 

Now these are the people that like to make deals; these are the 
people that like to dine and wine at the Diplomat and the 
Ramada Renaissance, and these are the kind of deals that these 
people engage in. They have a $1 billion asset that they've only 
gotten $125 million worth of money from. And all I can say is, 
some business operators, members opposite. 
 
Now on May 9 of last year the PC government admitted that it 
was splitting up Sask Power Corporation and they were creating 
three new companies on the gas side. Now this fragmentation of 
SPC makes absolutely no sense. It is the third SPC 
reorganization since former PC Party president George Hill 
became the president of our corporation at the end of 1986. 
 
Now after initially denying that they were planning to privatize 
the natural gas side of SPC, the PCs have finally admitted — 
finally admitted — that they are indeed planning to do so. 
George Hill created Sask(atchewan) Energy, the natural gas 
side of SPC, so that they could try to privatize it. 
 
Now earlier today, in question period, the Minister of Education 
said, under absolutely no circumstances would there be a 
privatization course brought into Saskatchewan class-rooms. 
Now I'd like to be able to believe that Minister of Education. I'd 
like to be able to take him at his word — and he shakes his 
head. 
 
But the Deputy Premier last spring, when we asked him 
whether the division of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the 
split-up of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, would lead to 
privatization, that member, the member from 
Souris-Cannington, said no. He said no. And at that time I 
believed him. You like to think that when people answer 
questions in this legislature, that you can believe them, that you 
can take them at their word. 
 
But I have come to discover, after two years of sitting in this 
legislature and observing the PC government, that you cannot 
take them at their word. The minister, the Deputy Premier, said 
to us that Sask(atchewan) Energy, the natural gas side of SPC, 
would not be privatized. And now we learn in January of 1989 
that this government is planning on selling off the natural gas 
side of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. These people 
cannot be trusted and you cannot take them for their word. 
Their word is worth nothing. 
 
Now the Minister of Education said to us today, there will be no 
attempts whatsoever to introduce a privatization course into 
Saskatchewan schools. I'd like to be able to believe him. But 
based on your past . . . the past practices of your ministers, Mr. 
Minister of Education, I can't believe you; I simply can't believe 
you. And I suspect that if you were allowed to fire the 
curriculum advisory committees, which you'd like to do, I 
suspect that if you continue to act in the way you've acted in the 
past in not collaborating with the partners in education, that we 
could very well see a propaganda course for the government 
members opposite. 
 
Now in the history of our province we have not had the political 
propaganda or the ideology of the government in our 
class-rooms. We've not had that. Children have been  

able to learn, and learn a number of things. They've learned 
about the mixed economy; we've learned about private 
enterprise; we've learned about co-operatives; and we've learned 
about public ownership. No particular ideology of any 
government in this province has ever been prevalent in 
class-rooms. 
 
And I would advise the members opposite that Saskatchewan 
people will not put up with any kind of PC propaganda course 
designed to ram your particular philosophy and ideology down 
the throats of Saskatchewan school teachers and school 
children. There is no place for politics in our schools — none 
whatsoever — and I would urge the members opposite to be 
mindful of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — We will be watching with great interest, 
because we know that the PC's propaganda on television that 
we're all subjected to regularly at our own expense, taxpayers' 
expense, isn't working. We know that the dozens of community 
meetings that you've held around this province aren't working; 
that people don't agree with your privatization strategy. 
 
We know that your polling is telling you that you are failing in 
your endeavours to ram privatization down Saskatchewan 
people's throats and that Saskatchewan people don't want it. 
And now this government and the PC members, the PC Party 
members, think their only place to sort of proselytize and 
propagandize Saskatchewan people is with the young people. 
And Saskatchewan parents won't put up with that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to continue when it comes to the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The privatization of this 
utility makes absolutely no sense, and it will not produce 
positive benefits for Saskatchewan people. It means that this 
government has sold off a Saskatchewan energy resource to an 
out-of-province company. It means a weaker and less efficient 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It will mean sharp utility 
increases to Saskatchewan consumers. A PC user-pay 
philosophy will mean much higher rates for farms and homes 
and businesses, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this government's engaged in a number of privatizations. 
They've sold the Saskatchewan Mining (and) Development 
Corporation, which last year alone made $60 million, or a 19 
per cent return on our investment. They sold it. 
 
They sold Saskoil. In 1984, Saskoil made $44 million in profits; 
that stayed in our province. In 1985, it made $40.6 million 
worth of profit; that stayed in our province. And now when 
Saskoil has a profit, the dividends are paid to people outside of 
our province. 
 
They sold this Manalta coal mine . . . or they sold the coal mine, 
the Poplar River coal mine, to Manalta of Alberta. Now let's 
just talk about what this little deal was about. They sold a $45 
million drag-line to Manalta Coal of Alberta. Now in order to 
make that purchase, Manalta had to borrow the money, and the 
Government of  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

664 
 

Saskatchewan guaranteed the loan — that's what this 
government did, and this enabled Manalta, a privately-owned 
Alberta corporation to avoid issuing a prospectus or release 
financial information to provincial security regulatory agencies 
across our province. 
 
And then in November of 1984 the government privatized the 
Poplar River mine at Coronach, once again to Manalta Coal of 
Alberta. Now the then minister, the member from Yorkton, 
admitted in his public statement that the province had a $129 
million investment in the Poplar River coal mine, and the sale 
price to Manalta was $102 million — great business people 
here. And the province financed $89 million of that purchase 
price for Manalta. 
 
The only way these guys can attract business to our province is 
to give it to them, give our assets to those out-of-province 
business people or guarantee loans. That's the only way these 
people can attract business. So in other words, we had an asset 
worth $129 million, this government sold it to Manalta for $102 
million, and then we lent them $89 million to make the deal — 
some business men and women over there. 
 
Then the PC Government entered into a 30-year coal purchase 
agreement to purchase coal supplies from Manalta to supply the 
Poplar River power station at Coronach. Now that, my friends, 
is a bad privatization deal, but it's a good deal for Manalta Coal. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could you give us an example of 
privatization . . . 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — The member opposite asked, any good 
examples of privatization? 
 
The PC privatization strategy should be judged in four ways. 
Does that PC privatization strategy deliver public assets to 
people who reside outside of Saskatchewan; does that PC 
privatization strategy mean lost jobs; does that PC privatization 
mean lost revenue to our province; and does that PC 
privatization strategy mean lost services and increased costs and 
services to Saskatchewan people? And does that PC 
privatization strategy mean an increasing debt, an increase in 
taxes? And on all of those, all of those, members opposite, men 
and women of the PC party, your privatization strategy has 
failed on every count — every count. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now I want to talk about highways. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think constant interference is not 
necessary. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now the Minister of Education likes to chat 
and rant and rave at the back of the hall. If the Minister of 
Education wants to have a dialogue with me, he can come down 
and sit in his seat and we can discuss privatization. I will note 
with interest what this minister has to say about privatization. 
He's great at sitting at the back of the hall, claptrapping. He's 
good at that, but he rarely enters into any kind of debate in our 
province. This minister is rarely in the legislature, and when he 
is he  

doesn't have the . . . 
 
(1600) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. 
 
I think that, you know, we should refrain from comments like 
the minister's never in the legislature, and that's . . . Order, 
order, order. Order, order. 
 
I think, you know, personal references don't add to the debate 
on either side, on either side. And perhaps if we just get on with 
the debate. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will 
take your words under advisement. I think this minister's a bit 
sensitive about the fact that I am now the Education critic, that 
he has been shown for what kind of a minister he is in this 
legislature on several occasions, and so the only way that he can 
get at me is by shouting and screaming when I'm on my feet in 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now I want to talk about what this government did to 
highways. On April 1983 the then minister of Highways, Jim 
Garner, fired 157 Highways workers because he said that: 
 

These lay-offs are a move from socialism to freedom for 
the employees who will now have the opportunity to work 
for the private sector. 
 

And I quote Hansard, April 18, 1983, and that's what this 
government said. 
 
In March of 1984, Garner's further privatization of Highways 
led to the firing of a further 237 workers. He said at that time, 
and I quote: 
 

It's freedom of choice. I'm giving them the opportunity to 
transfer to the private sector. 
 

As quoted in the Leader-Post, March 23, 1984. 
 
And then in May of 1984, Garner privatized more than 400 
pieces of highways equipment in our province worth $40 
million. And these great entrepreneurs opposite, these great 
business people, only collected $6 million in revenue; $6 
million in revenue, that's all they collected. And many of the 
purchasers were from people outside of Saskatchewan. Those 
assets have left our province for good — they're in the United 
States, they are in Alberta, they're in Ontario and Manitoba, and 
you can sure tell by the highways; you can sure tell by the 
highways. 
 
This high-flying government that likes to fly all over 
Saskatchewan on the government aircraft needs to get down on 
the ground and get into their government cars and go up and 
down the highways of Saskatchewan. And if the cabinet 
ministers would do that, the Minister of Highways might have 
some support on that side of the House to do something about 
repairing Saskatchewan highways. 
 
So what does the privatization of highways mean? The 
privatization of highways has meant over 400 jobs lost, it  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

665 
 

has meant $40 million of Saskatchewan assets have gone to 
people outside of our province, and it certainly has meant a 
significant deterioration of our province's highway system. 
 
Now I'd like to talk about SED Systems in Saskatoon . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I will talk about SED Systems. I see 
I've got a bit of a rise from the minister responsible for the 
science and technology community. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's the minister of slot machines. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My colleague says this is the minister in 
charge of slot machines. 
 
Now SED Systems of Saskatoon was established as a private 
company by the University of Saskatchewan in 1972, and it 
emerged from the university's high-tech research and 
development work and grew out of a space engineering division 
of the university's Institute of Space and Atmospheric Studies. 
In 1987 SED was owned by the university, by the province, by 
the provincial government, or by the people of Saskatchewan 
and by its employees, and there were also some private 
shareholders involved. 
 
SED Systems in 1987 employed 370 people in Saskatoon, the 
city I represent, and the city the minister of high science or 
technology represents. Now in January of 1987, the 
government, the PC government, allowed SED to be sold off to 
Fleet Aerospace of Ontario. That's what this government 
allowed. And the minister in charge of economic development 
defended the deal by saying that this government would ensure 
that that company stayed in Saskatchewan and that the 350 
people working in Saskatoon would stay employed and that the 
management of the company would still be in Saskatoon. 
 
Now this government sold $2 million in SED shares to Fleet in 
exchange for Fleet's shares worth only about $1.3 million. By 
early 1988 this deal had fallen apart. Fleet was forced to lay off 
. . . or Fleet forced SED Systems to lay off 70 workers and they 
threatened to fire more staff if the Government of Saskatchewan 
didn't meet the demand of Fleet Aerospace of Ontario. 
 
Now the minister opposite says that's not true. Well let's just 
talk about that. Here is what we have quoted by the chairman, 
George Dragone, in a Star-Phoenix article, February 24, 1988. 
And this is what the chairman of Fleet Aerospace of Ontario 
said: 
 

The message to the government is, we'd better get some 
financial help, and some help quick. If we don't have help, 
we'll cut it right back again and again, and we may even 
have to move it out of here. 
 

Now what happened? In March 1988 SED Systems lays off 
more workers, and they replace SED's manager by an Ontario 
Fleet Aerospace employee. Here's a manager that was from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, this government talks about educating our children 
for the 21st century. We have had many, many, many heads of 
publicly owned corporations who were  

born and raised and educated in our province of Saskatchewan, 
and what does this government do? Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation — Roy Lloyd was the president of 
that corporation. Roy Lloyd's fired and they bring in some guy 
from Alberta. 
 
Then we have the Saskatchewan potash corporation — 
Saskatchewan potash corporation. What do they do there? They 
have David Dombowsky, a Saskatchewan born and raised man 
who gets his education at the University of Saskatchewan, he's 
running the largest potash corporation in the world, and what do 
these guys do? They bring in a guy from the United States. 
That's what these guys do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Wrong. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And he says wrong. I'm absolutely right — 
absolutely right. There is no one who's the head of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation that is Saskatchewan born 
and raised, no one whatsoever. 
 
Now then, what happens to SED Systems? SED says the PC 
Government . . . pardon me, the PC government then gives in to 
Fleet's latest demand. The PC government agrees to buy the 
building that SED is located in for 10 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I repeat once more that constant 
interruption of the speaker is not good form in the House by 
anybody, and I ask for the hon. member to refrain from doing 
so. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. So then the 
government agrees to purchase the new building that Fleet 
Aerospace or SED's in, for $10 million in order to give SED 
and Fleet some operating cash, and SEDCO agrees to lease the 
building back to SED for 20 years. And the terms of that lease 
have never been released to the public to this day. 
 
Now from the onset, I would say that the PC government 
opposite has mismanaged the privatization of SED Systems. 
This is a company that used to be a proud and successful 
high-tech Saskatchewan company. It was developed by 
Saskatchewan people to give Saskatchewan a chance to 
participate in high-tech opportunities. 
 
PC privatization of this company has meant the following. Over 
70 workers are gone; the province's $2 million investment in 
SED Systems, if it was sold now, would only be worth 
$600,000; and ownership of this company has been transferred, 
not to Saskatchewan people, not to Saskatchewan taxpayers, but 
to an Ontario company that then uses public threats to get more 
financial assistance from the Government of Saskatchewan. 
That's what privatization has meant for SED. 
 
Now I want to talk about Saskatchewan Minerals. 
Saskatchewan Minerals was a profitable, publicly owned 
sodium sulphate producer that was developed in the mid-1940s. 
And this company, since 1946, made a profit every single, 
solitary year except one, and that was in 1972. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

666 
 

Now in late March 1988, the minister of privatization 
announces that Sask Minerals has been sold. The sodium 
sulphate operations at Chaplin and Fox Valley are sold to a 
subsidiary of Dickenson Mines of Ontario, Kam-Kotia, for 
$12.5 million. The peat moss operation of Sask Minerals is sold 
to Premier Cdn of Quebec for 3.4 million. Now the announced 
sale price was $15.9 million. That $15.9 million is less than 
Saskatchewan Minerals' profits from just the last six years. It's 
less than that. 
 
Now on December 8, 1987, Premier Cdn enterprises issued a 
public share offering prospectus seeking to raise funds in 
Quebec, from investors in Quebec, in the amount of $3.8 
million. But the PC privatization of the peat moss plant at 
Carrot River only brought in a final price of $3.4 million. 
 
Now in early 1989 another Ontario company, Corona 
corporation, launched a take-over bid of Dickenson, including 
the sodium sulphate operations here in Saskatchewan. Now in 
this example of PC privatization, or privatization PC style, we 
see that there was no advance consultation with the working 
people at Sask Minerals, no advance consultation with the 
community at Chaplin and Fox Valley and Carrot River. And 
the Minister of Education says it's not true, but my colleague, 
the member from Moose Jaw South and myself happened to be 
out at Chaplin when the minister of privatization went to 
consult with the people after the deal was done. Consultation 
PC style means you don't consult for months beforehand and 
you develop a process; you don't do that — you go in 
afterwards and you tell the people what you're going to do. 
 
Now here's what else happened with this great little deal of the 
members opposite. There was no public tendering. No one in 
our province had the opportunity to buy Sask Minerals. The 
workers didn't have the opportunity to buy Sask Minerals. 
There was absolutely no public tendering of the assets for sale 
and the assets were sold in a sweetheart deal to 
non-Saskatchewan corporations. That's what privatization has 
meant. 
 
Now let's talk about the parks system. Here's another PC 
privatization. Since 1986 the government has been privatizing 
Saskatchewan parks. The most recent example that I'm aware of 
is the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. This government has built 
private hotels in Cypress Hills, Moose Mountain and in Duck 
Mountain parks. They had a little privatization deal going in the 
North Battleford park, but it seems to have fallen apart, with 
their friend Tim Ryan, who's a great party . . . Conservative, and 
great party supporter. 
 
Now in this case, what's happened in each case, privatization 
has meant the same developer gets control of all rental cabins 
and condominium units. Now privatization in our parks has 
meant increased cost to the public. For example, at Duck 
Mountain the private developer increased condominium rents 
by 25 per cent. When Mt. Blackstrap's ski operation was 
privatized, the price of a season ticket for a family increased by 
100 per cent; and after the Moose Mountain Park golf course 
was privatized, seasonal green fees increased 40 per cent. 
 
Now the new privatized Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park  

meant sharp increases in entry fees in 1988, and we still don't 
know what's going to happen in 1989. Now the deal permits 
further increases in 1989 and in the future, and I'll give you an 
example. An adult in 1987 was able to enter the park for $2. In 
1988 that increased to $3.75, and in 1992 it looks as though it 
will increase to $4.75, for an increase of 27 per cent. 
 
A student wanting to go to the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park in 
1987 paid $1.50. In 1988 when it was privatized, they paid 
$2.50. That's a 67 per cent increase on the children of our 
province. And then under privatization in 1992, students will 
pay $3.50. 
 
Let's talk about pre-schoolers, little kids, little kids under the 
age of five. In 1987 when this park was publicly owned, little 
kids could get into that park free. They could go and see the 
animals for free. Their parents didn't have to come up with the 
money. Now in 1988 they'll pay a buck. That's what they paid 
last summer. That is a significant increase. And in 1992 those 
parents of pre-school children will pay $2 — another significant 
increase. For little children — eight-month-olds, two-year-olds, 
three-year-olds — they will pay $2 to go and see the animals at 
the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. 
 
(1615) 
 
I think that's unbelievable, and it's not what I call a fair and 
equitable fee increase. But that's what PC privatization has 
meant to parks and the young people and the young families 
and the families that go and enjoy our parks. 
 
Now privatization has not only meant higher costs charged by 
the private corporations in our parks. It's also meant higher 
costs charged by the PC government for the public services it 
still provides. For instance, park entry fees have gone up over 
30 per cent, camping fees over 80 per cent, and charges for 
swimming lessons for young kids has increased by 150 per cent. 
That's what PC privatization has meant. 
 
Now this Bill, Mr. Speaker, gives this government the 
opportunity to do whatever it wants, whenever it wants, 
however it wants. This Bill means that privatization deals will 
continue in our province in secret. They will be secret deals 
done behind closed doors and not in the open. That's what this 
Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister and the government will try to explain away 
this privatization Bill by pretending it's a little innocent Bill and 
it really doesn't have much to do with privatization. But no one 
can believe this government any more. We can't believe them 
because their word is not their word. 
 
They somehow pretend that this Bill really won't mean 
anything, that PC privatization deals will have to come before 
the legislature. But we know that that hasn't been the case in the 
past. They didn't bring the Sask Mineral deal before the 
legislature. They didn't bring the SaskCOMP deal before the 
legislature. They didn't bring forward the privatization of the 
school-based children's dental plan before the legislature for 
public debate. They didn't bring forward a Bill to privatize 
SaskTel, and many,  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

667 
 

many assets of SaskTel have already been privatized. 
 
When they privatized parks, they didn't bring that before the 
legislature. When they privatized the highways, they didn't 
bring that before the legislature. They haven't brought many 
privatization Bills into this House for public debate. 
 
This government likes to do deals down at the Diplomat and the 
Ramada Renaissance in closed little cubby-holes with their 
big-business friends and their political cronies. But they have 
no mandate to sell off Saskatchewan assets; they have no 
mandate whatsoever. 
 
Governments in this province and in this country own 
absolutely nothing; they own nothing. The people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada own the assets. Governments are 
elected every three or four or five years to manage those assets, 
to manage the taxpayers' dollars, and this government's not 
doing a very good job at that. 
 
Taxes have gone up steadfastly since this government came to 
office in 1982. Taxes go up and the deficit goes up and services 
go down, and working people in this province have a smaller 
amount of money in order to provide an education for their 
children, to provide a house for their family, to take a little 
vacation once in a while into our parks, because this 
government keeps taking more and more and more away from 
them. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance said that his budget was a hit with 
Saskatchewan people. Well it was not; it was not. I had the 
opportunity to meet with literally dozens and dozens of 
constituents and people out and about Saskatchewan since this 
government brought in its budget. Saskatchewan people are 
feeling taxed to death, taxed to death. And this government will 
say, well we only had tax increases on the sin taxes or the sin 
things, like cigarettes and alcohol and lottery tickets. But there 
are a lot of people in this province that drink alcohol. There are 
a lot of people in this province that smoke. There are a lot of 
people in this province that buy lottery tickets and go to bingo, 
and they're not necessarily the poor; they're middle income 
people. 
 
And those middle income people see their Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation rates going up when SaskPower had $100 million 
profit last year. They see their SaskTel rates going up, and 
SaskTel had a profit. They see their car insurance rates just 
went up March 1 — 7 per cent; and if you drive an old car — 
10 per cent. They see their mortgages going up, and this 
government says absolutely nothing about rising interest rates, 
nothing at all. 
 
They see their wages being cut back and this government 
introducing legislation that will make it more difficult for 
working men and women in this province to make a living. 
They see this government privatizing publicly owned assets, 
and they see job lay-offs. They see their young children not 
being able to get into university or Kelsey institute because this 
government has cut funding to post-secondary educational 
institutions, and those institutions have been forced to put on 
enrolment quotas. They see grade 12 students who graduated 
last year, going back to high school to get their marks up 
because you have to have a 78 or 79 to get into university. 
 

And they wonder what is this government doing with their 
money. They see them selling off these assets, and some people 
think you're actually getting money for these assets, but you're 
not. They see tax increases. They see the deficit going up. They 
see their ability to make a living in this province going down. 
And so what happens? 
 
Men and women of our province are thinking about leaving 
Saskatchewan because they don't think there's a future here. 
That's what the men and women are doing. In February of '89, 
6,300 people left Saskatchewan. On Saturday night I spoke to a 
family, he's a surgeon at a hospital in Saskatoon and they're 
leaving Saskatchewan. And you hear social workers leaving 
Saskatchewan and young people leaving Saskatchewan and 
teachers leaving Saskatchewan and business men and women 
leaving Saskatchewan because they don't think they have a 
future here. They don't think they have a future here. 
 
Now it seems to me that whatever you people are doing is not 
working. We don't have economic development in our province. 
You're not lowering the deficit. People are paying taxes for a 
depleting number of services. Services just aren't there any 
more. 
 
They see you privatizing everything. They think that you people 
are absolutely out of control. They think you're out of control, 
and this Bill is indicative of a government that has gone too far. 
This Bill is indicative of a government that wants to do 
whatever it wants, whenever it wants, however it wants. And 
the people of our province know that you people are 
anti-democratic, that you don't care about them, that you've 
given up on them. And so your job now is to simply stay in 
power for as long as you can so you can wine and dine at the 
Diplomat. 
 
Well, members opposite, it's no longer working. The people of 
our province have caught on to you. And after the little exercise 
that the minister of privatization went through on the weekend 
in Swift Current, people don't want your propaganda in our 
school systems. People don't want PC Party propaganda in 
schools. They know what you're about, that you're about 
deficits and tax increases and taking money away from them. 
People regularly comment that they now have to work 30 or 40 
per cent of the year just to pay taxes to the government, a PC 
government in Ottawa and a PC government in Saskatchewan. 
And they know that those governments are heartless. They have 
no compassion. They have no passion and no care. 
 
The people are on to you, and we're on to you. And I can assure 
the people of Saskatchewan that my colleagues and I are not 
prepared to allow you people to deliver the people's assets to 
your corporate friends and your cronies; that we will be 
opposing privatization with vigour; that we know that there is a 
new vision of Saskatchewan; that there's a new day coming; 
that there's a new Jerusalem in this province. There's a new 
Jerusalem coming in this province under the leadership of the 
next leader and the next premier of Saskatchewan, the Leader of 
the New Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

668 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — We have 26 members of the legislature that 
have integrity on the New Democratic Party's side, and there are 
literally dozens and dozens and dozens of Saskatchewan people 
who are coming forward to offer themselves as candidates for 
the New Democratic Party in the next provincial election. 
 
We welcome that election. We have a leader; we are involved in 
a policy formation in our province and within our party. We 
will have a bright new future for Saskatchewan people under a 
vigorous leader who has integrity and knows how to tell the 
truth. We will have future, forward-looking policies that will 
meet the real needs of Saskatchewan people. We will ensure 
that there is real economic development for all of us in this 
province. We will ensure that the family farm can continue to 
exist, that small town Saskatchewan will have a future and have 
hope. We will ensure that farm families and urban families have 
access to services that allow them to have a future. We will 
ensure that the working men and women of our province aren't 
taxed to death. We will ensure that the working men and 
women of our province have jobs and that the young people of 
our province have jobs. We will make sure that our government 
is fair and compassionate and cares about people. 
 
I look forward to the day that you people have the jam to call 
the next provincial election because we'll be there with our 
leader and with our policy, and we will win the next 
government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to be able to rise and speak to this 
debate and also speak to the people of Saskatchewan about an 
initiative our government is bringing to them, an initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, that offers enormous benefits to everyone in this 
province — anyone who would like to become involved with 
the government and with the people in providing service to 
individuals, whether they are young or old or whoever; who 
would like to become involved in the governing and the 
business of providing the services to the people of our fair 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we're addressing and speaking about today is 
public participation. The very act, Mr. Speaker, of bringing 
public participation to the province demonstrates the 
forward-looking attitude that people have come to expect from 
this Progressive Conservative government, and the companies 
and resources owned by Saskatchewan men and women will 
continue to generate tax revenues and contribute to the 
provincial treasury. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us involved in this 
Assembly and any individual involved in business, whether 
they be on the farm or a small-business person, realizes that the 
province continues to operate because, as we create initiative, as 
our economy continues to move, as people bring in money and 
make money, they also pay taxes, and it's the taxes of 
individuals that go towards creating the economy and the 
movement of services that the people of this province have 
come to expect. 
 

Mr. Speaker, by transferring ownership of Crown corporations 
from the government to the people of Saskatchewan, public 
participation will expand our economic growth, develop our 
resources, create new jobs, and encourage new investment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has 
been involved in a variety of public participation initiatives, and 
we must also remind the people of this province that in 1982 
even members on the opposite side of the House, a number of 
leaders of that government of that day, sat down and discussed 
forms of public participation within the Crown corporations of 
that day. 
 
Some early examples of public participation include contracting 
highway construction and maintenance services, public bond 
and share offerings in Saskoil, provincial park leasing 
agreements, and the sale of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company). Mr. Speaker, I'm going to detail these initiatives 
more extensively later because the story they tell is very 
important as we enter and continue in this debate. 
 
But to continue on in this vein, Mr. Speaker, in January of 1988 
this government created the Department of Public Participation 
to provide a greater focus on the program by encouraging 
Saskatchewan people to play a larger role in the growth and the 
development of their province. 
 
Through the development of some government assets and the 
formation of new Saskatchewan companies, public participation 
has created new jobs and attracted new investment and revenue 
dollars into this province. The best example of this, Mr. 
Speaker, is the former Crown-owned, money-losing company 
called PAPCO. That cost, to the people of this province, when 
the company was in . . . when PAPCO was in operation, was 
$90,000 a day to operate. Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this 
province were putting out $90,000 a day just to keep a company 
in existence. 
 
(1630) 
 
And when PAPCO was sold to Weyerhaeuser Canada in 1986, 
Mr. Speaker, a transformation began. Run by private industry, 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser is now responsible for 1,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan. About 100 people run a saw mill in Big River, 
another 100 at a chemical plant in Saskatoon, and the rest 
working out of its pulp and paper mills in Prince Albert. 
 
And earlier on, as we were discussing the Speech from the 
Throne, the Deputy Speaker gave us a rousing speech on what 
Weyerhaeuser meant in his part of the province and how it was 
providing jobs to people in his area; just pointed out to us the 
fact that the sale of PAPCO was a worthwhile investment, not 
only to the people in north-western Saskatchewan but to all the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Weyerhaeuser constructed a $250 million 
world-class paper mill, over 700 construction jobs were created, 
and 169 permanent positions are now a reality. And just 
recently, Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser has announced a $20.8 
million expansion in their Prince  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

669 
 

Albert pulp mill. This initiative is expected to create 34 
permanent jobs and about 100 man-years of employment in the 
construction phase. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add that they have tied this 
expansion directly to the free trade agreement, which was 
opposed as vehemently by the members opposite as was the 
sale of PAPCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with figures such as these, I'm not sure why the 
members would take such a negative outlook regarding public 
participation. I believe any time any corporation and or any 
individual is willing to put some money out to create jobs and 
create employment that is good, not only for all the people, but 
we have been hearing over the past number of days there have 
been many questions regarding jobs and regarding job 
employment. 
 
And I would point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that the directive of 
this government and the intention is to create more jobs, more 
employment, so that our young people can continue to remain. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, down the road we will see more 
people coming back to Saskatchewan because of the job 
creation, because of the availability of jobs within this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the monthly incomes of the paper mill employees 
are injecting approximately $500,000 directly into the city of 
Prince Albert. And in April of 1988, Weyerhaeuser presented a 
cheque to the Government of Saskatchewan for 30.5 million as 
the first instalment on the total profits of $63.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other initiatives in public participation were seen 
when WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation became a fine 
example of how effective the private industry can be in 
providing a service. Since forming, WESTBRIDGE has earned 
$6 million in out-of-province contracts, and the company's 
quick rate of growth has already created 50 new employment 
opportunities — 50 new jobs that were not available prior to the 
formation of WESTBRIDGE. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these are permanent jobs, jobs that people 
can continue to look forward to and feel this job security that 
most every individual would like to have. And continued 
expansion promises 200 additional jobs within this industry. 
 
Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, another example of planned gas 
development activities resulting from the purchase of and 
utilize Saskatchewan Power natural gas reserves, will create 
new economic activity. Mr. Speaker, with 100 new wells to be 
drilled and the potential for over 600, there are 1,000 jobs 
projected to be created in the Saskoil sector and in the oil and 
gas sector of SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of TeleBonds helped raise $103 
million in new capital for the telephone company to expand its 
digital technology and improve individual line service to rural 
customers. I believe, Mr. Speaker, as I've been talking to 
individuals around my constituency, a number of whom bought 
some TeleBonds, each and every one of them, Mr. Speaker, has 
indicated that they thought it was a good idea to raise the 
money from within  

the province versus borrowing money outside of the province 
and, specifically, going to New York and paying large interest 
and sending it outside of the province, rather than investing 
right here at home. 
 
And I find many of my constituents are more than happy to be 
involved and to be able to invest some of their savings. And we 
find, Mr. Speaker, I believe that Saskatchewan has one of the 
highest savings per capita of anywhere in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sale of Saskatchewan Minerals corporation to 
two companies brought new marketing and technological 
expertise into the province. Kam-Kotia Mines Ltd., one of the 
companies, has a profit-sharing plan that resulted in over 
100,000 being given back to their employees at Chaplin and 
Fox Valley. 
 
The sale of the Meadow Lake Sawmill to the employees and 10 
local Indian bands has attracted 250 millions of dollars of new 
investment to this area of the province. 
 
Two new companies, a chopstick factory and a pulp mill, have 
decided to locate and invest in this area, and there are more than 
400 jobs projected to develop because of this sale to the 
employees and these native Indian bands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new employee and native owners have created 
a new spirit of enterprise and attracted new economic activity to 
the area. And I know that the native owners are more than 
happy to be involved and to be looking at creating employment 
in their sector so that they can create an added avenue by which 
the native people of this province can look forward to 
developing industry in which they can be a part of, as well. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what public participation is all about. 
Increased participation and the delivery of public services is 
being achieved through new forms of delivery, involving 
contracting services from the private sector, government 
employees, community groups, and third parties. 
 
In 1983, the Saskatchewan Department of Highways and 
Transportation began contracting much of their highway 
construction and maintenance operations out. Today 97 per cent 
of the construction work done on the highways is contracted to 
the private sector. 
 
Data entry services within the Department of Finance have been 
contracted to a private company, COMPUSHARE of Regina. 
Mr. Speaker, COMPUSHARE'S technological advantages and 
proven marketing expertise ensures quality service delivery and 
cost efficiencies. 
 
Increased participation has occurred within the provincial 
government's auditing services. Previously conducted by the 
Provincial Auditor, private auditing firms now deliver these 
services with great success, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these 
services are cost benefit and service improvements . . . there are 
cost benefit and service improvements through public 
participation. 
 
In December of 1988, Mr. Speaker, requests for proposals were 
advertised for the sale of three government-owned  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

670 
 

northern farms. To encourage local participation, northern 
communities have been invited to bid on these farms. 
Historically, the provincial government farms have lost almost 
$1 million annually. Mr. Speaker, I believe that as the northern 
communities get involved and look at developing these northern 
farms, they can provide a great service, not only in their 
communities but to the areas in which they serve. And I believe 
public participation will be very beneficial in creating a more 
economic climate for those northern farmers to work in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government-owned White Track ski hill was 
recently reopened through the efforts of a local volunteer ski 
club. The facility was closed in 1986 and lost 104,000 in its last 
year of operation. Last fall the Moose Jaw Alpine Ski Club 
worked with the Department of Public Participation to create a 
viable business proposal allowing for the club to reopen the 
facility using local volunteer labour. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate that local volunteer labour. 
 
Many times, Mr. Speaker, we may look at government as the 
means of realizing a dream or having high expectations of what 
government can do for us, but there are also times when 
volunteer help can be very beneficial in providing services to 
our communities. And as we see the local volunteer help in 
working to open the ski slope at Moose Jaw, I'm sure that 
everyone involved has taken great pride in realizing that they 
have provided a service and reopened a recreation facility that 
so many people were enjoying, had enjoyed over the years, and 
were able to enjoy again this year; not only provided economic 
involvement within the community, but it also provided an area 
of recreation that . . . from the youngest to the oldest, people 
could enjoy. People didn't have to drive for miles out of Moose 
Jaw to go to ski; they just had to drive to their own local ski 
slope and enjoy a service that they had had for a number of 
years. Mr. Speaker, the hill is now operating successfully, and 
an important community service has been preserved for the 
people of Moose Jaw and for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contracting highway ditch mowing services to 
local farmers, businesses and communities has provided them 
with new opportunities to supplement their incomes. In fact, 
I've had many people approach me about the possibility of 
bidding on some of these tenders. And it is an indication to me 
that there are many individuals who are willing to get involved 
in providing a service, not only to their community but to their 
province. There are many people in Saskatchewan who would 
like to become involved in providing services and, in fact, in 
some cases giving of themselves to build their communities and 
build their province. The contracting out of the ditch mowing 
has resulted in a 55 per cent cost saving from the contracting 
out of these services. 
 
Contracting the function of the Provincial Inquiry Centre 
resulted in one-stop convenience for provincial and federal 
government inquiries. Contracting of the service, Mr. Speaker, I 
am told will save $118,000 per year. And, Mr. Speaker, not 
only was the service contracted out but all employees were 
offered continued employment with the government. There 
wasn't a loss of jobs; everyone was given the advantage of 
working within government  

or working within the company that was formed. 
 
The Department of Education has also been practising some 
public participation initiatives. Let me tell you about one. A 
Saskatchewan education employee submitted the winning 
proposal to contract tape duplication and film loan services for 
the provincial government. The employee's proposal was 
chosen over three other bids received from private companies, 
based upon projected cost efficiencies, service improvements, 
and new economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, better technology and marketing expertise for this 
service exists in the private sector, and I believe, as we look at 
the private sector, as we look at personal initiative, there is 
possibly just a little bit more pride or greater pride exhibited by 
individuals when they feel they have a part of something, versus 
just working for someone, when they've got an investment that 
they want to see enhance and go ahead. 
 
By contracting these services, the government will be enabled 
to improve service delivery and avoid purchasing costly 
equipment. The new employee owner plans to expand his 
company as a private contractor to include some video 
post-production work. What were the cost savings of this, Mr. 
Speaker? They are projected to be in the neighbourhood of 
$124,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the affected Saskatchewan education employees 
have been fully protected. All 15 of the employees were offered 
positions with the new company and alternative employment 
within the department. 
 
Let me give you another example of public participation. A 
welder with the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation has started his own business to deliver welding 
services to the government as a private contractor. As a private 
contractor the former SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) employee will be able to expand his 
earnings through private sector contracts and save the 
government 35 per cent of their former cost. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is a great saving to the people of this province. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1983 public participation in Saskatchewan's 
park system has encouraged economic diversification across the 
province. New business, investment, and volunteer delivery has 
improved and created many new facilities for residents and 
tourists to enjoy. Some of these, Mr. Speaker, include a new 
marina at Rowan's Ravine, and in my area of the province at 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park we have a new club golf 
house. And just recently, in fact, just a little over a year ago, we 
opened a new inn. The new inn is providing a service which 
was never there before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kenosee Park is a beautiful park. A major 
problem we have is the water in the water level within the lake. 
But aside from that, Mr. Speaker, we have a golf course which 
is next to none within this province. In the winter-time there is 
cross-country skiing and there is fishing off the lake. There's a 
large population of deer and moose and elk within the park, and 
many people enjoy  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

671 
 

coming to this park. In fact, it is the . . . last year and over the 
past number of years it has been the most utilized of any of the 
parks within this province. 
 
And just recently, as well, there's a large water slide developed 
in the area which was utilized to its fullest last year. In fact the 
developers were more than pleased with the use of that water 
slide. 
 
And so the creation and the building of this new inn has not 
only provided employment within the park, but has provided a 
service in meeting the needs of individuals as they come to the 
park — a place where they can stay; a place where they can 
relax and rest; a place where they can sit down and enjoy a bite 
with their friends and neighbours. And, Mr. Speaker, when I see 
that, I just see a lot of the benefits of public participation. 
 
And I also want to remind you that that inn was created and 
developed by six young entrepreneurs. They weren't well-to-do 
individuals. In fact five of the six are basically just starting out, 
but they wanted to provide a service. They could see that a lot 
of their . . . the young people that they had grown up were 
looking for a place to gather, were looking for something to do. 
And they wanted to give them an opportunity to have a place to 
stop when they came to the park, other than just parking on the 
parking lot. They wanted to provide a service. And I'm more 
than happy to be able to say that it is doing very well. And in 
fact I was talking to some of the owners recently, and they were 
saying it's working beyond their expectations. 
 
We also realize, Mr. Speaker, that interest rates are a thing that 
concern individuals, and I believe in the near future you will see 
us discussing interest rates as well. But what I would like to 
point out is that public participation in this case is working, and 
working very well. 
 
We also have a new golf clubhouse at Valley Centre recreation 
site. And as I'd mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, the White Track 
ski hill reopened under volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for as long as I could list public participation 
initiatives in this provinces, I could list positive economic 
benefits as well. These new forms of service delivery are 
encouraging more efficient use of our resources, new jobs are 
being created, and existing jobs are being protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people all over the province have been consulted 
about our public participation initiatives. In 1988, 15 public 
consultation meetings were held throughout the province with 
over 2,500 Saskatchewan people being involved. And I would 
like to speak just for a minute about a meeting I attended in 
Whitewood. In fact, it was the very first public participation 
meeting that was conducted in this forum, conducted in the 
Whitewood Inn. And, Mr. Speaker, we had over 150 people 
came out for that meeting, the very first one of its kind. 
 
And what was interesting, Mr. Speaker, was after a series of 
meetings and just sitting down and discussing some of the 
alternatives and what could be done, and how we could reach 
out and help people through public participation, what was 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, were some of the comments coming 
from the delegates who  

had taken the time to come and attend this meeting. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I might add that the comments were coming not just 
from individuals who profess to be Conservatives, or profess to 
be Liberals, but even from individuals who profess to be strong 
New Democrats. They could see there was a place for public 
participation; there was a place where they could be involved in 
the development of the economic activity in this province, and 
they wanted to have a part of it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 1989 meetings are presently under way to 
give more people within the province an opportunity to speak 
out and to voice their opinions, to voice their views. I believe 
the minister responsible for public participation had a meeting 
today, meeting with a group of people. 
 
And I know many of my colleagues, as they have been meeting 
with their constituents and discussing public participation 
throughout the province have found that there are many ideas. 
People all over this province have ideas of how we can make 
this place a better province, a better place to live. And I believe 
that is the intent of our government, is to create an environment 
where people from all walks of life can continue to come and be 
proud to live in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we find too, Mr. Speaker, that people are saying that they 
like our ideas. Not only do they like the ideas that we're 
presenting but they're also giving us some very positive and 
affirmative ideas that we can put to use as well, and that I'm 
sure the member from Indian Head-Wolseley has been more 
than happy to hear of and to receive some of the ideas and 
proposals that have come forward. The people of this province 
are giving us many of their own ideas and initiatives. 
 
Saskatchewan people want to see more efficient forms of public 
service delivery that will stimulate new investment and create 
new jobs. Saskatchewan people want to put their savings to 
work inside the province by purchasing bonds and Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people want to invest 
in the ownership of government assets by purchasing shares. 
Mr. Speaker, if they didn't, we wouldn't have the overwhelming 
success of the Sask TeleBonds and SaskPower bonds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan people didn't believe in those 
initiatives, they wouldn't have invested in them. But the fact is 
they have, and they have invested in very enthusiastically. They 
have been more than happy to get involved and to put their 
money to work here in the province of Saskatchewan. And most 
importantly, Saskatchewan people want more opportunities to 
invest and save in the province, to facilitate our own economic 
development. Mr. Speaker, this government is going to give the 
people of Saskatchewan many of the initiatives that they would 
desire to see, many of the opportunities that they are asking of 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also didn't just limit our consultation process 
to public meetings, but the Minister of Public Participation has 
also gone to the very people who would be affected by the 
process of public participation. In the past year we've had over 
20 informational seminars with over 400 government 
employees from all parts of the  
  



 
April 10, 1989 

672 
 

province being involved. Government employees are providing 
input into how public participation can build a stronger 
province, a stronger Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Speaker, 
employees want to have a greater control over improving public 
service delivery. They want to protect the quality of life here in 
Saskatchewan. They also want their rights and benefits 
protected, and they want to learn more about the many 
opportunities public participation can provide, not only for 
themselves but for their children and the children of the next 
generation. And we are doing our best to meet those requests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing about public participation 
is that it is not an ideological idea as the members opposite 
would have you believe. In fact they have said many times that 
we are blinded by our right-wing ideology. I'd like to remind 
you, the members opposite, that public participation is being 
practised by governments all over the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's being practised by governments with a 
socialistic ideology. It's being practised in communist countries 
in the world. Public participation is nothing new. We are just, as 
a province, just getting involved in an activity that has been 
going on for many years. 
 
Let me speak about a few places where public participation has 
been going on for a number of years. New Zealand has engaged 
in moving government-owned enterprises to the public, and 
they are a Labour government, Mr. Speaker. Australia is also a 
Labour government, and they are moving away from state 
ownership. 
 
I would just like to let you know, Mr. Speaker, that a couple of 
my constituents, neighbours of ours, spent a month in Australia 
and New Zealand last fall. And when I was talking with them, 
or I saw them at a local bonspiel back in January, I asked them 
how their trip was and how they enjoyed it. And they were just 
telling me how beautiful it was in New Zealand. One thing that 
really amazed them was their ability to harness water and to 
turn a river in New Zealand, one river, and set up five power 
projects on that river. And you ask, well how can that be done? 
They said, it's very simple, because they've got such high 
elevations of land, they can start on a peak at a high elevation, 
set up one power project; run the water through that power 
plant, shoot it down the mountain; half-way down the mountain 
pick up another power project, and then down, pick up the third 
one — he said it was just amazing to see the development of 
power within that country. 
 
And then what were they doing? They were selling it, they were 
selling it and moving it outside of the country. They were in 
Australia, and in fact as they drove around the country of 
Australia and saw the government's involvement in public 
participation in turning over government ownership to the 
private sector, his comment to me was that if we were in 
Australia as a Conservative government, we would be left-wing 
beside that Labour government in Australia. 
 
He felt that, considering what he thought their ideology was, we 
were moving rather slowly, Mr. Speaker. He was quite 
impressed with what the Australians and the New  

Zealanders were doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have countries like Finland, Sweden, Portugal, 
Spain, and Tanzania, all socialist governments, and they're all 
moving the control away from government and back to the 
hands of the people. I believe that, as a party, this party has said 
all along that we want to be the servant, not the master, and 
through public participation I believe, Mr. Speaker, we are 
indeed working towards that goal. 
 
Let's move to some other countries: Australia . . . Austria, 
pardon me . . . Jamaica, Holland, Britain, Denmark, Turkey, 
Nigeria, Togo, Grenada, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Belize, and 
Honduras — are all selling government-owned corporations to 
their people and other investors. And, Mr. Speaker, if this 
wasn't a good thing, would they be able to sell off government 
ownership? If it wasn't a good thing, no one would get involved. 
But, Mr. Speaker, it obviously points out that public 
participation is a good thing and it is doing well, and it will do 
well not only in other countries of the world but even here in 
this province. 
 
Let's look at China and the Soviet Union. What are they doing? 
Mr. Speaker, I am told that in China, and I've got . . . Let me 
back up a little bit. Let me just speak about the background, the 
ancestry I come from, the Hungarian people. I have relatives 
that just returned to Hungary recently, and they were saying that 
in Hungary the little garden plots that have been turned over to 
the people, the people are producing more in those little garden 
plots than they are in the big state farms. And in fact Hungary 
has become a very aggressive, progressive country. If we were 
all socialists, Hungary would be considered a democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Soviet Union also began selling her 
state-owned farms before Saskatchewan did, and yet the 
members opposite have the audacity to say that we are blinded 
by our ideology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have listed 24 countries whose political beliefs 
come from every part of the political spectrum, and I cannot see 
the correlation that the members opposite are trying to make 
between public participation and political ideology. Mr. 
Speaker, their entire attitude on public participation is a lesson 
in hypocrisy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hold it, we're adjourning debate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I have one minute. I would 
just like to remind the Speaker that I would like to get into some 
of the arguments that the New Democratic government was 
working on in 1982, but being near 5 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, I 
would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — If the hon. member doesn't mind, would he 
just move a motion adjourning debate. Would you do that? 
Okay. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
  



 
April 10, 1989 

673 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


