


















































June 1, 1989 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 1, 1989 
 

 
1571 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 
a privilege — although a sorrowful one at this point in time — 
to speak on this motion. I want to say that we have taken a 
number of tacks in terms of dealing with this Bill in a reasoned 
and a reasonable fashion. 
 
We’ve shown to the people of this province that there is a 
constitutional right for the activities which led up to the 
introduction of this Bill. We have shown that, in fact, there was 
an obligation placed upon us as members of the Assembly to do 
that; at least we’ve shown to some extent that that was the case. 
I think that there are many more cases in terms of the activities 
of the British House of Commons and also the Canadian 
parliament, as well as those other parliamentary forums 
throughout the British Commonwealth, that would lead one to 
the same conclusion that I have, that indeed there are many, 
many reasons and many examples in history to show why the 
kind of . . . the duty that we as members of the Legislative 
Assembly have in opposing what we think to be Bills which are 
harmful. 
 
And apparently, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter from somebody 
who was watching the speech today. And I’d like to read that 
letter into the record because it relates directly to the comments 
that I was making in regards to how people in this province 
perceive these Bills, perceive this action by a government 
which intends to ram the Bills to change the rules unilaterally of 
this Assembly. And this letter reads as follows: 
 

Dear Bob and Ned: (And this refers to the member from 
Regina Centre.) This is a Bill that women in 
Saskatchewan, perhaps more so than men, are strongly 
opposed to. For centuries women have been powered over 
(that’s the terms that the writer used, powered over, i.e., by 
those who have more power than women, powered over) 
and silenced, and this Bill attempts once again to silence 
their opposition to the privatization of our utilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to stop there for a moment from 
reading that letter because today we have seen in this House 
examples of members of the Legislative Assembly trying to 
deny that that’s what this Bill represented. 
 
And once again I remind members that this Bill came about as 
our bell-ringing in opposition to a Bill called the Bill to amend 
The Power Corporation Act, Bill No. 21, which would end up 
privatizing the natural gas portion of Saskatchewan Power. So 
that those people who are watching our reasoned discussion of 
this Bill are beginning to make the connections that there is 

something to what we in the opposition have been saying, that 
the rules themselves of this parliament are being changed in 
order to ensure an initiative of the government which is the 
privatization of The Power Corporation Act. It says once again: 
 

To silence their opposition to the privatization of our 
utilities, women in disproportionate numbers signed the 
petitions presented in this legislature. 
 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, that is a very interesting 
observation, because, as you know, we presented so far to date 
nearly 100,000 petitions in this legislature opposing the 
privatization, and this person who was watching what’s going 
on on television says that: 
 

. . . women in their disproportionate numbers signed the 
petitions . . . 
 

And I don’t know whether we do a gender count when the 
Clerk here at the legislature makes the count of the petitions and 
checks their validity, and whether or not in fact they do a 
gender count, but it would be interesting to know if in fact that 
were true. I tend to think that it probably is true. I think that it 
probably is true, that women in disproportionate numbers 
signed that petition and opposed what this government is doing. 
 
This writer goes on to say: 
 

They did so because they know full well that they and 
their families will be the losers if our utilities are 
privatized. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that everybody in this province, everybody 
but the most rock-rib, hard-nosed, right-wing ideologue, knows 
very well that when these assets are privatized, that for the great 
majority of people in Saskatchewan, and particularly women 
and their families, that they will be the ones to bear the brunt — 
and as this writer says, the losers. 
 

The government opposite (the writer goes on to say) has 
nothing to say to women, nothing to offer women, and 
fails to recognize that it is the women of Saskatchewan 
who provide what little stability there is. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to that writer: that we on this 
side of the House can whole-heartedly agree with that; that it is 
women who bear the brunt of the bad times that we are going 
through in Saskatchewan; and that this Bill which is presently 
before us and the consequences of the enactment of this Bill 
which presently is before us will do nothing less than add to the 
burden of misery and to the instability which women and their 
families find themselves faced with here in this province at this 
time. 
 
And I want to say that I think that this writer is right on, right 
on when she says that this government has nothing to offer 
women and has nothing to say for women, and their actions, 
their callous actions and the consequences . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. The letter is 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1572 

 

very interesting; however, it is not on, directly, the issue under 
discussion. I have been listening to the hon. member, and he has 
been using the letter to discuss the privatization of SaskPower, 
as he puts it, more than the bell-ringing. I don’t think that’s the 
intent of the use of the letter. Certainly citizens have concerns 
and they write members; however that doesn’t seem to be really 
related directly to this topic. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will relate this letter 
directly now, and it’s in the very first sentence. And it says, 
“This is a Bill . . .” The Bill that we’re discussing, the Bill 
which would limit bell-ringing in this legislature — the motion; 
excuse me, Mr. Speaker. And maybe that’s where the confusion 
arises, is that it is a motion before us, a motion put forward by 
the Minister of Justice, that it’s . . . are strongly opposed to it 
because they themselves realize what the consequences of that 
Bill is. And, Mr. Speaker, when someone is consequent of their 
actions, when somebody knows that if A is going to lead to B 
and that there is a causal connection between A and B, I would 
submit, as the writer out there does, because she goes on to say, 
Mr. Speaker, directly on the point that you have raised: 
 

Against great odds and with no help, no support (no 
interest by members opposite and of their big-business 
friends), just as women in Saskatchewan are working 
overtime in 1989 to protect their families, their 
communities, and their future, so too did the women of 
England struggle in the 1600s for . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the hon. member is — 
and I’m sure he realizes this — that he’s drawing kind of a long 
bow. And, once more, I repeat that citizens certainly have 
concerns and they contact their members on it, and that’s as it 
should be. However, the letter that the hon. member is using 
and the direction of his argument is really not directly on this 
motion, and as far as the privatization of SaskPower, an 
argument which he has used many times already today, and I 
have brought that to his attention too — that one cannot repeat 
his arguments over and over in the same debate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 
writer goes on to say in the next two words “. . . in the 16 . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order, 
order! I have now . . . This is the third time, and I know that the 
member who’s speaking knows this is correct because he is a 
member who is capable. Now for the third time he’s referring to 
that letter, and even though the letter may be of great concern to 
him and to other members as well, I repeat again that you have 
not been using it, and have not been able to use it, to directly 
discuss this issue. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The contents of the 
letter . . . The writer makes the point that she sees democratic 
freedom being at stake here. This Bill is about the question of 
the democratic rights and the right to oppose in the legislature. I 
agree with the point that she’s making, that this Bill to muzzle 
the opposition — this motion, excuse me, to muzzle the 
opposition — will lead 

to a loss of democratic freedom by denying us the right, just as 
this writer of the letter does, it will lead to a loss of democratic 
freedom and hence an overall improvement in the standard and 
quality of life. That was the point that that writer was trying to 
make, Mr. Speaker, and I agree with that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she is opposed to bell-ringing. She is opposed, I 
will say, Mr. Speaker, opposed to a motion which will limit 
bell-ringing because she sees it as an attack on her democratic 
freedoms. Mr. Speaker, I suspect that she is not alone out there. 
I think, far from it, that she is not alone, but there are literally 
tens of thousands of people in Saskatchewan who do not want 
the opposition muzzled in any shape, any kind of form 
whatsoever; that they, in fact, want us to be able to continue the 
job which this motion that would limit us in doing our job puts 
us in that position of taking away, as she puts it, a democratic 
freedom. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards . . . She also — this woman who 
wrote me and the member from Regina Centre — also included 
a book called . . . by Antonia Fraser called The Weaker Vessel 
— Women’s lot in 17th century England. And it deals with, in a 
great detail, with the lack of democratic freedom that women 
had, on the one hand from their exclusion from the 
parliamentary process which . . . And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, there were two great eras of democratic reform in 
Britain. One was in the 14th century and the other was in the 
17th century. According to most constitutional experts, those 
were the glory days of democratic reform in which those things 
which we cherish, including our democratic rights which are 
being threatened by this Bill here tonight, that those freedoms 
were denied to women in the 17th century. 
 
(1915) 
 
In fact, there was a popular rhyme of 1641 — I’ll just open to 
this page, quite by accident — entitled: “Lucifer’s Lackey or 
the Devil’s New Creation.” It ran: 
 

When women preach and cobblers pray, 
The fiends in hell make holiday. 
 

At the bottom: “It was a women’s demand for freedom of 
conscience,” Mr. Speaker, that’s what it was on. At the bottom: 
“It was a women’s demand for freedom of conscience,” a 
freedom of conscience which was denied to women in the 17th 
century, precisely because of arbitrary actions initiated by a 
government which tried to deny a whole class of citizenry, that 
is to say women, their fundamental, democratic rights. 
 
What we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we have come a fair 
distance from that situation in the 1700s. Certain democratic 
rights and freedoms have been won. And why should anybody 
in good conscience or right mind stand in their place and vote to 
turn the clock backward, if not to a time when women were 
denied the vote and were treated . . . in fact more than denied 
the vote — treated as chattel, were totally excluded from the 
political process. 
 
As I submit, Mr. Speaker, to you, that the intent of this rule 
change has much the same kind of intent as the intent to deny 
certain citizens their right to participate in the 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1573 

 

democratic process. 
 
I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, if I may, to some of the 
comments made by members of the opposition who said that 
what we did was anti-democratic and somehow denied citizens’ 
rights. The government did that. Somehow, Mr. Speaker, that 
what the opposition did was deny people their rights the same 
way that women were denied their rights in the 17th century 
and were excluded from public affairs; that somehow the 
bell-ringing incident was somehow a denial of democratic 
rights and freedoms. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I for the life of me can’t deduce 
where that type of logic comes from other than it is, on the one 
hand, some weird ideology, some twisted misconception of 
what democracy is all about, or on the other hand, it’s a 
deliberate attempt by a government to deny the citizenry its 
rights. 
 
And what are its rights in this regards, Mr. Speaker? What are 
the rights of the citizenry to participate in the political process, 
and how does this Bill which would limit the opposition’s 
ability to operate in the legislature, how would this Bill also 
limit the rights of citizenry to participate? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what this writer was talking about, was that this 
motion before the House tonight, this motion to limit the use of 
bell-ringing, is a motion which denies not just the members of 
the legislature but, more importantly, denies citizens their rights 
to participate in the democratic process of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what this debate is all about. 
That’s what this debate is all about. There is absolutely no 
hesitation or doubt in my mind that that is what we are doing 
here tonight. We are defending the rights of citizens to 
participate in the democratic process, unlike the members 
opposite, who would deny citizens the right to participate in the 
democratic process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tendency, that mind-set, and that mood, as I 
. . . I would submit to you, sir, is the mind-set of an 
authoritarian government. That’s the mind-set of 
authoritarianism. 
 
We’ve already made this afternoon what I think . . . rather than 
drawing a long bow in regards to the activities of the 
government and the activities of a feudal monarchy, we have 
seen precisely how the parallels run on the same track. Now I 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that, as the other side of that coin 
— the executive, if you like, and its relationship to the 
parliament — the other side of the coin is the parliament and its 
relationship to the citizenry. Because that’s, Mr. Speaker, 
ultimately where the bottom line is drawn when it comes to 
what is democratic and what is not democratic. 
 
I want to ask another question of the members opposite, 
because I think it’s important that they answer not this one but 
also the other ones I put to them. Does this Bill enhance or does 
this Bill inhibit — pardon me, Mr. Speaker — does this motion 
enhance or does this motion inhibit the ability of citizens of 
Saskatchewan to 

participate in the affairs of their province? 
 
The argument I will now make for some period of time, Mr. 
Speaker, is this: is that this bell-ringing, this motion to limit 
bell-ringing, inhibits the citizenry of Saskatchewan to 
participate in the affairs of their government, and that far from 
having bell-ringing as an anti-democratic exercise, the only 
anti-democratic exercise that we see here in the last several 
weeks has been this government’s attempt to silence the 
opposition and inhibit citizens from participating in the 
democratic process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what constitutes inhibiting citizenry in the 
democratic process? Well we know that there are a number of 
factors. One is the denial of certain fundamental, basic facts that 
are cherished by all those who call themselves democrats. First 
and foremost of those is the right to freedom of speech. 
 
Secondly, the right of freedom of assembly. Thirdly is the right 
to form themselves, the citizenry to form itselves to not only 
seek redress but to ensure that redress is done as it was in the 
case, for example, of the barons and their opposition and the 
ability of them to deal with Henry IV, and the ability of the 
barons in feudal England to force Henry IV to undertake certain 
things that will be done, including not collecting wool taxes, or 
not imposing new levies on them that weren’t in existence 
before. 
 
But as part of the democratic process and tradition, the right of 
Assembly to force the government to do those things, which the 
citizenry don’t want it to be done, is also an elementary 
democratic right. The right to either directly, or indirectly, 
participate in the affairs of government, whether by way of 
election of representatives, or by seeking elected office, or 
through forms of direct democracy which have existed for 
numerous years in this province and which exist on a 
day-to-day basis; whether it’s in the Kinsmen club, or the 
Kinettes club, or the Lions club, or whether it’s any of the 
service organizations where members get together and vote on 
the direction that those organizations would take — an example 
of direct democracy. 
 
And all those things which allow the citizenry to come together 
and to directly exercise influence over those things which 
would affect them, all those relate to the enhancement of 
democracy. I don’t think that there’s any argument . . . I don’t 
think any member on the other side would argue with that, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t think that they would in theory — I don’t think 
that they would in theory. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined four, four of what are probably 
some of the fundamental aspects as it operates in practice of 
what democracy is all about. 
 
First let’s deal . . . First of all, does this Bill expand the limit to 
exercise freedom of speech? Or, on the contrary, Mr. Speaker, 
does this Bill confine . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Motion. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Pardon me. I am sorry, I keep getting mixed up; 
it is motion, Mr. Speaker. There is only one reading on this and 
it’s a motion to limit bell-ringing, not a Bill. I want to make that 
clear that when I use Bill, I sometimes tend to 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1574 

 

use interchangeably with the word motion. 
 
But motion, Mr. Speaker, motion is this. Does this motion allow 
freedom of speech to flourish or does it trample on freedom of 
speech? Mr. Speaker, I think any fair and honest observer of 
politics in this province realizes that this motion to limit 
bell-ringing tramples on the right of freedom of speech. 
 
And here is why. All we have to do is look back to the last little 
while in this province — the political affairs when the bells 
were ringing and the citizens of the province, open line radio 
shows, television interviews, letters to the editor in the press, 
editorials in the press, direct representations made to their 
elected representatives, postering, meetings. 
 
And I remember in particular a meeting of April 19 in Martin 
Collegiate in which over 500 people gathered in my 
constituency to oppose privatization — over 500, Mr. Speaker 
— an event which quickly escalated as the bells rung, and 
thousands of citizens met in Assembly around this province, 
first and foremost in formal meetings to make known their 
opposition. 
 
The bells were ringing. There was no limit on bells ringing; 
there was no motion which to deny citizens that opportunity to 
use the breathing space that the bell-ringing episode provided. 
 
Freedom of speech, Mr. Speaker, was fanned and was fed by 
the bell-ringing. As part of the fundamental democratic right, 
and as part of the fundamental democratic processes which lead 
to the overall self-governance of society, people spoke out and 
spoke out strongly on this particular issue. Mr. Speaker, that 
would not have occurred, I submit to you, had not the bells of 
this Assembly not rung. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, if the case is, is that the citizens 
speaking out on issues which affect them, and which affect their 
families, such as this writer mentioned in her letter, that she 
thought that families in Saskatchewan would be affected by this 
motion; Mr. Speaker, if it is the case that bell-ringing enhanced 
freedom of speech in Saskatchewan; I ask you, sir, with all due 
respect, why is it that the government opposite is trying to limit 
that tool which enhances democracy as opposed to which 
tramples on democracy? It makes no sense to me, Mr. Speaker, 
particularly since those members opposite claim to be the great 
defenders of democracy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s leave the government behind 
closed cabinet doors. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, unless you believe, as my friend 
and colleague from Moose Jaw North says, a government 
behind closed cabinet doors as the only criteria for what 
constitutes democracy in this province, I think that the members 
opposite do not have one logical leg to stand on when it comes 
to arguing that this motion to limit bell-ringing will enhance 
freedom of speech. 

Reality says that that is just not so. Reality says that that is just 
not so, and it’s not just here is Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
can look back from the days of the Irish nationalists, and 
Parnell, in the British House of Commons, who used that tactic 
to bring the plight of Ireland to the attention of the monarch and 
the British people. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now there are those who say that they were obstructive and 
disruptive. And I ask, Mr. Speaker, and again it’s speaking from 
the dawn of history, looking back into the past at the sweep of 
human affairs. Mr. Speaker, perhaps if those in the parliament 
of Britain had not tried to limit those gathered together in the 
Irish nationalist cause, the ensuing centuries of bloodshed might 
not have come to pass. That, in fact, if the Irish nationalists and 
their grievances had been redressed as it is for most of the 26 
counties of Ireland south of the partition, in which we don’t see 
the violence and the bloodshed and the civil war, perhaps if the 
rest of Ireland had been treated by paying attention to the use of 
things like bell-ringing in the British parliament in 1741 and 
thereabouts, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, we would not be in the same 
situation that the families of Northern Ireland face. 
 
That’s perhaps. And as I’ve said, history in hindsight is often 
20-20, but I suggest, sir, that whenever dissent is stamped out it 
does not deal with the cause of dissent. All it does is make the 
sore which is festering, deeper, wider, and in the case of Ireland 
much more fatal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is a lesson in regards to the rights of those in citizenry, 
in this case Ireland or in this case Saskatchewan, to engage in a 
democratic exercise called free speech. And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that I have said it before. I want to just finish 
on that point — is that it does not, this motion does not enhance 
the rights of people in Saskatchewan to engage in free speech 
on a political level in matters that affect us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first element of some of those 
things which make up what constitutes civil liberties and 
democracy. The second element, I suggest to you, that is 
inhibited by this motion to limit bell-ringing, is the freedom of 
assembly, and not just in the abstract, but the freedom of 
assembly to get together in common cause to deal with the 
grievances which are on the minds of those who assemble. 
 
Did the ringing of the bells in Saskatchewan help bring people 
together to talk about an issue which affected the whole of the 
province? Prima facie evidence for that, Mr. Speaker, given the 
results of what’s happened. Did it help bring people together in 
not just the formal meetings, Mr. Speaker, that my leader went 
out and spoke to, to thousands and thousands of Saskatchewan 
people, not just to the thousands of people that the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale was able to express and articulate 
their grievances in this regard. No, Mr. Speaker, there was 
another form of democracy taking place in this province outside 
and below what I would call the level of media consciousness. 
There were certain organic processes, in a sociological sense, 
that were happening here around this political question, and 
those processes and those things 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1575 

 

that were done — and I’ll enumerate some of them in a minute 
— not only helped but were spurred on by the ringing of the 
bells, because the ringing of the bells focused, crystallized, and 
put into perspective precisely what this whole notion of 
privatization was about. 
 
Now what was the nature of the democratic assemblies that 
were being undertaken that this rules change would do away 
with, or would help do away with? 
 
First of all, there is what is known in Saskatchewan as coffee 
row. And, Mr. Speaker, having visited many small towns, 
including towns in the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood . . . let me assure you, sir, and as I know 
very well that all members of this House realize, that not only 
are there fine folk in Last Mountain-Touchwood, in that 
constituency, and the towns of Southey and Cupar, Raymore, 
and so on and so forth, but that those people in that 
constituency, as there were in the constituencies throughout this 
province, were getting together on coffee row to discuss this 
question. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, as I went to the number of 
small towns and sat and had coffee and listened with these 
people, what struck me was, first of all, the knowledge that 
these people had in regards to the political situation in the 
province, and perhaps it’s why Saskatchewan has the reputation 
of being the most politicized province of any political 
jurisdiction, I dare say, in North America, given its history. 
 
And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, as part of that politicization, 
sir, there can be no doubt in anybody’s mind that as that 
politicization occurs, so does the strengthening of democracy. 
Because as that politicization occurs, each and every individual 
citizen of this province realizes that they have a stake in 
whatever political issue — and in this case the privatization of 
SaskPower — of what is going on, that each and every citizen 
has a direct interest in determining the future of this province. 
 
Coffee row, Mr. Speaker, coffee row, that time-honoured 
tradition in this province, was alive and well, and the 
democracy of the streets, the Demos, the democracy of the 
people, where people live, because not many people live in this 
institution. 
 
But let me tell you: on coffee row democracy was alive and 
well — not only in terms of the debates, not only in terms of the 
gibes and the quarrels of a partisan political nature, but more 
importantly, the issue itself was being dissected with all its 
ramifications. People understand and people understood that 
political issue. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the bell-ringing enhanced that 
democratic, the actual Demos, in Saskatchewan in a way that 
we have seldom seen in this province, probably not since 1962 
and the great debate around medicare. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what does the government have to say about 
that? If that is true, if coffee row was alive and well and the 
democracy of reality was out there alive and well — if that was 
true, how can a limit on ringing the bells be anything other than 
anti-democratic? Only, Mr. Speaker, you can only say it is 
anti-democratic if you don’t believe 

that people arguing, debating, discussing political issues around 
the province is something other than democracy. Only if you 
believe that democracy exists away from the people; that 
freedom of speech is something that is divorced from reality; 
that freedom of assembly is something that occurs only in 
textbooks of political theory; can one say that the bell-ringing in 
Saskatchewan to stop the privatization of SaskPower was 
anti-democratic. 
 
As I submit, that coffee row was strengthened and the 
democracy in coffee row, the kind of democracy, Mr. Speaker, 
that leads people to make informed choices as citizens when it 
comes to election time because, Mr. Speaker, it is on that basis 
that we are all, at least in theory . . . Goodness knows in some 
of our cases, it’s certainly not based on our good looks, but Mr. 
Speaker, that is based on, particularly in Saskatchewan . . . I 
hear the member from Moose Jaw North cackling there. And I 
shouldn’t use the word “cackle.” He’s having a hearty chuckle 
at that. He knows that obviously I can’t be referring to myself in 
that matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, coffee row was strengthened by that debate. But 
you know, there are other things, Mr. Speaker. There were other 
forms of freedom of assembly to discuss political issues which 
took place during that debate. Mr. Speaker, there were schools 
around this province who invited in speakers from both political 
parties represented in this legislature to speak on this matter, 
and there were school assemblies held to discuss what was 
going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, church organizations dealt with the matter, as 
people discussed it openly when they got together either after 
the formal religious service or when they were meeting in 
presbytery or when they were meeting in all the forums that 
exist in this province for people to determine the fate, to 
determine the fate of the church affairs. 
 
People discussed it. It was discussed all over the province, Mr. 
Speaker. One would have to be deaf to say otherwise. 
 
That’s all I have to say on the question of the right of freedom 
of assembly, Mr. Speaker, because it was enhanced by ringing 
the bells. We had exercised, but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
not just the right of freedom of assembly on everyday life, if 
you like. There were much more formal freedoms of assembly 
held in this province, much more formal manifestations of the 
right of freedom of assembly held in this province, with the 
avowed intention of deterring the government from its course. 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, there can be no higher democratic 
pursuit than for those citizens to join together under the rubric 
of freedom of assembly, in order to change the government 
from a course that those, the citizens, believe is an incorrect 
choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did or did not occur during the bell-ringing 
episode, political meetings of a scope and magnitude not 
witnessed in this province in decades, if at all? That’s the 
question I want to ask those members opposite. Did not political 
meetings to discuss the issue of Sask . . . the privatization of 
SaskPower occur during that time or not? 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1576 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is obvious. Citizens of 
this province got together, joined together, banded together, in 
common cause to deter the government from the course it was 
set upon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, meetings took place all across this province 
involving literally tens of thousands of citizens joined together 
to try to find ways in which the government could be deterred 
from its course. As I said earlier, my own constituency of 
Regina . . . In Regina, Regina Rosemont, Martin Collegiate 
drew 500 people. In the constituency of the member from 
Elphinstone, 1,200 people, representing people from all over the 
city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Redberry, the constituency of Redberry, 
represented by a government member, there were five meetings 
in one day of the citizenry of Redberry constituency to band 
together to figure out ways to oppose the privatization of 
SaskPower. In North Battleford, in Yorkton, in Prince Albert, in 
Weyburn, in Swift Current — Mr. Speaker, from one end of 
this province to the other, from Big Beaver to Stony Rapids — 
people of Saskatchewan met together in common cause to deter 
the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that democratic? Is or is that not a democratic 
exercise? I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that democracy in 
action or isn’t it? The members who accuse us of engaging in 
anti-democratic activity owe that explanation to the people of 
this province. 
 
How is it, I ask you, colleagues, how is it that when thousands 
and thousands of citizens join together in common cause on a 
political activity to exercise their right of freedom of assembly, 
how is that anti-democratic? What is the rationale and what is 
the logic for that kind of thinking, Mr. Speaker? 
 
(1945) 
 
There is absolutely nothing — only, Mr. Speaker, only one 
reason, and that is to muzzle not just the opposition here in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, but to use this motion to change the 
rules to try to muzzle the opposition of the people of this 
province to a course that they do not want the government to 
pursue. That is the only reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I ask you, Mr. Speaker, from the point of view 
of freedom of speech, from the point of view of freedom of 
assembly, from the point of view of common action, of 
common democratic action, who are the defenders of 
democracy and who are those who would eviscerate 
democracy? 
 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the bell-ringing exercise that we 
have undertaken in this province showed the people of 
Saskatchewan who really stand for the voice of the people and 
who will put the muzzle on, Mr. Speaker. We know that they 
want to put the muzzle on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, this letter by this citizen who 

watched the debate on this motion has caught precisely that 
spirit — that this debate is about what constitutes democracy 
and what constitutes legitimate political activity. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’ve been listening to the hon. 
member’s argument, and while there is an issue of democracy 
involved, I really don’t believe that this debate is intended 
solely as a wide-ranging, absolute, historical review of 
democracy. It’s a part of that; it’s part of that; but certainly the 
motion itself doesn’t deal with that specifically. And while 
certainly that can be dealt with, you, sir, are a . . . have been 
using that argument virtually all day as the essence of your 
debate. And I don’t believe that this motion is intended as a 
wide-ranging, total historical view of democracy. If that were 
the case, there’d be no limit at all. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the point of view 
of democracy as it exists from one month past to the present 
day, I will, in the next little while, limit my remarks, as I have 
for the last half-hour, regarding, did not the bell-ringing, did it 
enhance freedom of speech — yes or no? The bell-ringing here 
in Saskatchewan. Yes. Did it? Yes or no? Yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Did not the bell-ringing which took place in 
Saskatchewan enhance freedom of assembly? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Did it not enhance, Mr. Speaker, democratic 
action? I’m talking about the bell-ringing of a few weeks past, 
Mr. Speaker. What this motion is about, which would limit that, 
Mr. Speaker, that is precisely . . . I have proven, I think beyond 
a doubt, that we had the constitutional and the moral obligations 
to do what we did. 
 
Now I am saying to you, and through you to the members of 
this Assembly, that our activities enhance democracy in its 
widest form. Because this legislature stands as a symbol, Mr. 
Speaker. This legislature stands as a symbol of democracy. It is 
not democracy. This legislature is not democracy; it is a symbol 
of democracy as an institution. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that only those who believe that 
democracy can exist inside these four walls would ever, ever, 
take the view that limiting the rights of the opposition, and 
hence limiting the rights of the citizenry to participate in 
democratic affairs, somehow destroys democracy. 
 
Because I guess, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the position that those 
members opposite are taking, that somehow democracy exists 
only in this place, then what is all this cant and what is all this 
brouha about public participation? That’s what it is, that’s what 
it is: cant and empty air and brouha. 
 
Because there was a recognition, Mr. Speaker, that democracy, 
even the blindest, even the blindest neo-authoritarian 
legislators, those who say to 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1577 

 

themselves that the only place we’re going to rule is behind 
closed cabinet doors — even those, Mr. Speaker, understands 
that in reality democracy exists beyond the walls of this 
Chamber, exists mightily beyond the walls of this Chamber. 
 
And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that, given the conduct of the 
members opposite, that in most other institutions in this great 
province of Saskatchewan, democracy flourishes at a height 
much higher than these members would like to see it exist, Mr. 
Speaker. Otherwise, how could they possibly take the position 
they have in regards to this motion which would limit the 
ringing of the bells? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are some of the other fundamental elements 
of democracy as we have come to know them? Well we’ve 
dealt with freedom of speech; we’ve dealt with freedom of 
assembly; we’ve dealt with freedom of democratic action that is 
joined together — all those things outlined in the Canadian 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms. But there’s a few others we 
haven’t dealt with, Mr. Speaker. So let’s put this motion of the 
government, let’s use this as the litmus up against those other 
aspects. 
 
Freedom of the press, Mr. Speaker. Does this motion enhance 
or does it restrict the democracy of the freedom of the press? 
Mr. Speaker, let me outline for you what I mean by freedom of 
the press. We all know that there’s, in a very technical sense, 
there’s only freedom of the press for those who own the press. 
So if you’re a Michael Sifton or you’re one of the big-business 
magnates that own the communications network in this country, 
then you do enjoy certain freedoms not enjoyed by the rest of 
the citizenry of this country. 
 
But there’s another fundamental meaning to freedom of the 
press above and beyond the right of the fourth estate to operate 
from freedom of government interference. Freedom of the press 
also implies, Mr. Speaker, the freedom to disseminate 
information to the widest possible audience of those who, 
whatever side of an issue they may be on, have an interest in 
that issue — to disseminate the widest possible information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what happened when the 
government tried to privatize SaskPower and see whether or not 
the bell-ringing, which this opposition used to oppose that 
move, helped to disseminate to the widest possible audience the 
information, the facts, the figures — no matter which side of the 
debate one happened to be on — to the people of this province. 
 
In the first instance, Mr. Speaker, the opposition refused to 
allow introduction of the Bill — walked out, rang the bells in 
order to draw citizens’ attention to the matter. That was the first 
act of dissemination of information. The opposition said, this is 
a matter which we think affects all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That was the first message, if you like, Mr. 
Speaker, that was sent out. And, Mr. Speaker, that message was 
picked up by the press and the press reported it, whether it was 
print or electronic or whatever . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I must draw to the 
member’s attention we are not discussing freedom of the press 
except in a peripheral manner. He is devoting his 

time, from what I can see, to discussing freedom of the press, 
and it’s some peripheral matter attempting to relate it to 
bell-ringing. But that’s not the main issue. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the point of order? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to your 
ruling, I also have been listening to the member speaking, and 
I’ve been listening very diligently. And I find that he has been 
relating something which I feel is very, very important to the 
people of Saskatchewan and relating it to this motion. I can’t 
see how the motion can be interpreted in any narrow sense. It 
applies to the entire, entire democratic process in this 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d like to remind the hon. member 
that I have made a ruling. I have given wide latitude in this 
debate. My rulings are not debatable. I’ve been certainly giving 
wide latitude to people in their debates, and I’m just reminding 
people that they must try to stay on the topic. And I will 
continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will try to 
relate directly the attack on the right of we in the opposition to 
disseminate information to the people of this province on how 
the motion to ring . . . to stop the bells from ringing in this 
legislature, how that directly ties together. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have to go outside a 
very narrowly defined view of what constitutes one of the 
fundamental tenets of democracy in this province, in this 
legislature, and that is the right to disseminate information, i.e., 
freedom of the press, freedom to get information out. 
 
This motion, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, sir, in all due 
respects, inhibits that. And those who say that it doesn’t, those 
who say that it enhances it, have an obligation to stand up and 
say that, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got to prove to the people of the 
province that it helps get out information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, a motion 
which arose directly out of a political event. We’re not talking 
about something that arose out of a whim or arose out of the 
twisted mind of maybe one of the members opposite. We’re 
talking directly about this motion and its relationship to the 
fundamental tenets of democracy. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, that notion was raised by members 
opposite that the bell-ringing was anti-democratic, and they 
went on at great lengths and spread their arguments over a wide 
range of precisely why it was anti-democratic. And I submit to 
you, sir, that I’m being a much more narrow . . . making a much 
more narrow and precise argument than any of those members 
did. And I say so, Mr. Speaker, because the ringing of the bells 
resulted in the massive dissemination of information regarding 
the government’s intervention. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1578 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I think to say otherwise is to belie 
the reality which has taken place in this province. On the one 
hand, we in the opposition stormed up and down this province 
giving our side of the issue of why the government was trying 
to privatize SaskPower — right? — breaking their promises. 
All the ideas and all the reasons that we put forward, Mr. 
Speaker, in a political act, and I’ll make no bones about that, we 
were out to inform the citizens of this province of what we 
thought what the government was doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was a dissemination of information, and it 
was a form of freedom of the press that I tell you, sir, unless the 
officers of the legislature and members who sit in this 
legislature are not prepared to defend that actions and don’t see 
that as a fundamental form of democracy, God help democracy 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me tell you, the day that someone says that we can’t have 
the right to disseminate information to the people of this 
province, then we are in one sorry state — one sorry state. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as it turned out, we did. We 
went out and presented our response, our side of the story, and 
the government responded. And earlier on today I made 
reference to the fact that they set up these commissions and set 
up all these things of SaskEnergy to go around and put forward 
their side of the story. Mr. Speaker, you know, we don’t like it. 
We think it was a waste of taxpayers’ money, but the 
government did it, and so be it. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, standing back from the partisan nature of 
that, did the ringing of the bells help both sides of this 
legislature get their messages out? Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
question. Did our actions of ringing the bells, which the 
government now wants to limit, did it help the government even 
in getting its message out? Because, Mr. Speaker, it forced them 
into an expensive advertising campaign, and it forced them into 
these commissions, but at least they took the opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, an opportunity engendered by the bell-ringing which 
this motion will now limit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a rather narrow argument tying 
that together. I don’t think that’s wandering very far afield. I 
don’t think it is drawing a long bow in saying that we help the 
government by ringing the bells. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to remind the hon. member that I 
have made a ruling and he’s perfectly aware of it, and I do not 
wish him to make any references to possible . . . his personal 
doubts about that ruling, either directly or indirectly. And I just 
ask him to carry on with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

certainly didn’t intend to cast any doubts on your ruling, and I 
think if you check Hansard that there will be absolutely no 
intent, implied or explicit in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think any fair and honest judge of Saskatchewan 
politics will realize that not only did the opposition help get its 
message out by ringing the bells, it also spurred the government 
on to get its message. And so, Mr. Speaker, we now stand at a 
point in our history where the people themselves, the Demos, 
those who have the most to deal with in democracy, they will 
then make the decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is that anti-democratic? How is keeping 
information or helping . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, let’s put it 
this way. How is helping to get information about the 
privatization of SaskPower out to the people of this province 
anti-democratic? It takes a twisted and perverse mind, Mr. 
Speaker, I submit, to say so. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, look at the obverse — look at the 
obverse. If the bells didn’t ring, which this motion would stop it 
from doing, we wouldn’t have been going around the province 
in the manner we did because we would be forced to attend to 
duties in this House. The government probably wouldn’t have 
gone around and done its thing — the expensive advertising 
campaign, its road show. 
 
And the citizens of the province, Mr. Speaker, I submit, would 
have been poorer off for it because they would have been less 
informed. There would not have been that kind of information 
which engendered the democratic debate which took place, and 
of which I spoke earlier, in the first place, if not the bells had 
run. 
 
So on the litmus test of whether or not this motion, Mr. 
Speaker, will help or will hinder the right of the Assembly and 
the right of the government and the opposition to engage in that 
kind of political debate, I think that this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
fails on that count. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion fails on the litmus test of does it 
enhance freedom of speech. It fails to enhance that; it fails to 
enhance freedom of assembly; it fails to enhance concentrated 
democratic action; and it fails to enhance freedom of the press, 
freedom of dissemination of information. How then, can it be 
anything but anti-democratic itself, Mr. Speaker? And how can 
it be anything else but wrong? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what are some of the other fundamental 
tenets of democracy that this motion goes to inhibit? Well, you 
don’t have to think very long or very broadly to come up with 
some of the answers. One of the democratic rights and freedoms 
that we enjoy in this province is the ability to express by way of 
petition — and I’m not going to go into a long argument about 
that, Mr. Speaker, because that’s recognized here in the 
legislature and was recognized on the street. It didn’t stop 
people from petitioning. In fact it encouraged people to petition 
for their redress of their grievance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing enhanced the petitioning. 
Even the very operation of this legislature was enhanced by the 
bell-ringing. And for the life of me, Mr. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1579 

 

Speaker, I cannot see how it is that democracy is strengthened 
by this motion and that limiting bell-ringing is somehow 
anti-democratic just on using what we have come to regard as 
basic civil liberties — as basic civil liberties. All those things 
— the right of freedom of speech and the right of freedom of 
expression and so on and so forth — all those things have been 
enhanced by what we in the opposition did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of democracy, my case rests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Because, Mr. Speaker, I think that any 
fair-minded person in this province understands what the 
opposition did and agrees that, while they may have been on the 
other side of the issue, except for those with the narrowest of 
partisan political purposes . . . Only those with the narrowest of 
purposes, which sees democracy as something that is to be kept 
in the back rooms of the back-room boys of the Conservative 
Party; only those with the kind of perverse ideology which sees 
democracy as being okay for the boards of directors of 
shareholders, but not for its employees; only those who see 
democracy in its most limited form; only those who see 
democracy as an exercise that’s carried out once every four 
years by marking an X on a ballot; only those people, Mr. 
Speaker, would term what we did as anti-democratic. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the next election comes, when the next 
election rolls around and the citizens of this province have a 
choice to make as to who stood up for democracy, and giving 
the citizens of this province the right to participate directly in 
the affairs that govern them, in this case stopping the 
privatization of SaskPower, I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that it 
won’t be the opposition that the citizens of this province 
castigate. I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that what will happen is 
that they will trample . . . There will be a stampede to the ballot 
box to drive those people, those people who would limit the 
democratic rights of the people of this province, to drive them 
from the seats they presently occupy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, of that in my mind there is no 
doubt, and there is no doubt of that in the minds of the people of 
this province. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
doubt of that in the minds of the members opposite. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, and here we get down to the final, if you like, 
argument that I am going to make this evening. It may be 
somewhat lengthy, but judging from the reaction, Mr. Speaker, 
judging from the reaction from the members opposite, some of 
what I am saying is beginning to strike home a little bit. 
 
Some of those people opposite may realize, may realize that 
those who trample on democracy now, those who chip away at 
enhancing the basic civil liberties of the people of this province 
— and it may look like a small thing today, but it may be a big 
thing tomorrow — even those people, Mr. Speaker, even those 
people realize that democracy is not best served even from their 
point of view. 
 
Now it may well be, Mr. Speaker, that this motion serves 

the overall political game plan of the Progressive Conservative 
government of this province. And I think, in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that this motion to limit the bell-ringing is an intricate part of 
their plan. What their plan, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you is this: 
they have put forward this motion to stop the opposition from 
ringing the bells in order to do a number of things. Let’s 
examine what those things are. 
 
The first, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, is that it is the political game 
plan of the Conservative government to, after this motion has 
passed, and as a consequence of passing this motion, then at a 
time that they feel is politically convenient, go ahead, 
reintroduce those Bills, in this case Bill 21, which led to the 
bell-ringing in the first place; that at some convenient time you 
will see the Minister of Finance or one of the front-benchers 
reintroduce this Bill to privatize SaskPower — Bill 21, An Act 
to amend The Power Corporation Act. 
 
And they will use, Mr. Speaker, they will use this motion that 
presently is before the House in order to ram this Bill and all 
those other Bills that lead to the privatization of SaskPower, 
ram it through the House in a desperate attempt to achieve their 
political ends, which of course is to try to buy — as they did the 
last election — to buy the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this motion is all about. In the narrow, 
dark, and dirty world of partisan politics engaged in by the 
government opposite, this motion is to privatize public utilities 
in the province of Saskatchewan so that the proceeds of those 
public utilities can be turned around to use to try to buy the 
votes on a one-time, short-term basis, the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw what happened in the last election when 
the government used government largess, in this case from the 
federal government, to bolster itself in a last ditch effort to stave 
off political defeat. This motion, Mr. Speaker, will lead to an 
unfolding of a scenario which will do the same thing, or attempt 
to do the same thing for this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the political motive behind this motion that 
we’re debating here. There can be no other explanation. They’ll 
sell off SaskPower, they’ll sell off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, they’ll sell off Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance, despite and against the wishes and expressed wishes 
of the people of this province that they do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion will give them the legislative 
ammunition in order to shoot the opposition and shoot and 
muzzle and strap the opposition’s ability to oppose those things 
which the people of Saskatchewan do not want to happen. 
 
And they will take, Mr. Speaker, the proceeds from the sales of 
those corporations — and there’s a billion dollars from the 
potash corporation; they undervalued it by a billion dollars, but 
there’s a billion dollars there — and using this motion and 
ramming through the sale of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, they will take that billion dollars, and I suspect, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’ll see the Minister of Finance, as he’s 
already indicated to this 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1580 

 

House, go around and say to this municipality or to that rural 
municipality or this urban municipality, Mr. Speaker, how 
should we spend that money? 
 
And the people of the province are going to say, gee, we didn’t 
want you to sell the potash corporation or SaskPower or Sask 
Government Insurance or Sask telephones in the first place. 
Maybe you should use the money to buy it back. And he says, 
no, no, no, that’s all gone; that’s all over and done with. And 
why, Mr. Speaker? What for? To try to buy political support in 
those areas that they know they need to buy political support in. 
Because when you’re standing at 28 per cent in the polls, as this 
government is doing, and the opposition is over 50 per cent, 
poking around 56 per cent, Mr. Speaker, you bet your bottom 
dollar that this government will do everything in its power to try 
to buy themselves back into power in the next election, and they 
will use this motion to carry out that political operation. 
 
Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, otherwise why wouldn’t the 
government be dealing with the business of this province? They 
have a political game plan. They are sticking to that political 
game plan and it doesn’t matter what’s going on out in the real 
world. They’re interested in one thing, and that is ensuring that 
their political game plan go ahead. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of this province, more 
and more . . . That is the way in which the people of this 
province are more and more looking at this debate. They ask 
themselves: why would the government, faced with massive 
farm debt, all the problems it’s faced . . . I don’t have to go into 
a list of the problems that the people of Saskatchewan face. We 
just had a report the other day that talked about how the infant 
mortality rate, and the mortality rate in northern Saskatchewan, 
is a national scandal here in Saskatchewan. But instead of trying 
to deal with something like that, instead of having the Minister 
of Health deal with something like that, what are they doing? 
They are dealing with a debate. They’re dealing with a motion 
to muzzle bell-ringing. That’s what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
Right? 
 
Why wouldn’t they be dealing with the problems of northern 
health care? After all, Mr. Speaker, the aboriginal peoples of 
this province have a long and valued tradition of a democratic 
way of life in which decisions were made collectively. And 
whether those decisions were to pull up camp and follow the 
caribou up through Stony Rapids and Wollaston Lake and 
Woldaia Lake and up into the Territories, that kind of 
democratic tradition which existed in the North, Mr. Speaker, 
and that kind of way of life is being ruined by the kind of 
misery those people face. And why isn’t the government 
dealing with that? Why are they dealing with this motion? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’m not talking about health in 
the abstract; I am talking about there are young people in 
northern Saskatchewan who are literally — literally — starving 
and have all the signs of malnutrition, including rickets, 
something that we thought was abolished in this province. But 
does the government want to deal with those real problems? 
Does it want to deal with those real problems? No. It wants to 
deal with this 

rules motion. 
 
I ask you, how can that be? Why is it? What’s going on? You 
know, is it a question of warped priorities? You know, that was 
the initial explanation, that the government had some kind of 
warped priorities. And, you know, Mr. Speaker, I have now 
rejected that explanation. I have rejected that explanation 
because this is part of the government’s political game plan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Bill 41 . . . The House Leader, the 
deputy House Leader, made a great to-do about the opposition 
dealing with Bill 41. And they wrote letters and put it out to the 
press to try to somehow blunt the criticism that the press and 
the people of this province made in regards to the priorities that 
the government is pursuing. The people in the press were 
saying, why are you guys following this motion? Why are you 
ramming this bell-ringing motion at the opposition? It doesn’t 
make any sense. 
 
And the deputy House Leader wrote a letter to our House 
Leader and said: why? Let’s deal with Bill 41 on Wednesday, 
this Wednesday — yesterday. But what happened, Mr. 
Speaker? Now he doesn’t need the permission of the opposition 
to deal with any Bills. As you well know, the government 
determines what is introduced into the legislature and no 
amount of propagandistic letter writing by the deputy House 
Leader can change that fundamental fact. 
 
But when Wednesday came around, and after we on this side 
said, hey, we want to deal with Bill 41, which is The 
Agricultural Credit Corporation Act, to amend it — and there 
are some aspects there that I’m sure members on this side of the 
House will find cause to support — instead of dealing with that, 
which tends to grapple with the question of farm debt in this 
province, what did we see? What have we seen? We’ve seen a 
government that had the opportunity and the expressed 
permission and co-operation of the opposition to deal with that 
on Tuesday, the private members’ day. What happened? No. 
Did the government introduce that Bill? No. No they didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when Wednesday rolled around, that is 
yesterday rolled around, when they had the opportunity and the 
deputy House Leader had made a great hullabaloo about the 
necessity to introduce Bill 41 and get it dealt with in the fastest 
possible time, did the government, did the deputy House Leader 
go, Wednesday morning or Wednesday at 2:30 after question 
period, introduce that particular piece of legislation? No. No he 
didn’t; brought back this debate. 
 
Okay, so maybe something happened that he couldn’t do it 
yesterday. Well what about today? What about today? Why 
didn’t he put Bill 41, the Bill to deal with farm debt in this 
province; the Bill that that deputy minister will, once it’s 
introduced, trumpet to be the salvation of family farmers in 
Saskatchewan; the one, the centrepiece of their agricultural 
strategy. Instead of dealing with that particular piece of 
legislation, did he deal with it in the orders of the day? No. 
 
What he did, Mr. Speaker, was brought this motion 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1581 

 

forward which would limit, and I think I’ve outlined in rather 
broad terms, but also in terms which everybody in this province 
can understand, brought in a Bill which would limit the 
functioning of this House, the functioning of us as members, 
and the functioning of the citizens of this province to engage in 
the democratic process. 
 
Why? That’s the question I ask, is why are they doing this. 
There is no other answer than to say it is a part of the political 
priorities of the government in terms of its political game plan 
which is totally divorced, totally and absolutely divorced from 
the real problems facing real people in Saskatchewan. That’s 
why. 
 
I mean we have every opportunity in the world to be dealing 
with legislation which is fundamental, fundamental to the 
everyday lives of Saskatchewan’s citizens. Instead, what we’ve 
got is a shoddy piece of goods cooked up by the Minister of 
Justice in order to limit the rights of the opposition, to limit the 
rights of the citizenry of Saskatchewan — you know, to muzzle 
us, to muzzle the people. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I submit that the howls of protests that 
they received from the people of this province when we rang 
the bells the first time will be far, far, far exceeded by the next 
time that we have the opportunity to express in whatever 
manner we in the opposition choose to do it, our opposition to 
this government’s attempt to sell off the assets of the people of 
the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have had nearly two 
and a half days to consider the options open to them — two and 
a half days to consider the political options open to those 
members. They can spend, Mr. Speaker, they can spend one or 
two or three or four or five or however many long months it is 
going to take to convince them that we are not going to allow 
legislation through this House which would permit the sell-off 
of SaskPower. They can get that through their head, and that the 
only way they will be able to get that through the legislature is 
to receive a mandate from the people of this province to do so. 
And the only way they will receive the mandate from the people 
of this province in order so to do is to call an election and to 
receive the mandate that way. They better get that through their 
heads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — That, sir, is one political option open to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — In other words, to put it bluntly, they can keep 
coming at us, and at the people of Saskatchewan, with this 
anti-democratic act that’s got nothing to do with reality and 
nothing to do with the people of the province and only in the 
long-term and fundamental sense, or they can get to work. They 
can stop their parliamentary filibustering, their filibustering by 
the total misuse of the legislative agenda, and get on to issues of 
vital and real importance for the people of the province. That is 
their other option. 
 
Now what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? Well they say, 

well for political convenience and for the sake of our political 
face and for our honour, we can’t appear to be backing off this 
issue, because after all we’re the boss, and we’re going to tell 
the opposition what to do and not vice versa. 
 
Of course, when they say the opposition, they mean the people 
of this province, in their authoritarian manner that they’ve 
grown accustomed to. That’s what they’re talking about. 
They’re saying to the people of the province, we’re going to 
kick the opposition around a bit. We can’t afford to save face in 
this matter, can’t afford to appear to back down. And we know 
such a big macho guy like the Minister of Justice, he couldn’t 
possibly get himself in a situation where it would appear that it 
would look like he was backing down. After all, he had the 
shoot-out at the OK corral with Willard Lutz, the Provincial 
Auditor. Now he’s going to have it out with the provincial 
opposition. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, as long as that attitude prevails in the front 
bench, that attitude of legislative machoism, I guess — I don’t 
know what to call it — that kind of confrontational, 
we’re-the-boss type of attitude exists, nothing is going to 
happen here. Nothing is going to happen here because we’ve 
got a mandate from the people; they don’t. We stand as 
legitimate representatives of the people on this issue, and they 
don’t. And we’re willing to go to the people of this province on 
this issue, and they’re not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, why 
are they doing this? Why are they doing this except for some 
narrow partisan political purposes? This motion, which would 
stop the ringing of bells in this legislature, does not deserve not 
one one-thousandth of the time of the debate that, should this 
government persist, that they’re going to get — not one 
one-thousandth. 
 
Now may I offer, Mr. Speaker, a few words of advice to my 
friends in the opposition, and I do have one or two — in the 
government, excuse me. It’s a Freudian slip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that there are ways out of this 
dilemma for them. Our House Leader and others in this caucus 
have suggested various ways in which if this government wants 
to talk about rules, it can proceed in a manner that has the 
support of this House both in terms of partisan support but also 
by way of precedent. Because, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t yet talked 
about the precedent of this House. 
 
Well what is the way out, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, they 
could do like every other meeting of this legislature in this 
province has done in the past. They could set up a rules 
committee to examine the rules of the legislature in all its varied 
forms and manifestations. Mr. Speaker, they could set that 
committee up with yourself, as has been the tradition in past, 
with yourself as chairperson; Mr. Speaker, with officers of the 
legislature on staff such as the Clerk of the House or the 
legislative law counsel to assist the work of that committee. 
 
They could take a reasoned approach to the matter. They could 
remove it from here, because obviously it seems to 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1582 

 

me, Mr. Speaker, that the government has made a fundamental 
political flaw in trying to deal with this, is that they have 
inextricably linked the question of the change of the rules to the 
legislature, with the whole issue of the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is, in negotiating terms, something 
which I would have some little knowledge of. That is a bad, bad 
position to start out in trying to do any kinds of negotiation, in 
terms of change of whatever kind, whether it’s legislative or 
contractual or whatever. You never start out in a position where 
A is linked to B and A depends upon B. It’s just not done, 
because it leads to the kinds of impasses in which the 
government finds itself opposite. 
 
(2030) 
 
And the impasse in which the members opposite find 
themselves is this: in our mind, in the minds of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, your attempt to change the rules of 
the legislature, specifically to limit bell-ringing, is inextricably 
linked — as I’ve demonstrated by the use of a letter a little 
while ago — inextricably linked to the question of your 
so-called bound and determination to put forward your 
privatization measures. 
 
That’s the political conundrum that the members opposite find 
themselves in, Mr. Speaker. Everybody in this province knows 
that the only reason that this motion is before the House is that 
because they want to ram through the privatization Bills. And 
this party and our leader has made a commitment to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and I stand with our leader in that 
commitment, that as long as we remain representatives of the 
people in this House, they will never, ever, ever proceed with 
the privatization of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker — never. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that kind of commitment, which is a strong 
and a firm commitment on behalf of the members here, made 
by our Leader and held by every member of this caucus 
opposite, unfortunately the government has gone and linked this 
particular commitment to stop privatization to the question of 
rule changes in the legislature. 
 
And there’s only one way out, Mr. Speaker, of the conundrum 
they find themselves in, by trying to put forward this motion. 
There’s only one way out. 
 
And I suggest, in all due respect, and to members of the front 
bench of the government opposite, that they’d better take that 
way out before what goes around comes around in political 
terms. I suggest that they better take that out; that is, follow the 
precedent of the House. There is not one person in 
Saskatchewan who is going to say, gee, the government did bad 
by following the precedent of the House in terms of changing 
the rules. Not one person in this province is going to have that 
opinion of the government, Mr. Speaker, in terms of dealing 
with this motion. 
 
But what will happen, I suggest, that as the days and the weeks 
drag by, and as more and more people of this 

province realize that the government, instead of dealing with 
the real problems of the people of this province, are intent on 
pursuing what has become nothing more than a blind political 
agenda . . . And that determination will be shown by how long 
they keep throwing this motion forward, because it’s the 
government that determines what the order of business is and 
what the business of this House is, not the opposition. 
 
So they will on a daily basis make that decision, Mr. Speaker. 
But they’ve got a way out, they’ve got a way out to deal with 
this which involves . . . Let’s use the Japanese term for it, 
face-saving, that involves the kind of political face-saving that 
the government feels it needs, they can get. We in the 
opposition aren’t so concerned about saving face as we are 
concerned about saving SaskPower. 
 
But I say to the ministers opposite, in particular to the Minister 
of Justice and to the Minister of Finance who’s had some skill 
in negotiating deals in the past, that it may be in your long-term 
best interests, Mr. Speaker, to set up a committee to remove 
from the partisan politics which have permeated the House in a 
manner unprecedented in this province since 1982, I submit, or 
since 1964, that they’ve got the opportunity to do it. And 
they’ve got the opportunity and the political space is now in 
order to carry forward that particular operation. Because like all 
windows in politics, the window begins to shut. And those who 
are only half-way through the window, those who are only 
half-way through the window generally end up with their 
fingers badly banged up, badly burnt. That’s the political 
compromise. That’s the way to deal with it; that’s the way to 
deal with it. It’s your decision to deal with. 
 
We can go ahead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can go ahead and 
debate this motion till — to use the words of the Deputy 
Premier — till the cows come home. We can go ahead and do 
that. Because there is lots and lots of ways that we can deal with 
this particular motion, Mr. Speaker, mark my words about that. 
 
But what I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, is that at this point in 
time the members opposite may take a word of well intended, 
friendly advice, and that is to seek an out while that out is still 
available. Maybe they don’t want to, Mr. Speaker. Maybe they 
don’t want to because maybe they are so wedded to their 
political strategy that they’re on the long, long, downhill slide 
to the great big mud hole that’s at the bottom of that particular 
slippery slope. Because that hole is marked political oblivion. 
 
And if you need any, any other example from the real world, 
from the real world, any other example, look what has 
happened in the last month in this province. Look what has 
happened to you and to your reputations, not just as a member 
of a government, but as individual members. 
 
Look at what’s happening in your own constituencies. I know 
some of you don’t like going out there any more. I know you 
don’t like going out there any more because of the heat that 
you’re taking. But some members aren’t taking much heat 
because not necessarily talking with those who oppose what 
they’re doing, I’ll admit that. You look at the polls. You look at 
the things that you live and 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1583 

 

die by. You look at the weather vanes that you’ve been 
watching since 1980, ’81, ’82, and those weather vanes for you, 
my friends, are pointing in the direction which is neither east, 
west, north, or south, but pointing straight down — pointing 
straight down into that political mudhole that you are now 
beginning to feel. Because as your little toes begin to tickle in 
that cold, icy water of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe the member is 
just deferring or moving away from the topic of motion of 
discussion here, and we’re dealing specific with rules, not the 
demise or so of a government or members opposite. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Have you been listening all day? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve been listening very closely. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All day? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member from Moose Jaw South, are 
you questioning the Chair? Moose Jaw North, sorry. Moose Jaw 
North to show some respect to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that probably the state of the members’ toes opposite 
is somewhat far afield from the questions of the rules. I wasn’t 
speaking of toes, of course, in the literal sense. I was speaking 
toes only in the course of the political sense, of the political 
antenna and extremities of the members opposite must be 
feeling by now some cold showers of reality. 
 
I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, for the life of me . . . I don’t 
understand for the life of me, when an offer, the one I just 
outlined, was presented earlier on to that caucus, presented 
earlier on to that government, why the members opposite didn’t 
jump at the chance to take it. It doesn’t make any sense. Who, 
Mr. Speaker, who has convinced them that this motion and the 
day after day after day debating of this motion is going to serve 
them politically in the long run. Who? Who did it? 
 
Now one of the members asked: why is it being debated so 
long? That member, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s the member 
from Pelly. The member from Pelly obviously does not 
understand the proceedings of the legislature. I would ask the 
member from Pelly to pick up the little brown book that he has 
here, that he finds on his desk, on page 1 under No. 48, No. 48 
is the number of days we’ve been sitting in the legislature: 
Routine Proceedings and Orders of the Day of the Legislative 
Assembly, province of Saskatchewan, third session, twenty-first 
legislature, Regina, Thursday, June l, l989. Prayers. Then 
routine proceedings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said this twice, and that member has 
been in the House, so I’m not going to repeat this more than this 
one, and if he actually has any more questions about it, perhaps 
two more times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member has got to understand this, that it is 
his front bench, not the opposition, it is his front bench which 
determines the order of business. The member sitting there, the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance, 
the 

Minister of Justice, the minister there, determine routine 
proceedings. It lists five or six routine proceedings: presenting 
petitions; reading and receiving petitions; presenting reports by 
standing, select and special committees; notices of motions and 
questions; introduction of guests; oral questions; ministerial 
statements; introduction of Bills. And then, Mr. Speaker, at the 
bottom it says: orders of the day. 
 
Now I asked the member from Pelly, who asked me that, why 
are we debating this Bill? I’m going to give him the answer 
now, and if he wants to listen, if he wants to listen, I would say, 
Mr. Speaker, I would say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I said why are we debating this so long? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Oh, now he asked me a different question. I’ll 
answer the first question first. The first question is: why are we 
debating this Bill? Mr. Speaker, we’re debating this Bill 
because the government and the caucus of the party and the 
legislature to which that member belongs has made a decision 
to debate that Bill . . . to debate this motion, excuse me, Mr. 
Speaker, to debate the motion which would ring the bell . . . 
which would limit bell-ringing. 
 
They made that decision, Mr. Speaker, not we in the opposition, 
but the government made that decision. Now the member asks: 
why are we debating this Bill for so long? Well, I’ll tell you 
why. I’ll tell you why, Mr. Member of the Legislative 
Assembly for Pelly, why we’re debating this Bill for so long. 
We’re debating this Bill for so long because we know that this 
Bill is nothing more than the legislative ammunition that you 
need to sell off Saskatchewan, and first and foremost 
SaskPower. We know, Mr. Speaker, that that is what this 
motion is all about. And we will debate this motion, my good 
friend from Pelly, we will debate this motion, as the Deputy 
Premier said, till the cows come home. 
 
So that, Mr. Member, Mr. Pelly, is the reason why we’re 
debating this motion so long. Now listen, we’re here as political 
parties and you can decide what your political priorities are any 
day you want. 
 
Who put it on the agenda today? Was it us? Was it the member 
from Elphinstone? Was it the member from Regina Centre? 
Was it the leader of our party, the member from Riversdale? 
Did he put it on the agenda today? Who put it on the agenda 
today? Who put it on the agenda today, Mr. Member from 
Pelly? The Premier of this province put this motion on the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, that’s who did it, Mr. Member 
from Pelly. It was your leader, your Premier. Now your leader 
and your Premier, Mr. Member from Pelly, will have a decision 
to make. You ask the question, why are we debating it for so 
long? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the questions from the member 
from Pelly, let me say this, that the length to which we debate 
this motion will not be decided by the opposition, but it will be 
decided by, guess who? Will it 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1584 

 

be the member from Elphinstone? No. Will it be the member 
from Riversdale? No. The member from Lake Centre? No. 
They won’t decide how long we debate this Bill. 
 
(2045) 
 
You will decide it, Mr. Member from Pelly? One person in this 
legislature will decide the length of this debate. Mr. Speaker, 
that one person is not a mystery person; he’s not a mystery 
person. One person will decide how long we debate this motion 
before us, and that is the member from Estevan, the Premier of 
the province. And when you guys in the back benches stand up 
and put enough heat on him and tell him, let’s get on to the real 
business of Saskatchewan instead of this phoney political 
agenda, when you do that, then we will decide how long it is 
going, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Pelly hopefully 
has had his question answered. Now when you undertake your 
duty as a member of this legislature and say, let’s get on to the 
real business of Saskatchewan, let’s get on and do what the 
people of the province want us to do, not what our narrow, 
right-wing ideologies tells us to do, not what the Maggie 
Thatcher’s of the world would like us to do; when we deal with, 
as we could be doing now, the estimates of the province, the 
spending of departments, including Agriculture, including 
Environment, including Health, including Education — we 
could be doing that tonight. We could be discussing that. But 
no, the Premier of the province said, no, we’re not going to deal 
with that. We’re not going to talk about real things today. We’re 
going to teach the NDP a lesson and we’re going to teach the 
opposition a lesson because we’re going to ram this motion 
right down their throats. That is what your front benchers are 
doing. 
 
And do you know, Mr. Member from Pelly, you ask them, you 
ask them because they had the opportunity and they have the 
opportunity to get out of this conundrum. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this motion has brought considerable 
consternation, has brought considerable consternation to the 
people of this province. That, sir, is not political hyperbole. 
That is not by any means overblown political rhetoric or 
political hyperbole. 
 
I heard several minutes ago the member from Swift Current say 
how proud they were of being able to deal with this motion, 
how proud that she as a representative of the front benches of 
the government was in ramming it to the NDP; how proud she 
was of taking up the time of this legislature to deal with 
something that by precedent could be done co-operatively 
outside the partisan nature of the debate that occurs in this 
Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that, while I respect in some 
ways the political judgement of the member from Swift 
Current, I think that she has lost touch with the political reality 
of even her own constituents on the matter of this motion. 
 
And now why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Well I want to 

refer, Mr. Speaker, if I can, very briefly, to an editorial in the 
Swift Current Sun of May 29, 1989 — that’s two days ago. 
That’s this week, two or three days ago, Mr. Speaker. The topic, 
Mr. Speaker, is on the question of the motion before us, so I 
don’t think that the editorial is outside of what we’re debating 
here tonight, sir. Now the headline is, and I quote, “Devine 
government shows its contempt.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t an editorial from the 
Commonwealth. This isn’t an editorial from the Canadian 
Tribune, or this isn’t an editorial from even some of those 
supposed left-wingers that exist in the bowels of the 
Leader-Post. This is from the Swift Current Sun, a staunch 
supporter, time in and time out, of the Conservative 
government. And it says in its headline, “Devine government 
shows its contempt.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the Devine government show its 
contempt, according to The Sun from Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan? It says, first of all, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

The provincial government seems to think lately that it can 
do anything it wants; drink our liquor from an old fruit jar, 
slander our names all over the place, even step on our blue 
suede shoes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that that editorial, that that first 
sentence of that editorial kinds of sum up, opens a rather broad 
framework to discuss why it was that the Devine government 
shows its contempt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

The first scuff (not the last, not the second or the third, but 
the first scuff) came when the provincial government 
decided to sell shares in SaskEnergy (SaskPower) despite 
the fact that two out of three people in Saskatchewan don’t 
like the idea. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why is it that the Swift Current Sun can recognize 
reality when the member from Swift Current can’t, Mr. 
Speaker, or the member from Morse or the member from any of 
those constituencies served by the Swift Current Sun? Now: 
 

There’s nothing intrinsically wrong with that — 
governments should lead, not do only what makes them 
popular . . .  
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, nobody argues with that. There is a time for 
political leadership, and the role of any government worth its 
salt is to exhibit that strong political leadership. The nature of 
that strong political leadership is gathering together the people 
of the political jurisdiction which they are trying to lead, to 
form a consensus and to march forward into the future. That’s 
political leadership, and nobody, Mr. Speaker, nobody on this 
side of the House opposes that. 
 
But listen to what the Swift Current Sun, Mr. Speaker, says 
about political leadership, Devine government style: 
 

. . . but then the Tories formed a commission to study the 
issue and appointed Lloyd Barber as its chairman. Barber 
belongs to a business group that promotes privatization and 
favours selling 

  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1585 

 

SaskEnergy. How’s that for a government that thumbed . . . 
 

Pardon me, I want to read that again so I quote correctly: 
 

How’s that for a government thumbing its nose at people? 
 

Mr. Speaker, isn’t that what I have been talking about for the 
last several days that I’ve been speaking on this topic of this 
motion which would limit bell-ringing — that it shows a level 
of contempt for the people of the province — never mind, Mr. 
Speaker, the historical traditions of this legislature which I will 
get into at a later date — but shows its contempt for the wishes 
of the people of the province. 
 
Now this, Mr. Speaker, is not looking back into the 12th 
century or 13th century. This is dealing with the Swift Current 
Sun of this week. 
 
It goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say — and I won’t quote it all, but 
I’ll quote the salient points. It goes on to make the points that 
there was the Willard Lutz affair, and we all know what that 
constituted. 
 
What did they call it? They called it, “Slander our names all 
over the place.” Well isn’t that what the Minister of Justice did 
with Willard Lutz, in thumbing their nose at the people of the 
province, showing contempt, the same kind of contempt that is 
contained in this motion which stands before us? 
 
It says, Mr. Speaker, that this Tory, when dealing with the 
Willard Lutz affair, and I quote the words: 
 

. . . responded shamefully. They didn’t refute the auditor’s 
claims, they attacked his integrity. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when this legislature is misused and abused as it 
has been doing with this rules debate, as it is being done with 
this government’s attempt to introduce and ram through a 
motion which would limit bell-ringing, contempt is shown to 
the people of the province. 
 
The Swift Current Sun says it was done in the case of Willard 
Lutz, it was done in the case of SaskEnergy — something that, 
Mr. Speaker, we have been talking about at some length 
because we related that fundamentally the political project and 
the political agenda of the Conservative Party is nothing but a 
cynical and a contemptuous manoeuvre, contemptuous 
manoeuvre, and that’s the word, Mr. Speaker, used in this 
editorial. They throw contempt; the Tories responded 
shamefully; they didn’t refute the auditor’s claim, they attacked 
his integrity. That’s contempt, Mr. Speaker. It goes on to say 
that, “ . . . few Justice ministers in Saskatchewan have acted so 
injustly.” 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, it quotes on in great length about the sins of 
the government, this from a paper which normally has 
supported the government in almost all its activity. I can’t think 
of an editorial in the Swift Current Sun that opposed any of the 
government’s initiatives. So I figure that coming from one of 
your friends, coming from one of your friends, Mr. Speaker, 
this kind of criticism has got to 

sting home. 
 
You would have to be totally insensitive, totally out of touch 
with any kind of reality, totally ensconced in the cocoon of the 
Barber palace not to realize that. This is their friend speaking. 
 

Then last week the Saskatchewan Securities Commission 
ordered SaskEnergy to stall campaigning. (And then the 
editorial says) The government response in this case was 
to approve an order allowing SaskEnergy to bypass 
security laws and contain its campaign. 
 

And it goes on and on to say a number of other things. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it ends up, it ends up, Mr. Speaker, with the 
kind of cogent comment that only can be found by those with 
an ear to the ground and with their nose to the political winds 
which are blowing in Saskatchewan, in this case, the Swift 
Current Sun. 
 
It says, it says, Mr. Speaker . . . And I think that it’s important 
that all members on that side listen to what the Swift Current 
Sun is saying, because its characterization of the government, of 
the Devine government, which shows its contempt for the 
people of the province, is, in short, “ . . . it does as it damn well 
pleases.” 
 
Those are in quotes, Mr. Speaker. That’s pretty strong language, 
Mr. Speaker, that is pretty strong language in any editorial, in 
any editorial, Mr. Speaker, let alone an editorial from a 
newspaper which is supportive — well had been up till now — 
supportive of the initiatives of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t that what’s at the crux of this debate here 
tonight? Isn’t that the crux of the kind of things we’ve been 
trying to bring to the attention of the government members? 
That the government, despite its macho attitude, just can’t do as 
it damn well pleases. Now I know it may be a blow to some 
egos there of some ministers who figure they can ram stuff at 
us, but I hope that all members of the caucus of the government 
opposite have had the opportunity to realize that their 
front-benchers were offered an out, that their front-benchers 
were offered an out, and that out consisted, Mr. Speaker, of my 
final topic for tonight, which is the question of precedent. 
 
That is, Mr. Speaker — excuse the hoarseness — a question of 
precedent. Mr. Speaker, for those who aren’t familiar with the 
language of parliamentary democracy, precedent means those 
things which have happened before, which have served to act as 
guides for the conduct of the parliamentary institutions, unless 
those things are mutually changed by co-operation and common 
consent — it’s tradition, but it’s tradition with a meaning, not in 
the stuffy sense of musty old things that may be thrown out 
along with great-grandmother’s trunk of used clothing, but is a 
much more richer sense in the sense that it means that it serves 
as guides to actions today based on activities of people who 
came before us. And that’s precedent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2100) 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1586 

 

Now what, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with this question of rule 
changes, have we seen by way of precedent, that is, by way of 
tradition and history in this Legislative Assembly? The Swift 
Current Sun says that the government goes ahead and does, to 
quote: “ . . . as it damn well pleases.” And that includes, Mr. 
Speaker, trampling on precedent; and that includes, Mr. 
Speaker, an activity which I personally find an affront, because 
it’s not the first time, Mr. Speaker, as I, as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan, have 
had to deal with this kind of contemptuous action, of this 
arrogance, of this thumbing its nose at the people, by thumbing 
its nose at the legislature, by this lack of respect for precedent 
and its inability to understand that the functioning of any 
institution — whether it’s this legislature; whether it’s a church; 
whether it’s a service organization; whether it’s a trade union 
— the part of the ordinary operations of all organizations 
involving and governing the activities of people, precedent 
plays an important part. 
 
And I’m surprised, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that that issue 
has not, when we’re dealing with this motion to change the 
rules, entered into, or at least twinged upon the consciousness 
and the conscience of members of the front bench opposite. 
 
After all, precedence, as a concept in law, has a long and 
mighty weight to it. Lots and lots of things are decided, Mr. 
Speaker, as they are in here, and as, Mr. Speaker, in every 
Legislative Assembly does throughout the British 
Commonwealth, whether it’s New Zealand or Australia, 
whether it’s in Ghana, whether it’s in Saskatchewan, no matter 
where it is, the concept of tradition and the way in which things 
have been done in the past plays an important part in 
determining how things today, and in the future, will be carried 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the precedent that the government has for 
doing what it’s doing in muzzling the opposition by putting 
forward a motion which would limit the ringing of the bells? 
What precedent does it have, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature? 
None. Absolutely none, Mr. Speaker. No precedent. That is, 
Mr. Speaker, what the government is doing is — without any 
fear of factual contradiction in the very literal and technical 
sense of the word — that what the government has undertaken 
is without precedent; that is, it is unprecedented. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, it is abnormal. What the 
government is doing is not normal to the conduct of the affairs 
of this Legislative Assembly here in Saskatchewan. It is 
abnormal. It does not have the normal conduct of the legislature 
to back up its authority to do what it is doing. 
 
Now not one, Mr. Speaker, of the members opposite will rise to 
their feet at a future date — and it may be far into the future, let 
me say — to try to refute that statement that what they’re doing 
is abnormal and without precedent. Because the historical facts 
of the matter are that in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, as in 
most jurisdictions in which the precedence of British 
parliamentary tradition has some kind of operative norm, 
precedence in making rule changes to the legislature forms a 
great part of how governments and oppositions draw up rules so 
that they can live harmoniously. 

And I use that, Mr. Speaker, in a not literal sense but in the 
sense that to outline the guide-lines by which this legislature 
can operate and operate to fulfil the mandate given to it by the 
people of the province, in a manner which, I guess, boils down 
to the question of civility and the question of good manners. 
Notions which may be outmoded . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Around here. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Around here, but which lie, in fact, that many of 
the formalisms which we observe about us and which are, if 
you like, the material manifestations of the historical 
precedence. In other words, Mr. Speaker, just as your 
three-cornered hat is as much a matter of the precedence of this 
legislature, as is the Clerk at the Table, or as is the Mace, or as 
is the title that you yourself have. The title, Mr. Speaker, is a 
material manifestation of the form of historical precedence. 
 
So too are the other activities which are governed based on 
precedent, and that includes, in this particular legislature, the 
changing of the rules. And when that precedent is broken, when 
that precedent is swept aside by a unilateral action as it is 
presently being done by the members of the government 
opposite, well, Mr. Speaker, they’re trampling on your 
three-cornered hat, in a figurative sense. They are throwing 
underfoot, they are throwing underfoot that symbol, that symbol 
of historical . . . of historic tradition. 
 
And just, Mr. Speaker . . . And, Mr. Speaker, just as there is a 
symbol and a reason for the use of that hat, so is there a reason 
for, in changing the rules of the legislature, the rule of 
precedence to apply. That precedent becomes operative in 
dealing with activities that are, by and in and of themselves, 
intrinsically sensitive. 
 
The first speech, Mr. Speaker, that I delivered to this House 
involved precisely this issue. After the general election of 1986, 
there was an attempt to unilaterally deal with the question of 
quorum, as it was, I believe, in the rules committee, what 
constituted quorum, and how things were going to be operative 
in the committee of the legislature which determined how other 
things operated. 
 
And unilaterally the government made some motions and 
undertook some activities which were unprecedented in terms 
of dealing with the activities of that committee. Not a great 
thing in and of itself for the person on the street in 
Saskatchewan, but an affront, an affront to the legislature, an 
affront to precedence, an affront, Mr. Speaker, which led to a 
ruling which went against the government in that instance; an 
affront, Mr. Speaker, which said that no, when it comes to 
dealing with things of precedence, that the government should 
not in and of itself undertake, because of the way the rules are 
structured, activities of a unilateral nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I haven’t researched whether or not that ruling 
may apply in this instance, but I suggest, Mr. Speaker, as I 
stand up here at a future date to undertake this debate, that that 
issue may well indeed arise. Because, Mr. Speaker, there is the 
question here before us all as members, of whether or not the 
government has the right, the government has the 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1587 

 

right to change by way of artificial majority what was changed 
by way of unanimity in the House. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, there is some question, I submit to 
you, that the government does not have, based on the rules and 
procedures of this legislation — and I’m not pretending by any 
means at all to act as an expert in this regard, but I do say, Mr. 
Speaker, that it seems to me that there is some room to question 
the activities of the government in this regard, of changing the 
rules unilaterally when the whole history of Saskatchewan has 
been to change the rules by way of unanimity; that is, by 
striking a committee. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that by the reactions of the member 
opposite, that precedent is something to laugh at. And the 
operations of the legislature since the time it opened is 
something to be scuffled underfoot, because as the Swift 
Current Sun says, “Devine government shows its contempt.” 
And the members of that government do as, to quote the Swift 
Current Sun, “ . . . damn well as it pleases.” 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, in regards to this change of rules, that 
this government will not damn well do as it pleases because the 
members of this side of the House are bound and determined 
that this government shall damn well do what the people of 
Saskatchewan want it do and none other — none other, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, they may laugh and they may 
thumb their nose and they may show that contempt. But in this 
issue of changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, they will not . . . the 
Spanish have a saying for it — no paseran, no paseran — they 
shall not pass. 
 
Let me say then, Mr. Speaker, just as the people of Cuba and 
Nicaragua and now of El Salvador are putting it up to the 
tyrants they find in their country, of no paseran, so shall we 
here in Saskatchewan refuse to let this government damn well 
do as it please, thumb its nose at the people, slander our name 
all over the place, step on our blue suede shoes and drink liquor 
from an old fruit jar — just as the Swift Current Sun said of the 
type of activities that the government is engaged in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, doesn’t precedent mean anything 
to the government opposite? I ask you, sir, and I ask, through 
you to the other members of the Assembly, to look back at the 
history of this Assembly. Because long after you and I are but 
faint remnants of dust scattered over goodness gracious knows 
what field somewhere, this legislature, or a forum much like it, 
will continue in existence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, long after we’re gone from here, there will be the 
history of this legislature. This rule change, by way of motion 
introduced by the Minister of Justice, breaks with the history 
and tradition of this legislature. That’s what I talk about when it 
tramples on precedence. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, why does it do that? Why does the 

government take the time of the people of the province to scoff 
at the history and tradition of this legislature, to go about and 
try to gain by force what it cannot gain by consent? In 
legitimate and honest debate, Mr. Speaker, these people cannot 
win. 
 
What they will do, Mr. Speaker . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
make a prediction here now tonight: this government will 
attempt to use by way of force what it cannot gain by way of 
consent, by the use of parliamentary rules and regulations 
which have been rarely, if ever, used in this legislature. They 
will drag out some — or attempt to drag out — some dusty, 
musty, old rule from way back when, that’s rusty from misuse, 
that hasn’t been oiled lately, but will be oiled up with the snake 
oil that these people are peddling in order to try to stop this 
debate on this rules motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2115) 
 
I make that prediction, Mr. Speaker. I make prediction, Mr. 
Speaker, because these people are well known for the kind of 
arrogant bull-headedness that leads to, Mr. Speaker, editorials 
in the Swift Current Sun, but also led to, Mr. Speaker, another 
political event which took place tonight within 50 miles of this 
legislature — another political . . . animated, I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, by the ringing of the bells of the opposition, just some 
of the kind of political reverberations and tremors that are 
reverberating around this province. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the people 
of Regina and the constituency I represent, that the fight against 
the privatization of SaskPower is not over, and that in Southey 
tonight, Mr. Speaker — here in the midst of this debate on 
changing the rules — in Southey tonight, Mr. Speaker, over 300 
people . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Over 300 people in the little town of Southey 
tonight gathered together, Mr. Speaker, to fight the privatization 
of SaskPower, fight this government’s attempt to ram through 
unilaterally rule changes which inhibit the opposition from 
stopping the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those 300 people gathered in Southey, 
overflowing the hall, spreading out to the main speaker, had one 
message to this government, had one message to this 
government. Mr. Speaker, their message was: what you are 
doing is wrong. You have no mandate for doing what you are 
doing. If you want that mandate, call an election and let’s see if 
you have our support, say those 300 people in Southey, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s see if you have our support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, this is in rural Saskatchewan, the 
same type of rural Saskatchewan represented by those people 
who read the Swift Current Sun, who say, “Devine government 
shows its contempt.” Well, Mr. Speaker, it was obvious that the 
300 people in the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood, 
in the town of Southey, were saying the same message to the 
government of the 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1588 

 

province of Saskatchewan, we’ve had enough of your contempt. 
We’ve had enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We’ve had enough of thumbing their noses at 
us, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had enough. You are not going to 
slander our names all over the place. You’re not going to dance 
on our blue suede shoes; you’re not going to drink our liquor 
from an old fruit jar, as the Swift Current Sun says. Because 
we’ve had enough, and we, says the 300 people in the town of 
Southey tonight said, not only we have enough, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had enough of that government; we had enough of your 
arbitrary action. 
 
And you, Mr. Speaker, you, Mr. Speaker, can pass that message 
along to the government. You can pass that message along, Mr. 
Speaker, to the government, because those people in Southey 
fundamentally are saying, this government will not damn well 
do as it would please. Over our dead bodies. We’re going to 
fight. We’re going to continue that fight. And they will not stop. 
Just like this opposition, Mr. Speaker, the people of Southey 
will not stop. And neither, Mr. Speaker, will this opposition. 
The fight goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people across this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Southey at that 
meeting asked questions. I am told — I wasn’t at this meeting, 
but I am told by my colleagues and by way of note that people 
at this meeting in Southey, of 300, were saying: why is the 
government trying to ram this Bill change through? Why are 
they trying to put forward this motion which would help the 
privatization of SaskPower? 
 
Don’t they realize, say the people of Southey, that everybody in 
the province, just like the Swift Current Sun says, two out of 
three — two out of three — they’re opposed to it? Don’t they 
realize that? What have they got in their head? Rocks? Why 
don’t they listen? What have they got in their ears? Wax? Don’t 
they have the brains to understand that we don’t want the 
privatization of SaskPower? We want the government to listen 
to us and treat us with the respect that we deserve, and not with 
the contempt that we’ve been getting. 
 
That’s what the people of Southey say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You know, Mr. Speaker, a rural constituency, a 
rural constituency that the Premier now holds, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier of the province has made the decision to go ahead and 
ram this rules motion at the people of the province — not at the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker; he’s ramming it at the people of the 
province — because he wants to privatize SaskPower. The 
Premier of the province has made that decision. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he can make that decision, but he won’t have 
to pay the political price for making that decision. Not him, Mr. 
Speaker, oh no, he’s poured his 

two billion dollars-plus into his constituency to help out his 
political friends down in Estevan. 
 
But what about the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
the members of the other side of this House who are going to 
have to pay the political price for the political decisions made 
for by the Premier of the province? Mr. Speaker, someone in 
Last Mountain-Touchwood is going to pay that political price 
for the decision that the Premier has made. Mr. Speaker, 
somebody in Pelly will pay the political price for the political 
decision that the Premier has made . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, someone in Rosetown will pay the 
political price for the political decision that the Premier has 
made. And not just on this matter, Mr. Speaker, but on the 
whole question of backing Cargill versus backing the local 
people of Rosetown. That member from Rosetown will pay the 
political price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, some other of us are going to pay 
that political price, or should I put it this way, Mr. Speaker, 
some other political people are going to reap the political 
rewards. I would love to be in the shoes, Mr. Speaker, of one of 
those five candidates of our party who’s running for the 
nomination in Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency, five 
people who are opposing the sale of SaskPower, who oppose 
this Bill which will limit the opposition; five people, Mr. 
Speaker, who are vying for the seat, vying for a seat when we’ll 
be backed for it, backed by those 300 people that were out 
tonight in Southey, saying to the government of Saskatchewan, 
don’t you keep on doing what you’re doing. I’d love to be in 
their position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d love to be, Mr. Speaker, in the position of those who are 
going to reap the political rewards in Kinistino. In Kinistino, 
Mr. Speaker, where there are three or four . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Where there are three or four or potentially 
more candidates for our party who are out there working hard, 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this opposition will be backed up in 
every farmyard in the constituency of Kinistino by all those 
farm folks out there who are saying, I don’t want some private 
entrepreneur holding on to my gas line; I don’t want this 
government to ram this rules motion at us; I want to be 
respected by a government here in Saskatchewan; I want to be 
respected by the people that I put in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, those will be the political rewards 
reaped by those who’ve had the political courage to stand up 
and say what this government is doing over half-way through 
its term, with the political clock ticking, saying, we stand not 
for a cynical, political manoeuvre so that we can buy the next 
election, but who are standing up for principle, who are 
standing up for the people of the constituency of Kinistino. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1589 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the only people who will reap the 
political rewards, and I don’t mean, Mr. Speaker, reaping those 
political rewards in any personal sense. Goodness gracious 
knows that we all go through long hours and we all have a 
tough row to hoe, particularly in Saskatchewan where Tory 
times are tough times. So it’s not a question of political reward, 
but it’s the kind of reward where . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. I’m 
having difficulty hearing the words of the member from Regina 
Rosemont. The reason is of course there are many debates 
taking place on both sides of the House, and I would like the 
co-operation of the members. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I appreciate 
your comments in this regard. Mr. Speaker, as I was saying — 
and I know that you said that you missed some of the remarks 
— basically what I was saying is that the work in this House, as 
a member of Legislative Assembly, does not gain one, unless 
one takes advantage of their position any kind of personal 
rewards. But the rewards that are gained, Mr. Speaker, and 
gained by those people who will reap the political rewards for 
standing up in opposition to this motion and standing up in 
opposition to the things that this government is doing and which 
are opposed by the people of the province, will be the gratitude 
and thanks of the people of this province for their efforts to 
preserve their right — not the right of members here in this 
parliament, but their right to participate as they did tonight by 
the hundreds in the community of Southey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are rewards enough; those are rewards 
enough, Mr. Speaker. For when you stand up and speak out on 
behalf of the people, one does not need to go about and try to 
satisfy themselves with false rewards or false accomplishments. 
To speak for the people, Mr. Speaker, is the highest reward of 
all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier on that there were members in 
this legislature who are going to pay a political price, and they 
are over on that side, because it won’t be this side of the House. 
And I had earlier on begun an argument which I will now 
attempt to finish in the time left to me, although I don’t know if 
there is going to be enough time left. Maybe we’ll pick it up 
again tomorrow, but it’s this, Mr. Speaker — that while those 
who make the decisions may or may not have to pay the kind of 
political price, may or may not have to reap the whirlwind of 
the wind that they have sown, that the other members of this 
Legislative Assembly on that side of the House, of the 
government side of the House, do not have to go through the 
kind of misery, political misery, which an extended debate on 
this motion implies. 
 
But that, Mr. Speaker, that decision, Mr. Speaker, lies not in the 
hands of the opposition. That political decision which the 
members opposite have to make in terms of dealing with this 
motion lies in their hands. It lies in their hands in this sense, Mr. 
Speaker: they have the opportunity, and have had the 
opportunity over the last little while, to observe the events of 
the House, to reflect on the kinds of things that, while there 
have not been all that many speakers on this side of the House 
involved yet in the debate, other members will, and other 
members 

will make points, I think, as salient and as pertinent to this 
debate as I certainly have made. 
 
(2130) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, during that period of time the people of this 
province, as they did tonight in Southey, and as they’re doing in 
the press gallery, and as they’re doing in my constituency of 
Regina Rosemont, are asking themselves: why is it, why is it 
that they’re doing what they’re doing, and how can we stop it? 
 
This is what must, Mr. Speaker, be going on in the minds of the 
members opposite. Is it . . . are enhancing us as political 
representatives of our party in, let’s say, Shaunavon or in 
Shellbrook-Torch River or in Qu’Appelle or, I’ll say, 
Moosomin? Is it enhancing our reputation as representatives of 
the people to be taking up the time — and we’re at day 48, I 
noticed in the blues today — of the Assembly of the province? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, while the government front-benchers are 
trying to peddle the line that it’s the opposition which is 
somehow holding up the work of the House, as this debate 
gains increasing attention throughout the province, as evidently 
it is doing by the reports of tonight’s meeting, then the whole 
way in which the Assembly functions will become a matter of 
common and public record. 
 
And I for one, Mr. Speaker, say that that would be a good thing. 
I think that it is a good thing, not a bad thing, that people in 
Saskatchewan know that in this House the government, the 
government determines what the order of business is, and not 
the legislation . . . not the opposition. And that’s how it 
functions. That’s the political reality. 
 
Because as long as members from this side of the House enter 
into this debate and are forced, because of the government’s 
action, to debate this rule change which does nothing for the 
people of the province except muzzle them, as long as that 
occurs, Mr. Speaker, more and more people will be asking 
themselves: what the heck is going on in Regina? What are 
these folks up to? 
 
And more and more the members of my party — and I don’t 
mean just here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, but the members 
of my party all across Saskatchewan, will be saying on coffee 
row, whether it’s in Kinistino, whether it’s in Shaunavon, 
whether it’s in Melfort or Melville, whether it’s in Kamsack, 
whether it’s in Hoey, they will be saying, Mr. Speaker: it’s 
because the government is trying to change the rules and the 
opposition won’t let them. 
 
Well how come they’re trying to change the rules? Because 
they’re trying to privatize SaskPower. Well that’s kind of a 
waste of time, ain’t it? Yes it is; yes it is; we agree. How come 
the government doesn’t pass the farm debt Bill or all that farm 
debt legislation. I mean, that’s reality. That is what’s going to 
occur out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is another form of democracy. It’s a 
form of democracy which I discussed earlier, and I have to 
discuss again, but it is the use of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, to 
inform the citizenry of this province. And if it 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1590 

 

comes down to how the legislature operates, and people are 
interested in knowing how the legislature operates, the members 
of my party and the members of this caucus will tell the people 
of Saskatchewan precisely how it is; that on a day-by-day basis, 
yes, it’s the government determine what’s debated, and no, it’s 
not the opposition; and yes, it’s the government which has 
brought this motion forward, and no, it’s not the opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, from the point of view . . . if you, sir, were 
sitting in one of those constituencies occupied by the 
back-benchers, I wonder, sir, wouldn’t you be asking the same 
questions: is it worth the candle? Is this fight worth it? What 
political price are we going to pay? 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, the question they would be asking 
themselves is this: can I sell the line that the opposition is 
debating this rule change because they control the legislature? 
Can I sell that line? Not a chance, Mr. Speaker, not a chance in 
seven breezes in Heaven will they be able to peddle that line, 
not to the press gallery here, not to the people who occupy the 
galleries, not to the people who watch on television; certainly 
not to the members of this opposition. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the 40,000-plus members of our 
political party are going to ensure that the government is not 
able to peddle that particular line that it’s the opposition that 
wants to deal with the rules. We don’t. I’d rather be dealing 
with agricultural estimates or anything else than standing here 
trying to defend democracy and the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I would rather be trying to deal with education, 
Mr. Speaker, dealing with the question of the school boards 
who are having to pay tens of thousands of dollars in interest 
because the government won’t withdraw this motion and bring 
forward the real things of the province. They won’t do it, Mr. 
Speaker, because they’ve got their own political agenda. 
They’ve got their own political agenda and they can grind away 
at it, and the school boards of Saskatchewan can — as the Swift 
Current Sun says — suffer because the government wants to 
damn well do as it pleases. 
 
And we know. We look in the paper and we see the school 
boards are suffering because the government refuses to deal 
with the problems in education but instead wants to deal with its 
privatization agenda through the pushing forward of this 
motion. We say let’s deal with the education problem right 
now, right here tonight. 
 
If we would have a firm commitment by any member, any 
honest member of the government opposite, from the front 
bench, who would stand up and say: yes, we’re going to 
withdraw this Bill and deal with . . . withdraw this motion and 
deal with the real problems, I will give up my place. Because 
every member on this side of the House wants to deal with 
education and the problems the school board’s facing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I have many constituents in 

the constituency of Regina Rosemont, including the former 
member of the legislature from Regina Rosemont, who have 
children who attend the Regina separate school board. We 
know what kind of financial difficulties the Regina separate 
school board are doing. Why aren’t we dealing with an 
emergency cash injection to the Regina separate school board 
instead of dealing with this whole, this phoney boloney rules 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Isn’t that more important, Mr. Speaker? Isn’t 
that more important, Mr. Member from Regina South? Isn’t that 
more important to your parents and your families who attend 
the Regina separate school board? What’s more important, 
dealing with the cash injection that they need, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, or, Mr. Minister, dealing with this silly rule thing? 
Which is more important? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government is going to try to sell the 
line, to peddle the story to the people of Saskatchewan, that 
somehow the opposition’s holding up the legislature. I want to 
ask, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members here tonight from 
the government: do you want to deal with this rules motion 
from now till the cows come home, or do you want to deal with 
the problems and crises in education? Which do you want to 
deal with, members? Put your hands up. How many of you want 
to deal with the problems of education? Put your hands up. Go 
on, put your hands up. Come on, show a little bit of 
independence. None. None. None, Mr. Speaker, not one of 
those government members wants to deal with the problems of 
the Regina separate school board and every other school board 
in this province starved for educational funding. 
 
They’d rather deal with the rules. They would rather deal with 
the rules which, for most people on a day-to-day basis, don’t 
mean sweet tweet, as the birds would say, don’t mean sweet 
tweet. They’d rather sit on their hands, act as the hallelujah 
chorus for the Premier who’s made this political decision. 
 
Well that’s fine, Mr. Speaker. If that’s what they want to do, 
then they had better not go around this province, they had better 
not go around this province trying to peddle a false story to the 
people of this province that the opposition is holding up this 
House. 
 
We know why they’re doing what they’re doing, ramming this 
thing, trying to ram this motion through parliament so that they 
can privatize SaskPower, so they can privatize the potash 
corporation, so they can privatize SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). That’s what’s the number one priority 
is in their minds, not, Mr. Speaker, the problems of the kids 
who are going to St. Joan of Arc School or may have not have 
the same teacher or may be cut short of teachers next year 
because of the government’s refusal to deal with some of the 
educational crises that are brewing in this province. They don’t 
care about kids in that matter. 
 
All they care about is selling off what we already own and 
ramming through rule changes that will enable them to do that 
and save face for the Premier of this province. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1591 

 

That’s what all their interest is. 
 
You know they talk about families a lot, Mr. Speaker, but when 
it comes down to the nitty-gritty, when it comes down to the 
crunch, when it comes down to them determining what the 
priorities are, you just have to look at the choices that this 
government makes and you see very easily, Mr. Speaker, they 
choose privatization. They’ll choose privatization over families 
and children any day of the week. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, are they going to be able to peddle their 
story that somehow the opposition is holding up the legislature 
while they want to deal with important business. Only, Mr. 
Speaker, only those who would peddle the most bald-faced 
untruth, the most bald-faced hypocritical story, would attempt 
to peddle that line. And Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan, no matter if they try to peddle that line, will not 
believe what they have to say about them on this issue. 
 
Not one, Mr. Speaker, not one person who signed the 100,000 
petitions opposing the privatization of SaskPower, not one of 
the thousands of people who attended the meetings around the 
province, not one of the tens of thousands of people including 
members of their own political party who question the wisdom, 
what they’re doing, will believe that it’s the opposition which is 
holding up the work of this legislature, Mr. Speaker. Not one, 
because, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly nobody believes them any 
more. Nobody believes a word they say. Nobody believes a 
word they say, Mr. Speaker, which is why they’re trying to ram 
this rule change through the legislature so that they can carry on 
their phoney political agenda. Nobody, Mr. Speaker, nobody 
believes what they say. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, maybe we need another demonstration 
for the members opposite of how the people of this province do 
not believe what they say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Maybe we need another demonstration for them. 
So I want to suggest tonight, Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest 
tonight that those people who are watching this tonight, who 
know that the motion that’s before this legislature is wrong, and 
who know that the political agenda of the government is wrong 
and shows, as the Swift Current Sun says, shows its contempt 
for the people of this province, I want them to contact a New 
Democratic Party member of the Legislative Assembly and ask 
for a petition. If they haven’t signed one of those petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, it is not too late. It is by no means too late, Mr. 
Speaker, because this is a long struggle. 
 
This struggle is not going to be over tomorrow; it’s not going to 
be over a month from tomorrow, or it is not going to be over 6 
or 8 or 12 or 14 months is it going to be over — maybe. This is 
not going to be over until we drive these people from the seats 
of power and put in place a government that people can believe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — That put in place a government that people 

can trust; that put in place a government that doesn’t have these 
kind of headlines written about it: “Devine government shows 
its contempt.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this — I want to say this: the day 
that it comes that the government that I hope to be a supporter 
of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Part of, part of. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Part of, Mr. Speaker, receives the kind of press 
that our friends give to us the same way their friends are giving 
to them, Mr. Speaker, I want to make this promise to you: I will 
look at my friends when they say that you are treating me with 
contempt, and I will resign, Mr. Speaker, from this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, what that says to me when my friends 
and my side of the political fence say to me: you show nothing 
but contempt for the people of the province; when my political 
advisers, as the Swift Current Sun has been to the Conservative 
party of Saskatchewan, says: you are not doing anything except 
damn well as you please; when my friends tell me that, Mr. 
Speaker, then I know it is pull . . . the quote. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is a quote . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — May 29. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — May 29, the Swift Current Sun says, in short: it 
damn well does as it pleases — that’s my friends. Mr. Speaker, 
that is the friends of that government saying that, the friends of 
the Tory government, the friends of the Premier saying that. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker? To get back to the point that I was 
making earlier on, and the point that I was making earlier on 
was that that is the kind of political price; that when one ignores 
the wishes of the people, that even the government with the 
biggest pockets and the most money-bags and the most largess 
to try to spread around, will fail and will be doomed, Mr. 
Speaker. Because when you have broken the trust of the people 
of this province, as the minister in charge of SaskPower did; 
when you have broken the trust of the people of this province 
that leads to editorials such as contained in the Swift Current 
Sun, and not just the Swift Current Sun, Mr. Speaker, paper 
after paper after paper — whether it’s The Rosetown Eagle, 
whether it’s the Weyburn Review, whether it’s The Globe and 
Mail, the Swift Current . . . the Moosomin World-Spectator, 
whether it’s the Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix, the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald, or the Moose Jaw Times-Herald — it 
doesn’t matter. 
 
But when editor after editor after editor of the press in this 
province, many of whom are owned by out-of-province chains 
who receive their editorial directions from outside 
Saskatchewan, many . . . when you find that paper after paper 
says, what you’re doing shows nothing but contempt for the 
people of this province. And I say, in this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
the same kind of contempt stinks through, because it shows the 
contempt for the history of this legislature and for each and 
every member, including 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1592 

 

the government back-benchers. 
 
When your friends say that, my friends I want to tell you, I want 
to tell you my friend from Pelly — you have earned a 
reputation as someone that is honest and fair to deal with in 
your business dealings, Mr. Speaker; you have earned a certain 
reputation, that member has, and no matter what a nice guy or 
fair guy he is, if he doesn’t exhibit that niceness, that fairness, 
that integrity — if he does not exhibit it in this House, then he 
too shall pay the political price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — It is not a question. Mr. Speaker, they will pay 
the political price, and no matter how Mr. nice guy you are, 
because you then become chained to, tainted, painted, cornered, 
clothed in the same cloth of those that are leading you down the 
path towards that kind of political oblivion. 
 
Well maybe, maybe when you have the opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, those members have the opportunity to exhibit the 
kind of integrity that they exhibited — some of them exhibit in 
their personal life — they’ve got the opportunity to stand up. 
They don’t have to do it publicly here. They can go to the 
Minister of Finance, who’s obviously one of the machiavellian 
figures behind this rule, and the Minister of Justice and the 
Deputy Premier and the Premier and confront those 
front-benchers and say, this motion is wrong. It doesn’t make 
any sense. Pull it. 
 
The opposition has offered you a way out by setting up a 
committee to deal with rules changes, chaired by the Speaker of 
the House of the Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve made that offer publicly. We’re doing it 
again tonight. You’ve got a way out of your conundrum. It’s the 
right thing; it’s tradition. It’s the way that things are done in this 
province. 
 
You know, what’s wrong with that? What’s wrong with that? 
That gives you an opportunity, my friend from Pelly and my 
friend from Canora, to stand up and show that kind of integrity 
that you show in your personal life. Okay? Because political 
integrity should not be separate; it’s important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s that kind of arrogance that has led to this 
motion. It’s the kind of arrogance that we see today exhibited in 
this news release. It’s called the Barber commission on 
SaskEnergy public participation. 
 
Now we’ve had, Mr. Speaker . . . Those members want to talk 
about a waste of money. And at some point in time they will 
say, well, because the member of Rosemont has spoken for two 
or three weeks on this issue, he’s wasting the money of the 
Legislative Assembly. Well, Mr. Speaker, the money that it 
takes to defend democracy, versus the money that it takes to sell 
off the heritage of this province, I would put up any day, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, this news announcement, the Barber 
commission on SaskEnergy public participation goes to say: 

Dr. Lloyd Barber, chairman of the commission on 
SaskEnergy public participation today announced that the 
commission will begin public hearings on Wednesday, 
July 26, and will visit a total of eight Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 

Eight Saskatchewan communities, eight Saskatchewan 
communities. We need, Mr. Speaker, another road show to try 
to sell off SaskPower like we need a hole in the head. The 
taxpayers of this province need to spend more taxpayers’ 
money . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — For something they rejected? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . for something that’s been rejected? 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much are we paying him again? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, think: how much is this 
commission eating up in taxpayers’ money a day? You know, 
Mr. Speaker, I know Dr. Barber announced that Gary 
Drummond, member of the legal firm of Wilson & Company, 
Barristers and Solicitors, has been appointed as legal counsel. 
What is he costing the people of this province? 
 
Don’t you dare, don’t you dare members opposite, try to ever 
say to the people of Saskatchewan that the opposition has 
wasted one penny of their taxpayers’ dollars when you go 
through and pay a Tory, or a lawyer and bagman like Gary 
Drummond, over a thousand dollars a day just because he’s 
some high-priced Tory lawyer, legal beagle, because that’s what 
you’re doing. 
 
Members of the commission are Dr. Lloyd Barber, a great 
believer in public enterprise, a great believer in the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people who can’t . . . that person that has a 
hard job keeping his own university together, let alone the 
assets of the people of the province Saskatchewan. 
 
Ken Sarsons, former chief executive officer, CSP Foods (Ltd) 
in Saskatoon; and Kathryn Ford, Saskatoon — Saskatoon 
family lawyer. Well, what family is Kathryn Ford a lawyer for? 
The only family that I know is the family of Tories that seem to 
have a million connections when it comes to robbing the public 
purse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The same Kathryn Ford who, if she is trying to parade her 
credentials as being unbiased, the people of this province had 
better know that this is the same Kathryn Ford that worked in 
the law firm and helped to draft — the law firm that helped to 
draft the sale of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
sell-off, the sale of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
Lloyd Barber, a founder of the institute for privatization, that 
great non-biased person, and Kathryn Ford who helped sell off 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Right? 
 
Now what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, and how does this 
relate to the rules change? And I can see the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg getting a little itchy in his seat. 
 
Well let me say this, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got this 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1593 

 

commission set up that’s going to go around and supposedly 
gather opinions from people in Saskatchewan — unbiased. And 
these people are going to try to claim they’re unbiased. But 
when it get right down to it, they’re basically a bunch of Tory 
hacks and its Tory front. 
 
They’re going to spend lots of money, taxpayers’ money, so 
that when they bring their report back to this legislature 
sometime in the fall, if this motion goes through, which it 
won’t, they will then have some kind of report which will say, 
go ahead, boys, go ahead and sell off the assets of this province 
so we got enough money to call a quick spring election and 
we’ll try to buy the voters back because we’ve lost their 
confidence, given the nature of our political integrity. Or in 
other words, Mr. Speaker, to speak much more plainly, they’re 
going to try to buy the election back, to try to fill the pockets of 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan with their own money, 
supposedly because of their great economic acumen in selling 
off the assets of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The trouble is, Mr. Speaker, the trouble that they’ve got — and 
the trouble that that government finds itself in, and the reason 
why the front bench won’t help get themselves out of the pickle 
that the government finds itself in, in regards to this motion, is 
this, is that the people of the province do not believe them. 
They do not believe a word that is said by the member, for 
example, from Maple Creek, as she tries to hide the facts of the 
Gigagate scandal that’s emerging as a major political issue in 
this province. They don’t believe a word that member says. 
 
And you think that they believe a word that the Minister of 
Justice says as he tries to rationalize why it is that this motion is 
before the Legislative Assembly? Do you think that they 
believe a word that that member says? No. No. They’ve got no 
credibility. 
 
I mean, it’s not just because he attacked Willard Lutz in order to 
hide up the incredibly damaging statement by the auditor. They 
don’t believe his credibility because of actions like this motion 
which is before us. It doesn’t make any sense. How can the 
Minister of Justice go to Kindersley and try to tell the farmers, 
who have got lots of problems in regards to farm debt in 
Kindersley, that the work of the legislature is best spent 
debating a rules change, as opposed to dealing with the 
agricultural Bill. That member from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, 
can — has — the power, to bring forward Bill 41 to deal with 
the crisis in agriculture. He’s got the power, not us on this side. 
 
So how could he go to Kindersley, or how can the member from 
Melville go out and tromp around Main Street in Melville 
telling his constituents up there that, yes, they’re better served, 
all those small-business men who are having the economic 
problems they are in Melville? Not even an implement dealer, 
because an implement dealer pulled out. And along with the 
implement dealer, other people pulled out, and I don’t know 
whether it’s because of the member of Melville or not. 
 
But how is he going to tell Main Street; how is he going to tell 
the people in the automotive stores; how’s he going to tell the 
people there in the television repair shops; how is 

he going to tell people in the furniture and clothing stores in 
Melville that this House is better served by debating this motion 
than by dealing with the agricultural crisis? Because we all 
know, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan. when the farmer is 
better off, we’re all better off. When the farmer is better off, 
we’re all better off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the farmer would be better dealing with Bill 
41 than dealing with this rules debate. I don’t think there is any 
doubt, any doubt in anybody’s mind in this province, that to 
deal with the agricultural credit corporation, Mr. Speaker, to 
deal with the agricultural credit corporation is more important 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan than to deal with the Bill about 
rules changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Let’s deal with the farm crisis. Let’s deal with 
the education crisis. Let’s deal with the real problems that 
people face in this province. Let us not continue this silly 
debate. Take the deal that’s been offered to you by the 
opposition, cut your losses, and get back onto essential 
legislative agenda, the business of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It being 10 o’clock, the House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


