


















































May 18, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 18, 1989 
 

1197 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Acting Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7), I have examined the 
following petitions and find them to be in order: 
 

Of certain residents of Saskatchewan praying that the 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, a group of 
45 students from Confederation Park School in my constituency 
in Saskatoon. They’re in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
from the grade 8 class at that school. They’re accompanied by 
Mr. Mantyka, Mr. Colson, Mrs. Dyck, Mr. Schultz, and their 
driver, Mr. Johanson. I’ll be meeting them later for pictures and 
drinks, but I’d ask all members of the legislature to welcome 
these students to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure today that I introduce to you, and through you 
to the other members of the legislature, 26 kindergarten 
students from Lindale School in Moose Jaw. This is a special 
class to me, Mr. Speaker, as my oldest son is a member of the 
class. They’re sitting in the west gallery, and they’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Linda Tweet, chaperons 
Marquita Neufeld, Brenda Morrow, Kevin Anderson, 
Rosemarie Moggey, Cecile Waldenberger, and Corinne Seman. 
Their bus driver, Wendy Semard is also with them. We’ve had 
the opportunity to meet out on the lawn and talk about the 
legislature. Unfortunately they have to leave in a few minutes 
and I won’t be able to discuss what they’ve seen here today. But 
I’m glad they’re here, and I hope they’ve enjoyed their trip to 
the science centre, and have a safe trip home. 
 
I would like all members to join me in welcoming the 
kindergarten class from Lindale. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to other members of this House, a group of 42 students from my 
home town of Hague, Saskatchewan, and their teacher, Margi 
Corbett, who is a former colleague of mine, and another 
teacher, Grant Elke, and a former student who is now a bus 
driver, Darryl Giesbrecht. I have taught in this school myself 
for 15 years, I believe it was, in my 22 years as a teacher, and I 
know the Hague School quite well. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to particularly point out  

one individual, a cute little blonde sitting off in the corner there. 
Her name is Cheryl. She is going to be graduating this year, and 
she is my daughter. I also want to indicate to the members 
present that it is a tradition in the Hague High School to come 
to Regina, to the big city of Regina, for a two-day stint. They 
have lots to learn here and I’m sure they’ll enjoy their trip. 
 
I offer my condolences to the teacher-chaperons for tonight, but 
I certainly trust that all you boys and girls, you young adults 
here, will have a great time tonight and tomorrow. Have fun, 
but take care — do you hear? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Grant to Game Farm 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of several 
questions yesterday and the day before, and I would like to 
briefly respond, if I might. I have about eight points to make; 
that should only take three or four minutes, maybe not that long. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am convinced, with the 
information made available to me, that the Minister of Public 
Participation is not in a conflict of interest relating to Northern 
Lights ranch for several reasons. One is that our government 
has been exploring the whole area of game farming for many, 
many years. Secondly, the minister has pursued government 
policies in game farming since the 1970s, so it’s nothing new to 
the minister as well. 
 
The minister lobbied for game farming regulations long before 
anybody in his family, particularly his son, was ever involved in 
the industry. The minister’s son did not receive any money from 
the government. The minister had no opportunity to use his 
position to influence SEDCO, as the loans to the company were 
not big enough to require cabinet approval, Mr. Speaker, nor 
were they even big enough to require SEDCO approval at the 
board level. 
 
The minister has said that he asked the minister responsible for 
western diversification, WDO (western diversification office), 
to meet with the principals of Northern Lights ranch to explore 
their request. As the minister’s son was not a principal of the 
company but rather only an employee, pasture manager, worth 
1 per cent share, I see nothing wrong with this request. 
 
There are about 60 game farms in Saskatchewan now, Mr. 
Speaker. SEDCO’s involved in some of them. There are game 
farms across Canada, and the western diversification office is 
involved with them across Canada. 
 
As well, the minister’s wife has nothing to do with this case as 
she has made it a practice never to involve herself, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Farm Debt Review Board cases from the constituency 
of Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
As the minister lobbied for changes to game farming  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1198 
 

regulations long before his son ever became involved in the 
company as pasture manager, and has had no involvement with 
the SEDCO loan, and as both the SEDCO loan and the WDO 
grant were benefits to the company and not to the minister’s 
son, and finally, since there’s no impact on this case by the 
minister’s wife, I believe, Mr. Speaker, to best of my ability, 
and with the information that I have before me, that there is no 
conflict of interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — My question is to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, by your minister’s own admission he telephoned the 
federal minister of the western diversification office to set up a 
meeting with a business partner of his son in order to discuss a 
grant from which his own son stood to benefit financially. Is it 
still your contention that it’s perfectly in order for a cabinet 
minister to do that? And do you believe, Mr. Premier, that it’s 
proper for one of your ministers to influence a federal minister 
to ensure material gain for his own son? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can repeat this 
information, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve gone over. And I 
acknowledge that the minister’s son has been hired as the 
pasture manager in the Northern Lights ranch and that he has 
invested 1 per cent in that game farm. Now I see no benefit to 
the minister’s son as a result of SEDCO money or as a result of 
WDO money, with the minister long before this — even before 
his son was a pasture manager — being involved in developing 
this industry. 
 
We have been anxious to develop the industry for some time 
because of the competition that goes on between provinces, and 
we see a very exciting possibility for diversification in 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. The minister’s been involved 
in that. 
 
Now his son has been hired as a pasture manager in one of these 
game farms, but I cannot see any benefit that went to his son. 
He’s paid as a pasture manager, and certainly has 1 per cent of 
. . . He’s not a principal or a major shareholder in the game farm 
with that kind of an investment, which is extremely modest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, I’m glad today we’re able to get you on record, and I 
have another question for you. I’d like you to tell this House 
what limits you would place on how far the minister of 
privatization and those who work with him could go in assisting 
his son to establish the game farm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we develop, and as I’m sure 
governments all over develop policies to allow people to build 
industries, and we’ve been doing it in the game farming 
business for some time, and obviously the cabinet has to do 
that. 
 
Now if one of those industries that is being developed, whether 
it’s in the paper business or whether it’s in fertilizer or whether 
it’s in game farming, hires somebody’s relative as a pasture 
manager or as an employee, that’s pretty much normal because 
we’re all from Saskatchewan, all of us on both sides of the 
House. We have families and relatives across the province and  

they work at various kinds of things. 
 
In this case, it seems to me you’re saying that because the 
minister’s son is employed as a pasture manager in an industry 
they’ve been trying to develop for some time, that it’s 
something that’s out of place. And I don’t see that. I think, to be 
fair to people who have worked in an industry for a fair number 
of years, it’s not unreasonable at all. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier again. Mr. 
Premier, we’re going to help you with this. We’re going to walk 
you through this during question period today. 
 
On Tuesday in this House your minister of privatization said 
that you were made fully aware of all of the dealings entailed in 
the set-up of the Northern Lights game farm. On July 28, 1987, 
cabinet approved a directive changing the regulations of The 
Animal Products Act which benefitted that minister’s son. Had 
the minister told you of his son’s interest in the Northern Lights 
game farm prior to that meeting? 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m sending across a copy of that cabinet directive 
for you to have a look at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, my information that I have 
received is that Mr. Taylor’s son, the minister’s son was 
employed as the pasture manager in February of 1988. Now 
these rules and regulations I believe were brought forward in 
1987. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, the minister, and I can tell you, as 
all ministers have been working on this for some time, the 
Minister of Agriculture has been involved in public 
participation, and other ministers. 
 
Now I don’t see a difficulty, Mr. Speaker, if after the 
regulations are changed and the industry is developed and one 
of the farms developed, that the minister’s son is hired as a 
pasture manager after this. He was not involved as a pasture 
manager before February 1988. And after February 1988 he’s 
got 1 per cent that he’s invested in this farm. 
 
And I don’t see that as a particular or significant problem, 
particularly when the minister has been working at it for years 
to have the industry developed. And his family or his son might 
have some specific expertise, and I think people in the industry 
would tell you that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. A new question 
to the Premier. Mr. Premier, herein lies the problem: did your 
minister of privatization inform you that 583867 Saskatchewan 
Ltd., a firm in which the minister’s son is a partner — and I’ll 
give that document to you; a page can take it across — is a 
partner, received a mortgage from SEDCO in the amount of 
$120,000 — just wait, please — in the amount of $120,000 on 
April 11, 1988, and later on June 10, 1988, that same company 
received a further mortgage of $100,000 from SEDCO? 
 
And did he point out to you that on April 11, 1988, one Larry 
Kyle, a solicitor, witnessed the mortgage and he signed the 
affidavit of execution as a solicitor? And that  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1199 
 

Mr. Kyle on June 10, 1988, after affirming he was solicitor for 
both the numbered company and the Northern Lights game 
farm — I’m sending these documents across to you because I 
want you to know Mr. Premier, that also that Northern Lights 
game farm owns 70 per cent of the numbered company, 583867 
Saskatchewan Ltd. And you’ll find it further strange in those 
documents, sir, that the mortgage was signed to the numbered 
company of which this minister’s son is a shareholder, and that 
the money didn’t go directly to them; it went to the Northern 
Lights game farm, sir. Did he inform you of all this information 
before you responded to the House this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can go back over this 
again. You raised the point, and I responded to it. And you 
raised it yesterday, that the minister has been lobbying whoever 
to have this industry developed and regulations developed so 
that, in fact, game farming could take place. And that took place 
in 1987. 
 
After the industry had been allowed to operate, then his son is 
hired as a pasture manager with this company, and he has 1 per 
cent in the . . . 1 per cent, 1 per cent of the game farm, Mr. 
Speaker, and he’s employed by them as a pasture manager. And 
you’re asking me whether, in fact, he should be able to do this. 
 
Now I think . . . I don’t see why you could deny anybody’s 
family member from participating in a game farm after the rules 
and regulations have taken place. Now you ask about SEDCO, 
or WDO (western diversification office). SEDCO has people 
involved in game farming across the province, okay? They 
participate in these; they come to them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not the only one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — There are more than this one. And they 
say, will you participate and help us get this industry going. 
And SEDCO looks at it and says, yes. They don’t come to 
cabinet because they’re not very big loans, and they have not 
gone to the board of directors because they’re not very big 
loans. 
 
So you say in April, or May, or June of 1988, that this company 
received a loan from SEDCO. Well yes, they did. Yes, they did. 
And they employ the minister’s son as a pasture manager, and 
he has 1 per cent. Now I don’t find that a particular problem, 
Mr. Speaker, because you may find family members across the 
province investing in game farms. And I think there’s about 60 
in the province now, as a result of the efforts of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I repeat to you, Mr. Premier . . . There’s 
another question here that you did not address. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Do you have a new question or 
a supplement? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I ask you, Mr. 
Premier, to look at those documents. You’ll find that there are 
two loans within two months of each other that would in fact 
exceed the limit of SEDCO and would have had to go to the 
board. You will find, Mr. Premier, that the  

numbered company of which Mr. Taylor’s son is a shareholder 
has one out of ten shares. 
 
Mr. Minister, the money went to the Northern Lights game 
farm. I ask you, Mr. Premier, can we assume that your minister 
pointed out to you on October 14, 1987, while he was 
witnessing this mortgage on behalf of the numbered company, 
and while serving as solicitor of the numbered company and of 
the Northern Lights game farm, Mr. Kyle was also serving as 
the chairman of the board of directors of SEDCO, a position he 
was confirmed to by the minister of privatization by a cabinet 
directive dated October 14, 1987? 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m sending this cabinet directive over to you, 
signed by the minister of privatization, at that time minister in 
charge of the economic development corporation, and by you, 
sir. I want you to tell us whether or not the minister has 
informed you of these facts as well, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that I caught 
all of that. I’ll look at this. If you send me this . . . send me over 
several documents, I will just say to the hon. member, I will 
receive any documents you have, and I’ve asked for the last 
couple of days to give me anything that you believe that is 
relevant. I’ve made a statement and you’ve sent me over some 
more material. On the surface, looking at it, I don’t see how it’s 
changed at all, Mr. Speaker, but I will take and respectfully go 
through these, and certainly report back to the hon. member if I 
see anything in here that would have me change my mind. 
 
Again I come back and say that once the regulations and the 
rules are allowed for the industry and people then participate, 
they’re all going to apply to SEDCO. They’ve almost all 
applied, as far as I know, and there’s 60-some operations. There 
may be half of them that have SEDCO loans; it’s not unusual. 
And certainly for somebody to be involved in the pasture, as 
pasture manager, and having 1 per cent of the farm, is not any 
big benefit from any loan or anything else. 
 
So I will certainly look at this information and respond 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question. Mr. Premier, 1 per cent is not 
the issue. Mr. Premier, can we assume that the minister pointed 
out to you that on April 11, 1988 when Mr. Kyle acted as 
witness to the mortgage for the numbered company, it was for a 
SEDCO mortgage of $120,000, and he was the government 
agency for which Mr. Kyle was the chairman; and on June 10 of 
1988, the same day that Mr. Kyle signed documents affirming 
he was the solicitor for the two companies, the numbered 
company and the Northern Lights game farm, they received 
another SEDCO mortgage in the amount of $100,000 with no 
increase in collateral. Can we assume, Mr. Premier, that the 
minister of privatization fully informed you of all of these 
issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said before, and I will 
respectfully say to the hon. member — and I was just given this 
information — the senior officials in SEDCO can approve loans 
up to $250,000. The CEO (chief executive officer) can approve 
loans up to $250,000. The  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1200 
 

CEO can approve loans up to $500,000. Up to two and a half 
million it’s board approval, and over two and a half million it 
comes to cabinet. 
 
So I wasn’t and nor was cabinet involved in any of these — 
none of them. Because it’s at senior official level, frankly, it 
isn’t even at the board level. It’s a pretty long bow to say that a 
hundred-and-some-thousand-dollar loan . . . and there’s nothing 
magical about a numbered company prior to having a game 
farm set up so that you can in fact do it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a long bow to say that some young fellow 
that is hired as a pasture manager in this and has 1 per cent of 
the final operation, receiving something that only an official 
needs to ratify, because it’s not large enough, is some sort of 
conflict that the minister or the cabinet’s been involved in. 
 
And in greatest respect, I’ll look at all these documents and I’ll 
certainly reply. But on the surface, I don’t see anything that 
would cause me to change my mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, there are two different 
companies involved here. It’s a new question to the Premier. 
There are two different companies involved here. One is the 
numbered company to which the minister of privatization’s son 
is a shareholder. That company received the loan from SEDCO. 
The money didn’t go to the numbered company even though 
that numbered company was filed on the mortgage. The money 
went to the Northern Lights game farm corporation. Sir, there 
are two companies involved here, and you’re either not 
listening or someone has not given you the proper information. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would think that any fair minded individual 
would say that the chairman of SEDCO, acting for a firm which 
received SEDCO money, was in a clear conflict of interest. And 
that the chairman of SEDCO, in representing these firms, was 
working for the direct interest of the son of the Crown minister 
who confirmed his appointment to that post. If your minister 
told you of these facts, then you must have taken one of two 
courses of action: either, sir, you condone the situation, or you 
turned a blind eye to it. Which course, Mr. Premier, did you 
take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I said, Mr. Speaker, that I will 
review any additional information here, and there’s nothing 
unusual about setting up a numbered company and then forming 
a game farm. And as far as I know, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
confirm it, there is no numbered company. It’s been completely 
bought out by the game farm, and it was used to initiate and 
start it up. And with respect to allegations about the chairman of 
SEDCO, I would certainly review that and respond to the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, perhaps I can put this in perspective for you. So let me 
take you through it so that you can read it in Hansard tomorrow 
and understand exactly what’s going on. Number one, the 
minister’s son receives $220,000 in SEDCO loans. Number 
two, the lawyer for his firm is the chairman of SEDCO, 
confirmed by his father, the  

minister. Number three, . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask hon. members to 
refrain from unparliamentary language. And I would like to ask 
the member not to make a long, long preamble, but to get to the 
question. I’ve been quite lenient today, as you well know, 
because it’s an issue, it’s an issue, and I’ve given both sides 
quite a lot of latitude, but I don’t think you should make what 
would amount to a speech before you get to your question. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 
not my intention to make a speech. I just want to summarize 
what we’ve been doing and address my question. Number three, 
Mr. Premier, the minister participated in a cabinet decision 
which changed the laws to benefit his son’s game ranch, game 
farm. Number four, the minister phoned a federal cabinet 
minister to influence a federal grant to his son’s company. And 
number five, Mr. Premier, you knew all this and still maintain 
that the minister acted in a reasonable and responsible fashion. 
 
I ask you this, Mr. Premier: is it your contention that Robert 
Taylor received absolutely no special treatment, and that any 
Saskatchewan resident who asks will receive exactly the same 
level of involvement and use of ministerial influence? Is that 
your contention, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, for the record so that hon. 
members don’t take certain segments out of Hansard and 
spread them around certain constituencies, I think for the record 
I hope that he . . . he also says and records that I don’t agree 
with his statements that the minister’s son received $200,000 in 
a loan. That’s not accurate; that’s not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the fact that the rules were changed to help a particular 
individual — that’s not true, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve been 
working at these for a long time, and the minister’s son became 
the pasture manager and put his 1 per cent down on this game 
farm after those rules were changed. 
 
And with respect to lobbying the federal government, the 
WDO, to help game ranching and farming, we do it all the time 
and there’s nothing irregular about that, and they’ve put funds, 
as does SEDCO, into game farming across Saskatchewan and 
across Canada, Western Canada at least. 
 
So I just hope the hon. member . . . you know, if he’s trying to 
put something on the record, that he at least gets it as accurate 
as possible and publishes both sides before he makes allegations 
that, frankly, from the information that I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, 
are not fair and are unfounded. And from the information that I 
have he’s stretching a long bow to say the least. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary, or new question, 
sorry. To provide you with even more information, sir, so that 
you are completely accurate to this House, I want to give to you 
a copy of an annual return for the numbered company, 583867 
Saskatchewan Ltd., which shows on it, Robert Taylor and  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1201 
 

two other individuals having one share each. The other share 
that shows the tie-in between these two companies is seven 
shares that are held by the Northern Lights Big Game (farm) 
Corporation. That’s not 1 per cent, sir; it works out different. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, that you look through all the documents 
and you have close conversations with the minister of 
privatization so that you are prepared in this House. Mr. 
Minister, can we be assured that you will have all 
documentation for us in this Legislative Assembly on what 
could be a very serious situation, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ll review these records, but my 
information says there is no numbered company, Mr. Speaker, 
in existence today with that number on it, and the entire thing is 
owned by the Northern Lights game farm which is a game farm, 
and that the pasture manager has 1 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
will confirm that. 
 
I still . . . I’ve a great deal of difficulty, Mr. Speaker, with the 
hon. member’s whole line of questioning with respect to the 
fact that we have developed an exciting industry here, and the 
ministers have been involved in developing an exciting 
industry. And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t surprise me, as in several 
of the initiatives that we’ve taken to build jobs and diversify, 
that the opposition against it. 
 
Now I will say that not in an antagonistic way, Mr. Speaker, but 
our objective is to build new industries and diversify, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition hasn’t had a real good record on that, 
and I know they’re a little sensitive in that whole area. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. We are on introduction of Bills. The 
Clerk rose. Order, order, order. Order, order, order. Order, 
order. We are on introduction of Bills. We have dealt with item 
number one. We are now on item number two, which I haven’t 
heard dealt with. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Stand. 
 
The Speaker: — Item number two is stand. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 
pursuant to rule 17 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Assembly to seek leave that a matter of urgent public 
importance now be given priority of debate. 
 
In accordance with the rules, I provided written notice of my 
intention to the Clerk of the Assembly this morning. I 
understand that the government members opposite were also 
advised. 
 
I will take just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to state the issue briefly. 
It is the refusal of the provincial government to provide full 
information and full co-operation to the Provincial Auditor, 
thereby preventing the auditor from effectively fulfilling his 
responsibilities to this Legislative Assembly. 
 

The government’s undermining of the Provincial Auditor has 
been consistent, arrogant, and unjustifiable. More importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, and more alarmingly, the government’s actions in 
this regard constitute an assault on this Legislative Assembly 
and a grave threat to the traditions of parliamentary democracy 
under which we are privileged to live as free men and women. 
 
One of the absolutely central principles of our parliamentary 
form of government, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. This is not the opportunity to 
enter long debate on the description of the matter the hon. 
member from Saskatoon South wishes to raise. As is the 
custom, the issue is stated very briefly, the question put, and 
then the matter dealt with. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I respect your comments and I will 
come directly to the procedure. In short, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to move a motion this afternoon: 
 

That the provincial government’s refusal to provide full 
information and co-operation to the Provincial Auditor 
with respect to the expenditure of public money, thereby 
preventing the auditor from effectively fulfilling his 
responsibilities to the Legislative Assembly, now be given 
priority of debate. 
 

Under rule 17, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — I have received the hon. member’s statement 
two hours ago, and I’m prepared to make the ruling on the 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — On a point of order. Mr. Speaker, before 
you make your ruling I would ask that I be given the 
opportunity to raise a point of order on this issue . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order, order. I’m 
prepared to make the ruling and I’m going to do so now. A 
notice regarding this matter proposed for priority of debate was 
received in the Clerk’s office at 11:30 a.m. today, for which I 
thank the hon. member. 
 
I refer all hon. members to rule 17(6) which states that the 
matter proposed for an urgent debate must be in order and of 
urgent public importance. I have no doubt in judging this matter 
to be serious and important, since the subject raised by the hon. 
member involves the ability of an officer of this Assembly to 
perform his duties adequately. 
 
The first question which must be answered, however, is whether 
it is urgent for the Assembly to set aside its regular business to 
discuss this matter now. It has been frequently ruled in this 
Assembly that, and I quote: 
 

The fundamental principle underlying rule 17 was to 
provide an opportunity within a proper framework of 
parliamentary procedure, where none otherwise existed for 
the immediate discussion of any matter deemed to be of 
such urgency and importance that all of the normal or 
special business of the Assembly should be put to  

  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1202 
 

one side in order to provide complete right of way to a 
discussion of one specific, particular subject. 
 

I refer all members to previous rulings in the Journals of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. Rulings on priority of 
debates have always considered whether an ordinary 
parliamentary opportunity to debate the matter will occur 
shortly or in time. The notice for priority of debate has not 
satisfactorily demonstrated the urgency of setting aside the 
usual business of the Assembly in order to debate this matter 
today rather than placing it on the order paper in the usual 
fashion. As well, in this particular case the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts could at this time debate this matter within 
its normal terms of reference. 
 
Furthermore, furthermore, I have examined the request in view 
of the restrictions outlined in rule 17(10). Since the matter 
raised deals with the ability of an officer of the House to fulfil 
his duties, a subject which could involve a question of privilege, 
I find that under rule 17(10)(e) the question ought not to be 
considered under priority of debate, rule 17(10) . . . I’m sorry, 
the question ought not to be considered under the priority of 
debate rule. 
 
Rule 17(10)(e) states: 
 

(e) The motion must not raise a question of privilege. 
 

For the above reasons, I am unable to grant the hon. member’s 
request for a priority of debate. 
 
I will not accept point of orders on my ruling. If you have a new 
point of order, then I’ll accept that. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question of privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under rule 6(2) of the rules of the Assembly, I rise 
under an order of privilege. Given the document and the report 
that was tabled in the Assembly yesterday, the Report of the 
Provincial Auditor, I would like the Speaker to refer to page 4 
of that document under the summary of current issues of 
importance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have here an individual who works for the 
Assembly, who is a servant of the Assembly, not unlike the 
Speaker of the Assembly, who clearly indicates on page 4 of his 
report, and I want to quote: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. I 
recommend the process be repaired to require that the 
appointed auditors and the Provincial Auditor work 
together on crown corporation audits as joint auditors or 
with some similar arrangement. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you have here an individual who 
works for the Assembly, similar to yourself, issuing, not in 
discussion but in his annual report, a statement that condemns 
the government of the day, and you go through here and he 
indicates in many areas the interference of the government in 
the working of his management and  

reporting to this Assembly, how he’s been interfered with . . . 
He says in his report that . . . The Leader-Post today: “Auditor 
slams secrecy.” 
 
In every way we have the auditor telling us that he’s being 
impaired in checking hundreds of thousands of dollars of 
spending that this government does, that he can’t do his job. He 
says that clearly in his report. I say to you, I say to you that in 
this report, and I refer to the Minister of Justice, the member 
from Kindersley, and I want to quote: 
 

“He’s a hard guy to complain about working together,” 
Andrew told reporters Wednesday. “Jesus Christ, he can’t 
work with anybody.” 
 

I say to you, when you have a minister of the Crown 
condemning an officer of this Assembly in those words outside 
of the Assembly, talking about a report outside of the 
Assembly, we certainly have a question of privilege, and I ask 
you to waive the rule which would require unanimity of the rule 
in order for it to proceed, section . . . or the 6(2): 
 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Speaker shall have the 
right to waive notice (the two-hour requirement). 
 

I ask you to now do that, given the seriousness of the issue that 
stands before us in terms of a servant of the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think that this is a serious 
matter, and I would simply ask for the co-operation of the 
members not to immediately interrupt members. If you don’t 
agree with their point, give members the opportunity to express 
their views. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of 
privilege, I would point out to the speaker that the point of 
privilege, rule 6, indicates that at least two hours prior to the 
regular daily sitting a notice should be given. You look, Mr. 
Speaker, at the fact that the hon. members in the motion prior to 
this gave notice, why would they not then seek to give notice on 
this? That is point number one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Point number two to the point of privilege that I wish to make 
the following observations, Mr. Speaker, the following 
observations. The hon. member refers to the Regina 
Leader-Post in which it says the power corporation and now 
SaskEnergy refuse to release details on the sale of property to 
Saskoil. In considering your ruling, Mr. Speaker, I refer you to 
page 94 of the Provincial Auditor’s report that says: 
 

My officials were able to examine the agreement at the 
Office of the Executive Council. Upon examining that 
agreement, I found SaskOil is not subject to an audit under 
The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that SaskTel would not provide 
information requested by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1203 
 

I can advise Mr. Speaker and I can advise this Assembly that 
that information has been undertaken, prior to the filing of this 
report, to be provided. There was information, Mr. Speaker, 
with regard to the property management corporation that there 
was no information filed with regards to ministerial . . . 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In the allegations of the Provincial 
Auditor there was a suggestion made that information was not 
provided to the Provincial Auditor with regard to travel on 
executive air by SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). I can advise Mr. Speaker and the members of this 
House that when the Public Accounts were filed, they were filed 
with a document that clearly set out ministerial travel by all 
members here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can further point out, Mr. Speaker, the following: that the 
rules in place today, at this point in time, with regard to air 
travel by ministers, is exactly the same rule that was in place in 
1982 when the government changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With regard to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan request 
for information, I can advise this Assembly that copies of those 
minutes were, in fact, provided to the auditor. With regard to 
the Crown investment corporation, where allegations is made 
that there were no minutes provided to the Provincial Auditor, I 
can advise this Assembly that, in fact, those minutes have been 
provided to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And when you consider the question of privilege, I would hope 
that you would take that into consideration as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
address this very serious matter of the question of privilege that 
is being addressed here by this House. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, and it’s hard to know what can be 
more serious than the interference of the functions of an official 
of this Legislative Assembly, than the interference of an official 
of this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, which the member 
opposite has done, and that government opposite has done time 
and time again, as is documented in the Report of the Provncial 
Auditor which was tabled in this House yesterday. 
 
There can’t be many more things that are more serious than 
that, because if the function of the officials of this Assembly are 
interfered with, Mr. Speaker, the complete function of this 
Assembly does not work, and the interests of the public, which 
we are here to serve, are not being served. 
 
The interference with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, is 
not in any way different than if a member of this House 
interfered with you, sir, as a Speaker, because you too are a 
servant of this House, of this Legislative Assembly. If this had 
happened with regard to yourself, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
there is any doubt what the  

actions of yourself or this House would be. And in light of that, 
there should not be any doubt in your mind or the mind of 
anyone in this legislature what the actions of you should be, or 
this House should be, with regards to the question of privilege 
being raised here today. 
 
It’s not the first time that that member from Kindersley has 
been caught in this kind of situation, by saying things out of this 
Assembly which he didn’t have the guts to say in this 
Assembly, and has had to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and apologize 
and withdraw. And I don’t think that the situation we have here 
today is any different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I refer you to the rule, because I think that’s 
important here. The member said that it had to be a two-hour 
notice. Well I refer you to 6(2) on privilege, in which it states 
the following: 
 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Speaker shall have the 
right to waive notice. 
 

Now I don’t suggest that that should be taken lightly, but I do 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this particular situation is so grave 
and so serious that you really don’t have an option if you’re 
acting in the best interests of what this Assembly is all about. 
We don’t have an option. I don’t want to put it on your 
shoulders, sir, because all you are is a servant of this Assembly. 
 
But I think that the ruling that has to be made here is clear and 
unquestionable, and you have the opportunity to do it because 
of the rule that is stated in 6(2). There is indeed a question of 
privilege here, and it is serious enough that it should not take 
any other time except today to be dealt with, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the only point I make is 
under 6(2). As the member opposite has just said, if this is a 
grave and serious matter now, it was at noon today, and they 
had ample time to provide the notice for the question of 
privilege. 
 
It wasn’t grave enough, Mr. Speaker, to raise it in question 
period. It wasn’t grave enough, Mr. Speaker, to provide notice 
as set out in rule 6(1). I doubt very much, Mr. Speaker, if it’s 
grave enough to waive notice. And I invite Mr. Speaker to 
review the record and make his ruling accordingly. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll give the opportunity, perhaps to one or 
two more people, and then I’ll have to make my decision on the 
member’s request. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
simply want to point out when you’re deliberating with respect 
to whether or not it’s a question of privilege, that the minister 
involved had raised a number of arguments which were, quite 
frankly, irrelevant, in which he was attempting to refute what 
the Provincial Auditor had said. They were irrelevant, Mr. 
Speaker, because the privilege, the breach of privilege, lies in 
his comments to the effect that: 
 

“He (referring to the Provincial Auditor) is a hard guy to 
complain about working together,” Andrew told reporters 
Wednesday. “Jesus Christ, he can’t  

  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1204 
 

work with anybody.” (is what he said, Mr. Speaker). 
 

And I say that that’s an offence against the Provincial Auditor. 
It tends to intimidate the civil servant, the servant of this 
Assembly, rather. It’s intimidating, it’s an attack on his 
credibility, it’s a put-down of the Provincial Auditor, and those 
comments amount to a breach of privilege regardless of the 
other facts that he may attempt to dispute, facts that the 
Provincial Auditor . . . that’s another issue. 
 
The issue is, is he attacked an officer of this Assembly, and that 
is the breach of privilege. And I think that that is so serious, Mr. 
Speaker, that it justifies you waiving notice in regard to this 
matter, Mr. Speaker. That is so serious an attack, and it’s not 
the first time that this minister has attacked an officer of this 
Assembly. 
 
You will recall the attack on the Legislative Counsel, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is a very similar kind of situation. That’s the 
breach of privilege, and I suggest that it warrants waiver of 
notice in this matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, if I would be allowed just 
a few short comments on the subject matter, and I would firstly 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that this is not a new debate. This is a 
debate that has gone on for a long, long time in the Committee 
of Public Accounts, and that is the forum where it belongs. 
 
I secondly make the point, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite 
can stand up in a very sanctimonious way, but the fact of the 
matter is, it was this administration that opened the Public 
Accounts Committee to the public. I would invite the public of 
Saskatchewan today to come in to the Committee on Public 
Accounts where it is rightfully and duly debated, Mr. Speaker. 
And it was under this administration that opened it up to the 
public, and, Mr. Speaker, that is the proper forum. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak to the 
question of personal privilege, if I may. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem that we have today is that the 
comments by the Minister of Justice were made yesterday about 
an officer of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to 
you that if I had made those comments yesterday about you, 
there would be personal privilege motion today by somebody in 
this House, and rightly so — and rightly so. 
 
The statement made by the member from Kindersley, or the 
Minister of Justice, this is not the first time, as has been pointed 
out. He thinks it’s his liberty to go out of this House and make 
damning statements about an officer of this Legislative 
Assembly. He does not have that right, Mr. Speaker, and 
therefore it’s important for you to waive the time and let us 
have this motion so that we can debate it and have the member 
opposite come to explain and give his reasons as to why, Mr. 
Speaker, he feels that he has the right to slander an officer of 
this Assembly, and with that officer not having an opportunity 
to defend himself in this Assembly. 
 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that you would rule in 
favour of the member from Elphinstone. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour, and I must 
inform the House that after I have heard him, we’ve had, I 
believe, a fair discussion on it and I will make my statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. There are 
serious questions and principles of democracy that have to be 
considered when you consider this matter. First of all, we take 
very seriously the question of privilege and the status of 
employees of the Legislative Assembly. We take that very 
seriously, and we protect them in every way possible. 
 
The members opposite are laughing. I am speaking on behalf of 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We in the Assembly protect those 
officers, whether they be officials at the Table, whether they be 
the auditor, the law clerk, or whether they be pages in this 
Assembly, they are all employees and we all have a duty to 
them. 
 
In a democracy, Mr. Speaker, we have to weigh also the rights 
of elected members of the Assembly to practise the freedom of 
speech and opinion guaranteed in the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms in this country. And surely when you get to a 
question of privilege, the rights of all citizens — all citizens — 
to have freedom of speech and opinion in this country is 
guaranteed by the charter of rights which follows, which has 
been enacted since these rules were made, hundreds of years 
ago and 50 years ago and 40 years ago. 
 
We now have a charter of rights in this country, and every 
citizen is entitled to freedom of speech and opinion, and that 
includes members of the Legislative Assembly. And so we have 
to weigh the rights guaranteed in a democracy against the rights 
of an officer of this Assembly. That is very seriously has to be 
weighed. 
 
Now the question of privilege arises, and this is a debate that 
there is a conflict between those interests, and you have to sort 
that out. But you have to weigh that very carefully. 
 
This particular public servant has in the past publicly taken a 
political stand and referred to a political party with respect to 
the carrying out of his duties. And he was quoted in the 
Leader-Post of January 23, 1989, this individual . . . with the 
question here we’re discussing, is this a question of privilege. 
This individual raised political matters as part of his office, and 
for that is on record having apologized to a committee of this 
House. So when we consider this privilege . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. I have 
heard arguments on both sides of the House, and I agree that 
this is a serious issue. Members on both sides of the House, 
whatever their point of view on it, have indicated that it’s a 
serious matter. And I agree with that serious matter, that it is a 
serious matter. And because it is, I believe I need further time to 
reflect, and I will bring back a decision. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1205 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this has to be the irony of ironies. 
This has to be the irony of ironies, that rather than dealing with 
this government and its minister’s comments about a servant of 
this Assembly, a direct violation of the rules of this Assembly, 
we find ourselves dealing with a . . . 
 
(1500) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, please. 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to have to belabour this issue all 
afternoon. But, Mr. Speaker, the very opening statement by the 
member opposite on an issue of what I believe is of prime 
public importance, and that is the bell-ringing issue in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, the opening comments of the member 
opposite totally irrelevant to the subject. 
 
I’d ask, Mr. Speaker, and I’d respectfully request that close 
consideration be given to the member’s comments to ensure 
that they are indeed relevant to the subject at hand. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I’ll be quite 
frank with the hon. members, and I think hon. members saw 
that another member came up to speak to me for a few moments 
while the hon. member rose, so I didn’t hear his opening 
remarks. However, if he was off the topic, well of course the 
point of order is relevant. 
 
Order. Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned my remarks 
yesterday on this motion to change a rule of this Assembly as 
an indication of this government’s legislative knee-jerk reaction 
to the use of a rule of this Assembly, I was in the midst of 
pointing out, in response to the comments made by the Minister 
of Justice when he introduced his motion as the great defender 
of the principles of democracy, that this government is in no 
position to stand with any aura of justice and honesty in terms 
of defending the principles of democracy. 
 
And I was just beginning to give some examples, in the period 
of time since I have become a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, how this government has violated the very principles 
of democracy, and the list is long. 
 
So let me repeat what I said at the beginning of my  

comments today. How ironical it is, how cynical it is, how 
facetious it is that on the very day in which raised in this 
Assembly are questions about the conduct of this government 
and its ministers and their relationship and comments about the 
officers and officer of this Legislative Assembly, in which it is 
very clearly — very clearly — a proper conclusion for anyone, 
both within this Assembly and beyond, to conclude that this 
government and its ministers are clearly not honouring 
time-long traditions of respecting the independence of officers 
of this Assembly; and that we then refer to and use the rules of 
the Assembly to avoid bringing to this Assembly the debate on 
a very current — the most recent within the last 24 hours — an 
example of this government’s respect for the democratic 
principles that we now find ourselves not being able to deal 
with that, so that we come to deal with a rule change and focus 
on yet another, on a different, on a smoke-screen rule 
functioning of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
How cynical, Mr. Speaker, how cynical of the government, and 
how ironical it is that the person who made the comment that 
was referred to earlier this afternoon about the Provincial 
Auditor is the very minister, is the very minister who introduced 
the motion to change this rule. My goodness! 
 
A week ago, that same minister stood in this place, and in a 
pretentious kind of way, I’d have to say, in light of his conduct 
since, brought to this Legislative Assembly a rule change which 
he purported to be in the interest of the functioning of 
democracy and trust in the Legislative Assembly. And then, 
within the last 24 hours, that same minister has put on public 
record in a direct quote in the Leader-Post, a comment, and I’ll 
read it into the record again, a comment about the Provincial 
Auditor when he says: 
 

“He’s a hard guy to complain about working together,” 
Andrew told reporters Wednesday. “Jesus Christ, he can’t 
work with anybody.” 
 

How are we supposed to come to this Assembly and treat that 
proposal for a rule change for the conduct of this Assembly by 
the Minister of Justice who then goes outside of this Assembly 
and makes that kind of comment about an officer of the 
Assembly? How are we supposed to come here and deal with 
this whole process as though it was proposed by the 
government opposite as an appropriate defence for the process 
of the democratic function in Legislative Assembly? 
 
Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Speaker, I find myself, and I must 
admit, feeling really extremely frustrated with the very 
legislative process that we’re going through in the Assembly 
now. And I think the public is totally justified, is totally 
justified to be thinking the worst of the conduct of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the way it chooses to conduct 
its own affairs — totally justified. 
 
I refer back to yesterday’s Hansard, near the conclusion of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, when I made reference to the auditor’s 
report on page 9, and let me simply refer to my quote from 
Hansard yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I was speaking and I said: 
 

  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1206 
 

On page 9, I quote, Mr. Speaker, he says . . . and this is the 
Provincial Auditor speaking. He says: 
 
The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because: 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I reached that word in my comments to 
this Assembly, one of the members from the other side — I 
guess, respecting the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment’s intervention here today respecting the right to 
freedom of speech — shouted out, he’s biased. And I read into 
the record yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Interesting, Mr. Speaker. Let’s put on the record that it 
was said by one of the members from government side 
that he’s biased. 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when we deal with this rule change 
here before us in the Legislative Assembly, it’s extremely 
difficult to even believe that the government is sincere in 
making this proposal. And clearly, clearly the government acts 
with substantially less than full credibility when it pretends to 
come to this Legislative Assembly with a proposed rule change, 
in the defence of protecting the principles of democracy, it says 
— facetiously — and respecting, most importantly, the rights of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me also make reference to a couple of 
media coverages of yesterday’s debate on this very issue when 
it was before this House. And first of all, let me refer to a 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix article of today, which I think 
accurately, by and large, accurately reflects what has happened 
in terms of both sides of this House dealing with the whole 
business of rules as related to this motion brought forth by the 
Minister of Justice and his statement at that time. He was 
willing to refer it to a discussion of a committee made up of 
members of government and opposition to be conducted away 
from the Chambers of the Assembly. 
 
Let me quote from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix article. It says: 
 

Debate continued Wednesday on a government motion to 
limit any future bell-ringing to one hour, after the 
government abruptly broke off negotiations with the NDP. 
 

I’d say that’s an accurate statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me repeat it for the interest of the members of government 
who seem to put forth a different interpretation: 
 

Debate continued Wednesday on a government motion to 
limit any future bell-ringing to one hour, after the 
government abruptly broke off negotiations with the NDP. 
 

And the article goes on to explain, and I quote again: 
 

Just before the beginning of Wednesday’s sitting, the 
government informed the NDP that it would be resuming 
debate on Andrew’s motion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, and this directly refers back to a very point I was 
making yesterday regarding an issue that I think needs to have 
some consideration in order to facilitate the efficient and 
effective conduct of business in this Assembly by providing 
some sense of notice from government to the opposition to deal 
with it in an effective kind of manner. It’s kind of ironic that 
even in raising this whole motion of the rules that that’s done 
with virtually no notice for the opposition by the government, 
and the Star-Phoenix is really quite correct in its reference to it. 
 
The article goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

By backing out of the negotiations, Andrew is proving that 
his so-called “olive branch” was just a sham, Lingenfelter 
said. 
 
The government simply wants to ram the rule change 
through the house and then probably re-introduce the 
SaskEnergy legislation that sparked the 17-day NDP 
walkout last month, he said. 
 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that that’s a fair and 
accurate media coverage of what happened yesterday. However, 
the fact of the matter is that there is one electronic media in this 
province that seemed to be less than accurate in its coverage of 
what happened yesterday, and I refer to the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation). 
 
The CBC’s coverage of yesterday’s events were, I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, totally inaccurate. And I would like to 
comment on them in order to set the record straight in the 
people’s chambers today. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday, the Minister of Justice, 
who introduced the rule change to this Assembly, stated to a 
CBC reporter that he offered the New Democratic opposition a 
two-hour bell limit, a change in the motion proposed before us, 
an extension of question period, and firm dates to table 
documents. Now, Mr. Speaker, so far that’s correct. 
 
But then the minister went on to say that the opposition refused 
to consider those. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that is 
totally, 100 per cent wrong. And the minister — let me make 
this specifically clear — that in making that statement to the 
media, the minister stated the opposite of the truth. When he 
said that the opposition refused to consider that, there was not a 
shred of truth in that comment. 
 
I will not go so far as to use the language that’s not admissible 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but I want to make the point 
very clear, that when that report was carried on CBC, the CBC 
was carrying an inaccurate report, in fact, a 100 per cent wrong 
report in its delivery of the news to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I want to clarify that in this Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in reference to the motion before us, calling 
for limitation on the ringing of the bells to summon the 
members for a vote, let me just very quickly just  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1207 
 

summarize — to put my comments today in context — very 
quickly summarize what I said yesterday. 
 
Point number one, the time to change the rules is not in the 
middle of the game. That’s contrary to the traditions of . . . I 
used the example of the sporting arena, but more importantly it 
contradicts the traditions of legislative assemblies and the 
House of Commons. 
 
(1515) 
 
When rules are changed they’re generally done at the beginning 
of a session, having been considered by both parties involved, 
both the government side and the opposition side. Prior to that, 
both having had the opportunity to reflect and look at the 
change of rules with cool and objective minds, considering the 
impacts on both government and opposition, and then having 
done that and carried out the negotiations or the debate or the 
discussion — choose your word — and arrived at a consensus, 
and bringing that consensus to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
It has been the tradition, therefore, Mr. Speaker, surprisingly to 
no one when you understand the process, that when rules 
change in this Assembly as approved by the members of the 
Assembly, that they are changed by unanimous motion. And 
that has been the tradition, unanimous motion. 
 
Clearly, the proposal before us here today violates that tradition 
of sensible, objective negotiations and reference to the rules 
then being brought to the Assembly, to the peoples’ Assembly, 
with the support of all sides and exemplified by unanimous vote 
to bring them into existence for the Chamber. Point number 
one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker, and I’m summarizing. It is my 
view that in dealing with rule changes it is most appropriate to 
deal with them in a context and within a package of rule 
changes that it doesn’t make sense to deal with any one specific 
item in isolation, but to consider the whole process of effective 
functioning of the legislature and to bring a number of changes 
that will either bring the function up to current standards or 
reflect current values or current procedures, but most 
importantly, a current identification of fairness. 
 
And so yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I suggested that it’s really quite 
appropriate to bring in rule changes. And I made it very clear, 
Mr. Speaker, that the opposition is not unwilling to talk about or 
to consider rule changes having to do with the ringing of the 
bells to summon members to vote, but that there are a large 
number of items which also should be dealt with at the same 
time so as to bring in a sensible package for this Assembly to 
consider. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without restating them, let me simply list several 
things that I referred to yesterday. 
 
A schedule or calendar related to the tabling of Public Accounts 
and annual reports certainly would not be inappropriate. It has 
become a problem lately. 
 
A clearer set of guide-lines for this Assembly regarding 
responses to both written and oral questions, the time  

within which they need to be responded to, questions need to be 
responded to, and the specificity with which they are responded 
to. 
 
A schedule or calendar regarding the presentation of a 
provincial budget so that those thousands upon thousands of 
entities, legal entities as well as hundreds of thousands of 
people who are directly impacted by that, can conduct their 
affairs with some degree of predictability knowing that the 
government has its act together and is doing some kind of 
reasoned planning in regarding the spending of public dollars. 
 
A schedule or calendar regarding the calling of sessions to deal 
with legislative business in the Chamber. 
 
The providing of notice of business by a government, a week in 
advance. As I said yesterday, it surely is not asking too much of 
a government to be able to sit down and put on a piece of paper 
on Friday what it intends to do next week. Surely any 
government that’s got its act together is not lurching along in 
such an unorganized manner that they’re not able to do that, and 
therefore to facilitate the effective use of time in the Legislative 
Chamber. 
 
I suggested as well, Mr. Speaker, consistent with some other 
chambers in our nation, that I believe it’s time for this 
Assembly, for the members of it, to give some thought to the 
election of Speaker in the Chamber, to either endorse that or to 
reject it consciously — one or the other. 
 
A couple of other things I would add as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
I think are worthy of consideration when reviewing rules, that I 
believe would facilitate again respect for the democratic 
responsibilities and processes that we are required to defend in 
these chambers, have to do with the telecasting of proceedings. 
 
Now I recognize, Mr. Speaker, in saying that, that these 
proceedings are carried over the air waves by cable TV. But I 
recognize as well that there are a number of people who 
subscribe to cable television in this province who in fact have 
no access to the proceedings of the Chamber, and perhaps that’s 
something that should be looked at by members of this 
Chamber in the interest of providing the arena for an informed 
public in belief of the principles of democracy. 
 
And I would add to that, Mr. Speaker, in light of the last 24 
hours and the release of the auditor’s report, and particularly in 
light of the response of the Minister of Justice — the Minister 
of Justice, of all people — who publicly slammed the auditor, 
that very clearly, very, very clearly this Assembly has to attend, 
not some time, but very, very soon, to this whole business of the 
rules by which the auditor is allowed to conduct his business. 
 
Clearly in the report, Mr. Speaker, the auditor says that the 
government isn’t following its own laws. And there has to be 
some way that this Assembly deals with that matter. When you 
have a government that passes legislation providing privileges 
and rights for the public auditor, who is there to protect the 
interest of the public, and is not responsible to the government 
but is responsible to all of the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, to the Assembly  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1208 
 

itself, there’s something wrong when the government is allowed 
to break its law and refuse to provide information to the auditor 
that by law the auditor is entitled to receive. 
 
And then, to top it all off, the Minister of Justice is the one to 
publicly criticize him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this starts to take on an aura of soap opera to it. I 
mean, this is the kind of thing that soap operas are made of. It is 
despicable in my mind that we should even be dealing with that 
matter at the same as we’re dealing with this proposed change 
in the rules brought to this Assembly by that same Minister of 
Justice. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that if we’re going to be 
serious, if we’re going to be credible in dealing with the matter 
of changing of rules in this Assembly, then there’s a lot more 
that needs to be looked at than one simple, legislative knee-jerk 
reaction by the Minister of Justice and the PC caucus to the 
ringing of the bells. 
 
And I was just beginning then yesterday, Mr. Speaker, to go 
through a litany of betrayal of democratic principles by the 
government opposite, in response to the Minister of Justice’s 
statement that the government was standing for principles of 
democracy in calling for, in attempting to ram through, a rule 
change in this Assembly. 
 
Because clearly, Mr. Speaker, if there is any government in 
recent times that does not have the right to make that statement 
that they are the defenders of democracy, to make that 
statement with credibility; if there is any government that does 
not have that right, it is the PC Government of Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
We had Bill 5 which was carried in this Legislative Assembly 
in December of 1986, putting into law the authority for cabinet 
ministers, the authority for cabinet ministers to create, 
eliminate, change, and alter government departments without 
having to come before this Legislative Assembly and express a 
single word of explanation, contrary to a principle of 
democracy that had been in existence since the beginning of 
this province. 
 
One of the first things I saw as a newly elected member to the 
Legislative Assembly was a government which was determined 
to act in such a way that it would take power away and 
influence away, public influence away from the Legislative 
Assembly and transfer it behind closed cabinet doors — Bill 
No. 5 in 1986. 
 
And surely we cannot make any reasoned comment about the 
conduct of this government and their respect for democratic 
tradition without making some specific reference to the 
comments of the Provincial Auditor and his report tabled in this 
Assembly yesterday. And I find it revealing, Mr. Speaker, that 
under the topic of current issues of importance on page 9, the 
Provincial Auditor says, and I quote again. I quoted it 
yesterday: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because: 
 

And point number three: 
 

I am being denied access to information. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not a comment made by an officer of 
the Assembly that should be taken lightly, and it’s not the kind 
of comment that I’m sure is made lightly. And clearly, any 
government that is operating their affairs in such a way that the 
Provincial Auditor finds himself feeling bound to make that 
statement, is not one which is functioning in a manner that 
respects democratic traditions and principles. 
 
I refer as well under the same category of current issues of 
importance and under a sub-category, Mr. Speaker, entitled 
interference. I note that the auditor raises some 30 — I guess it 
would be 37 — 37 specific items identifying interference, how 
he has been interfered with by this government in terms of his 
ability to function as an officer of this Assembly under the 
authority of an Act that was approved by this government and 
this Assembly. 
 
Let me refer, Mr. Speaker, to just some, and I won’t refer to all 
— maybe they should all be referred to, but I’ll leave that to 
other members of the Assembly, if they choose — to have the 
people of Saskatchewan understand the respect, the respect for 
democracy by the government of the day. Because that’s the 
issue that’s behind this Bill . . . or behind this motion. 
 
I refer to item no. 2.30, and the auditor says he has a concern 
about interference, and I quote: 
 

Where the Executive limits the Provincial Auditor’s ability 
to carry out his duties the accountability process is broken. 
 

Now let me make that very clear. When the term “executive” is 
used, executive refers to cabinet. It’s the cabinet of the 
government that the auditor is referring to here. And let the 
people of Saskatchewan understand that the Provincial Auditor 
is making a very, very clear statement about the conduct of the 
cabinet of the PC government of Saskatchewan limiting the 
Provincial Auditor’s ability to carry out his duties and therefore 
breaking the process of accountability. 
 
And he goes on to say — and you can’t say it more clearly than 
this, Mr. Speaker, item 2.31 — the auditor says, and I quote: 
 

In my opinion, I have been interfered with in the execution 
of my duties. 
 

The auditor goes on, Mr. Speaker, to make reference to other 
matters in which he’s been interfered with, and let me quote 
sections 2.34 and 2.35 of his report under the section of 
interference. And he says: 
 

As reported in my 1987 annual report, on September 17, 
1987, the Minutes of the Board of Directors of the Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan (C.I.C.) 
contained the following: 
 

And here’s the motion, Mr. Speaker, from the Crown 
Investments Corporation: 
 

The Board confirmed their direction to CMB  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1209 
 

Management to not release any information to the 
Provincial Auditor pending further discussions among the 
Board Members. 
 

To not release any information to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
(1530) 
 
And then in his next item the auditor states, and I quote again: 
 

In my opinion, this action by the Executive . . . 
 

The executive is the cabinet of the government, the cabinet of 
the PC government. The auditor says: 
 

In my opinion, this action by the Executive is an 
interference with an Officer of the Assembly. 
 

Can you state it more clearly than that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Let me quote again from section 2.41 of the interference section 
of the auditor’s report, and again I quote: 
 

It does not seem reasonable to me that by avoiding the 
letter of the law the Executive (the cabinet) can determine 
what I can or cannot see, by saying I have not followed . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise a point of order. 
I’ve been sitting listening to the member from Moose Jaw 
North address this Assembly on the basis of the motion, and 
I’ve listened for the last five, 10 minutes, and I have not heard 
him anywhere particularly address the motion. 
 
He has been speaking about the auditor’s report, and I believe 
that yesterday you ruled that that was not in order, and I believe 
that that is accurate, and I hold to that today. I don’t believe that 
he has the freedom to wander from that, and I’d like to have 
you rule on that point of order please, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order. The member from Moose Jaw has been discussing a 
report; perhaps it’s not clear to the members his intent to relate 
it to the topic under discussion. And if the hon. member can . . . 
is relating it to the motion under discussion, then his comments 
are in order. If not, perhaps there’s a question there, but perhaps 
the hon. member, to clear up any doubts, should make his 
points, perhaps, more relevant and clear. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to do that, 
and for the member from Morse, I’m glad he’s taking interest in 
the debate today and listening carefully. And so let me, just for 
the member from Morse, and perhaps if there’s others who 
didn’t understand, simply reiterate that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I point out to members of the Assembly that I am responding to 
the Minister of Justice’s statements when he introduced the 
motion purporting that the Government of Saskatchewan was 
needing to ram through this motion in  

the middle of a session as a defence of democracy. In response 
to that, Mr. Speaker, I make the point that I do not believe that 
to be a credible statement made by that minister or that 
government because of the actions of the government. And 
actions speak louder than words. And I simply make the case 
that this government has no ethical or moral justification to 
make that claim that they are defenders of democracy and 
therefore have the right to ram this rule change through in a 
manner that is totally contradictory to any way the rule changes 
have ever been made before. 
 
And in order to make my case and respond to that, it’s 
necessary not to just engage in rhetoric but, I believe, to 
substantiate to the people of Saskatchewan just how this 
government has violated the principles of democracy. I refer to 
Bill No. 5 as a violation, in my opinion, of a principle of 
democracy that people can decide whether they think it’s 
enhancing or detracting from democracy to take the change of 
government departments out of the Assembly and do it behind 
closed cabinet doors. 
 
I point, as well, to this government’s dealing with the Provincial 
Auditor who exists as an officer of this Assembly, by authority 
of law, and this government’s refusal to respond to information 
requested by that auditor, not at the bureaucratic level but at the 
Executive Council, at the cabinet level. 
 
Those who hold the highest posts of government in 
Saskatchewan are the ones who are coming under criticism by 
an officer of this Assembly. That strikes me as being the kind of 
action that’s inconsistent with some government that claims that 
it’s a defender of democracy and therefore has a right to ram a 
rule change through in an extraordinary kind of way. 
 
And so I’m sure the member of Morse understands the logic 
that I’m following, and therefore will welcome the information 
to consider how he’s going to move on this motion. 
 
And let me continue then for the member from Morse and 
others to point out what the Provincial Auditor has to say about 
the conduct of the cabinet of the PC government of 
Saskatchewan today. And I quote section 2.41, under the 
“Interference” category of current issues of importance in the 
auditor’s report submitted yesterday, and I quote: 
 

It does not seem reasonable to me that by avoiding the 
letter of the law the Executive (the cabinet) can determine 
what I can or cannot see, by saying I have not followed a 
“proper procedure” which the Executive (the cabinet) 
alone defines. If the Executive (the cabinet) can decide 
what and how I can examine (and let’s underline this 
point), if the executive can decide what and how I can 
examine, the Assembly does not have a watchdog over 
government spending. 
 

The statement of the Provincial Auditor about the conduct of 
the cabinet of the government of the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this does not strike me as the great defenders of 
the principles of democracy who, with any  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1210 
 

justification, come to this Assembly intent on ramming through 
a rule change in an extraordinary manner. 
 
As I said before, I’m not going to read all of these. I could. If 
the member from Morse remains unconvinced, I am quite 
pleased, I would be quite pleased to read these item by item into 
the record. 
 
Section 2.51, in reference to a Crown corporation created, Mr. 
Speaker, interesting enough, created, according to rule number 
five, without coming before the Assembly; created behind 
closed cabinet doors, the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. It used to be the department of government 
services, changed, without coming before the Assembly 
because this government had put through rule five, to the 
Property Management Corporation. 
 
So how is this property management corporation, formerly 
department of government services, changed behind closed 
cabinet doors according to rules brought in by this government 
in December 1986 — how is this corporation responding to 
requests for information from the auditor? 
 
And the plot thickens, Mr. Speaker. And the auditor says, and I 
quote: 
 

In my opinion, this action by SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) is an interference with 
an officer of the Assembly in the discharge of his duties. 
 

That’s his conclusion. If the member from Morse likes, I can 
read the items before that that substantiate that in the mind of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And then finally, Mr. Speaker, let me refer to item 2.55 of the 
auditor in the same section, in which he says, and I quote, and 
again if the member from Morse wants the substantiating 
preceding items, I’m happy to read those into the record. He can 
just give me a wave and I’m happy to do that. 
 
The Provincial Auditor says, and I quote: 
 

In addition to my inability to get information from C.I.C. 
(the Crown investments corporation), S.P.C. (the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation), SPMC (the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), 
SaskTel and P.C.S. (the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), I was refused access to the accounts of a 
crown controlled corporation, Westbridge Computer 
Corporation. 
 

And so on it goes, Mr. Speaker. Very, very clearly we have a 
government that is not at all committed to the principles of 
preservation of democracy. 
 
I can give you a quick list of other examples that are less 
current but certainly very clear. One has to question the respect 
for democracy when this government took until June of 1987 to 
call its first legislative session after receiving a new mandate in 
October of 1986, conducting government’s financial affairs by 
special warrant in the interim, and releasing announcement after  

announcement after announcement for two or three months that 
just literally devastated, psychologically devastated, the people 
of Saskatchewan. Finally called its session, finally called the 
House to session, the people’s Assembly to order to do business 
after there had been a threat of going to court in order to force 
them to bring the government to the people’s chambers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, does it strike anybody in Saskatchewan — 
normally the history in this province has been to call the 
Legislative Assembly to do its business in February, at the latest 
March, most frequently February — when the government of 
the day two years ago waited until June, mid-June, to call the 
Assembly to begin its business at a time in which normally it’s 
concluding? 
 
We’ve seen this government’s respect for democracy and the 
principles of democracy when a year ago it passed its Bill 
bringing into existence the gerrymander of the electoral 
boundaries. Because it simply does not believe, it simply does 
not believe if the principle that had previously existed of no 
more than 15 per cent variation from the norm, larger or 
smaller, of electoral boundaries and constituencies — if that 
was honoured, it doesn’t believe that it would have as effective 
a chance of getting elected. And so again they changed the rules 
for elections. 
 
It had changed the rules for government departments. It had 
changed the rules . . . it didn’t change the rules, it just didn’t 
honour the rules regarding the auditor. 
 
It violated the tradition in calling the session of June ’87. It then 
went to bring through this Assembly a change of the rules 
regarding boundaries and affecting elections. Last year we saw 
them ram through a change in the ward system, affecting 
elections in municipalities contrary to the wishes of the 
municipalities of this province. 
 
We’ve seen this government intentionally misleading the people 
of Saskatchewan in the financial affairs. We saw the Minister of 
Finance saying before the election of 1986, the deficit was not a 
problem, and then after the election saying, whoops, we’ve 
made an $800 million mistake. What do you expect? We’re 
politicians. He should have said, if he was being honest, what 
do you expect? We’re Tory politicians. 
 
We see this government time after time, year after year, failing 
to release Public Accounts in a timely manner. In February of 
this year the Public Accounts Committee started its review of 
the year that ended two years before. And that’s certainly not 
my definition of a timely manner. 
 
We see before us now Bill 1 in this Assembly on the agenda, 
giving the authority to the minister of piratization the right to 
piratize whatever he wants, whenever he wants, however he 
wants, to whomever he wants — a dangerous piece of 
legislation. 
 
We’ve seen this government unable to carry a quorum. Within 
the last four weeks of the function of this Assembly, this 
government twice, on two occasions, has not been able to even 
keep a quorum, to keep a sufficient number of members here; 
when this is the government that brings the business before the 
people of  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1211 
 

Saskatchewan, doesn’t even have enough people present in the 
Assembly to legally carry on the business of the Assembly. 
 
And now we see this ramming of this motion coming before us. 
And we’ve seen repeatedly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the refusal of 
government members to enter into debate. I think the most 
explicit statement of the purpose of this Legislative Assembly 
was given by Allan Blakeney just before he retired from the 
Assembly when he referred to it as a talking place, a place in 
which all of us, as elected members, have both the right and the 
responsibility to stand and state where we stand, but just as 
importantly, why we stand where we stand. 
 
And over and over again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen this 
government come forth with legislation and motions presented 
and then refused to be defended. And clearly again, in my mind, 
a violation of the principle of democracy where you have both 
the right, but also a responsibility, to say where you stand and 
why it is you stand where you stand. 
 
And so I can only conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can only 
conclude, after considering all the factors involved in bringing 
forth this motion today, that it is nothing more than a legislative 
knee-jerk reaction by a government that’s hurting, that’s 
demonstrating its hurting on its SaskPower piratization issue in 
two ways: one, by spending hundreds of thousands, if not 
millions, of taxpayer dollars, holding meetings and carrying 
advertising across the province of Saskatchewan and at the 
same, as an expression of just how hard it’s hurting and in spite 
bringing forth a rule change to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
(1545) 
 
Clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a government that’s trying 
to deflect the agenda from the concerns of the people of 
Saskatchewan. This whole process of bringing this rule change 
before the Legislative Assembly is a failed process. 
 
The government’s priorities are very clearly out of whack. It’s 
hung up on piratization and rule changes and has lost complete 
touch with the real issues of the province of Saskatchewan — 
fails to address the out-migration and unemployment and rising 
taxes and deficit, cuts in services; fails to address all of those. 
The protection of the family farm, family businesses around the 
province of Saskatchewan, rising interest rates — none of those 
are on the legislative agenda. 
 
Here we are dealing over and over again with piratization and 
rule changes. This is a government that’s out of touch and 
completely out of whack when it comes to dealing with the 
issues that are important to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of all of those 
reasons, and because the very process fails to address the 
manner in which rules should be changed, and I believe is 
simply a diversionary tactic to get away from the issues of 
greatest concern to Saskatchewan people which are the issues 
about which this government  

stands weakest in the minds of the Saskatchewan public, I stand 
opposed to this motion and will be voting accordingly if it 
should ever come to a vote in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
In saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope, I hope that there 
may still be an opportunity that the Minister of Justice offer to 
deal with some discussion of rules outside of the Assembly and 
involving members of both government and opposition caucus; 
that there still is a chance for rules to be dealt with in a sensible 
kind of way; and, therefore, if members opposite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are giving some serious consideration to what’s really 
going on, it may be that this will not come to a vote because 
cooler heads have prevailed and this Legislative Assembly has 
chosen to deal with this matter in a more sensible kind of way. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I make it very, very clear though, that 
if it does come to a vote, I shall stand opposed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to debate the motion 
and, of course, on the bell-ringing. I want to make it very clear 
at the outset that I am opposed to the motion as introduced by 
the government. 
 
At the outset, as I begin my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
must point out that the government chooses again not to partake 
in the parliamentary tradition of debate. They have chosen to 
hide under their desks and not partake in our great democratic 
tradition. 
 
And as I look back in the history of my short stay at the 
legislature, I must state at the outset that I have seen this 
practice of PC-style democracy which is generally one of not 
partaking in very important historic debates in this legislature 
and just hiding their own lack of knowledge in these particular 
contextual issues surrounding the bell-ringing incident. 
 
And as I look at the overall general question of the bell-ringing, 
one has to look at the aspect of why it is that bell-ringing is still 
part of the parliamentary tradition. And many of the people 
state that there’s got to be a balance on the role of the majority, 
which is the government, and also the important right of the 
opposition to criticize, oppose, and even obstruct a government 
measure. 
 
And as we look to the past we know that bell-ringing has 
simply become, you know, part of our historic tradition of 
parliamentary democracy. 
 
The question one raises in regards to the bell-ringing motion, 
where they are trying to limit the bell-ringing to one hour, is 
precisely because of the context in which this has taken place. 
In the past week, as we come back into the legislature, and the 
previous two weeks prior to that when the bell-ringing took 
place, many of the people looked at the reason why the 
bell-ringing took place. 
 
It’s very important to look at the reasons why the bell-ringing 
took place in order to gain a full understanding of the debate. 
It’s important therefore not to look at only the process of 
bell-ringing, it’s also  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1212 
 

important to look at the historical context in which this debate 
arose. 
 
And as I look at the historical context, one looks at the reasons 
why as an opposition member we decided to utilize the strategy. 
First of all we looked at the issue surrounding the bell-ringing 
incident. And of course it was specifically related to the 
privatization of SaskEnergy. 
 
Last year when we had presented the . . . when we had asked 
the questions about why SaskEnergy was being separated from 
Saskatchewan Power, we deliberately raised the question 
because we knew that it was inevitably going to be privatized. 
But we weren’t sure. So at that point in time we had asked the 
question to the deputy minister whether or not he would be 
privatizing SaskEnergy, which this bell-ringing rule is 
connected to. 
 
And we looked at the issue, and of course he said that there 
would be no privatization of our public utilities. And it was that 
same type of response that we got from the Premier previous to 
that, a year before that when he said that none of the public, you 
know, prior to the election time when that question was raised, 
that the public utilities would not be touched. 
 
And so the context is one where we look at the issue of 
privatization. And as we look at it, a person has to look at 
governmental mandate in parliamentary tradition. 
Governmental mandate is one where a government sets forth its 
position to legitimately become a government of a province. 
And during that time it sets out their positions as to why they 
are planning to govern in the future. 
 
And in that case then a certain type of mandate is put forth. 
Questions are raised by opposition and by the public during the 
period of campaigning to find out whether or not certain types 
of things are going to take place at a certain point in the 
government’s mandate, as is laid out during the campaign. 
 
And it’s become very clear that the mandate of the government 
was not really being followed, in a sense, that specifically it was 
mentioned that there would be no privatization of the public 
utilities. And when we look at that very carefully, one 
recognizes that this did not only occur in the area of 
privatization but also the budgeting aspect. We knew that the 
budget was going to be a certain figure, but that information 
was not let out at that certain point in time again. We found out 
that there was an $800 million difference between what the 
proposed budget deficit was going to be and what it actually 
became to be just a couple of months later. 
 
So we know that a promise had deliberately been broken. The 
Premier and his members knew very clearly that they would not 
get elected if the issue of the privatization of public utilities was 
brought out into the open. So there was a deliberate type of not 
following the facts in this case and trying to present a view that 
sure, we’re not going to sell off the public utilities. So a 
promise was deliberately broken to the people of the province. 
 
There are countless other promises that are related to the 
privatization issue that were of course broken, and the  

bell-ringing aspect, and the context of which it is tied to, looks 
also at the promises of privatization and jobs. We knew that the 
people have been promised since 1982 that there would be a 
growing number of jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
that privatization would be a solution after the 
open-for-business strategy had failed. The open-for-business 
strategy, which was the glitter and gloss of PC propaganda in 
1982, quickly lost its appeal and then shifted off in the latter 
aspect here to move into a different framework when they got 
elected back in ’86. 
 
So when I look at the bell-ringing incident, I look at the 
promises in relation to the jobs, you know, prior to this new 
phase of privatization, although the privatization had in fact 
started in other areas such as highways, you know, even prior to 
a general Bill of privatization came in. I might add that there is 
a connection between the bell-ringing and the privatization and 
that aspect also basically, you know, as I look back in regards to 
the jobs issue. 
 
I would like to stick to the jobs aspect though. I look back, and I 
come from a high unemployment situation in northern 
Saskatchewan where we have anywhere from 60 to 90 per cent 
unemployment depending on the community level, and a lot of 
the people were simply asking for more jobs, and we saw a lot 
of promises in ’82 and ’86 in that regard. In both cases there 
was promise of great jobs if a lot more of the money was turned 
over to the big corporations. So there was a direct connection 
between the PC strategy of privatization and open for business 
and jobs and big corporations and the complete reliance on big 
corporations. 
 
So the jobs question became to be a central issue. 
 
And as we look back at the historic record on privatization, we 
know that 400 jobs were lost in Highways; we know that 400 
jobs were lost in the dental program. And I might add that, you 
know, at a time when this government talks about health 
prevention and so on, that this was probably the best health 
prevention program in the whole world and that the 
privatization aspect of the dental plan was an important 
connection to this overall goal of the context of bell-ringing 
which we look at, you know, this evening. 
 
(1600) 
 
So I looked at also the privatization of the mining industry in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I see a direct connection there 
where we look at the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation and the tremendous amount of profits and over 
$1.5 billion worth of assets and about $60 billion worth of 
profits a couple years ago. Now it’s been changed in name to 
Cameco, and the privatization effort in that particular case is 
one where the jobs question was raised with again the minister 
in charge of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation), the Deputy Premier, and we raised it at that point 
and again he brought out the old argument that privatization 
would indeed create jobs. And as we look back at the record, 
we know that it took many years to argue with this government 
on the issue of northern employment and big corporate 
enterprise. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1213 
 

We used to raise the issue when the levels of employment were 
about 15 per cent, you know, as opposed to the legal limit. And 
I’ll make a connection here because we are dealing here with a 
legitimate legal rule and making the connection between the 
legal obligations of the government in regards to employment 
and privatization in the North in regards to SMDC. And we 
made the point — we said, look, there has been a slight 
improvement in the hiring policies in the North — you know, 
from about 15 to about 25 per cent. But we said, we have done 
this, you know, by arguing about a six, seven-year period. We 
would like to see the government follow the regulations of what 
was laid out in the lease agreements. And the lease agreements 
laid out that it was supposed to be 50 per cent; that the law 
stated 50 per cent and not, you know, a 25 per cent limit. 
 
So that the connection here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this: that 
we are debating the context of a democratic aspect of 
bell-ringing and the aspect of how it ties in to privatization, 
because that was the context of our debate. 
 
And so I’m introducing concrete information in regards to 
northern situations about the jobs question, which just is in the 
process of occurring also at the time that we are debating this 
motion, because the privatization of Cameco (Canadian Mining 
Energy Corporation) is occurring right now, and that’s the 
context of the debate. And when I looked at it, I saw that while 
there was a general improvement on the number of jobs, you 
still didn’t follow the full regulations. It didn’t fully follow the 
law. It was only following the law by about 60 per cent. So I 
might add that the law has to be followed 100 per cent, not 60 
per cent as in this case, and we have to make sure that when we 
are talking about privatization strategy and jobs that indeed that 
the laws are being followed. And the law wasn’t even being 
followed in this particular case. 
 
So when we are dealing with the regulation in rules and 
procedures of the House and we make a connection to 
privatization and we make a connection to the jobs issue, the 
concrete context is one where there were indeed not even . . . 
there was indeed a case where the law wasn’t even being 
followed. 
 
And as I looked at the promises of privatization and jobs, I look 
at it then as mere promises. If you can’t even follow the law 
that exists right now, how can we hope to believe the 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to really following 
the law. So my point of the argument is that the context has to 
be conducted with the bell-ringing and privatization and the 
jobs question, because that was the context of the debate as we 
went to the people. The people said, we are worried that in the 
long run the jobs aspects in SPC and the SaskEnergy aspect, if 
it becomes privatized, will no longer be honoured; that indeed 
more and more people, you know, from the outside will get the 
jobs, and less people from our situation. 
 
And I go back to the context of SMDC again, and I looked at 
the issue there, and here it was. We raised it last year and we 
said, look, Mr. Deputy Premier, this situation of privatization is 
going to be one of amalgamation. When you amalgamate, 
you’re going to have to cut staff. And he says, no, no, not to 
worry about it; I think we’re going to  

see a situation there’s going to be more jobs. But this year the 
historic record shows that there were 100 jobs lost in Cameco in 
northern Saskatchewan — 100 jobs. 
 
I know that the Deputy Premier was so red-faced and he got 
pounding on the table quite a bit and got pretty excited about 
jobs at Rafferty-Alameda. But he didn’t get that excited when 
we lost jobs in northern Saskatchewan. There was 100 jobs . . . 
there was 350 jobs in regards to lay-offs, you know, starting 
July. And a lot of people feel those jobs are very important for 
their own families. And I was hoping that when we got into this 
debate that some of the members from across would deal with 
some of these concrete historical aspects of unemployment and 
how we are losing jobs through privatization. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would just like to remind the 
member, he has been trying to relate his comments to the 
bell-ringing, but I believe jobs in the North and public 
participation are not totally relevant to the motion that is before 
the House. And I would ask the member to just maintain his 
debate around the motion on 33 that’s before the House at this 
time. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards to . . . the reason why I entered into a 
debate on those issues was during the debate we were talking 
about participatory democracy and some of the issues that do 
relate and connect to it. So I will continue in regards to the 
context . . . the context I was getting at was in regards to the 
promises made, and I was trying to get to the concrete level of 
the jobs, but I won’t mention the northern jobs any more 
because of your comment. So I will continue and talk about the 
context therefore about the bell-ringing incident. 
 
As we went around to the communities — when we talked 
about this bell-ringing incident and we went down to the 
community level — one of the things we learned, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that people were indeed about, you know, while 
they didn’t . . . they were considering the general context of 
jobs is what I should say then. They were very worried about 
the jobs aspect in regards . . . during the period of bell-ringing 
when we went out to the community level. 
 
And the people said, my goodness, we have worked hard, you 
know, to get at these things. We have made gains on these. And 
we want you to make a strong stand on those. We want to make 
sure that we not only, you know, look at those jobs that we lost 
previously, you know, in a general level, but we want to make 
sure that in the overall bell-ringing that you people are going 
through, that we want you to give a message to the government. 
 
We want to give them a message that bell-ringing is very 
important to focus in on the aspect of the jobs question. They 
said, do not back down on that issue because it’s a very 
important issue. Do not ever back down on the need for jobs for 
all Saskatchewan people. And that’s in the context that I guess I 
was trying to explain myself, Mr. Speaker, but it didn’t come 
through that clearly. 
 
So as I look at the other issue, I’ll also mention the aspect of 
bell-ringing. And as I talked to the people at the different 
community levels again, people were saying to me, they said, 
well you have to stay out. We knew it was  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1214 
 

very difficult to try and stay out on the bell-ringing situation. 
We knew that it was a very difficult thing for us to do. As a new 
member, you know, coming into the legislature, I never 
experienced the issue of bell-ringing, you know, at the level that 
we had gotten into. 
 
And I knew that at a certain point you look at the politics of 
process and the politics of substance. And you always have to 
make a connection between the politics of substance and the 
need for regular government business and the like, as we went 
through. And when I talked to the people about that and we did 
mention that it was a very touchy situation for us, and as I 
recall, the petition that went out . . . the petition basically gave 
us, you know, full support on the substance of the argument on 
SPC, on privatization, on just about anything. A lot of the 
people said, we’re opposed to it, you know, by a 70 per cent 
margin. 
 
And when we look at the bell-ringing situation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was about 49-39 in our favour, you know, at that 
point. So it was relatively close in regards to public opinion on 
the bell-ringing session, you know, at that point in time in 
history. 
 
So when I got into the discussions with the people about the 
bell-ringing, a lot of them stated to me, they said, look, make a 
strong stand. They said, it’s not jobs; they said, it’s our assets, 
it’s our provincial assets that this bell-ringing is all about. We 
are talking about our Saskatchewan heritage; we are talking 
about not only the future of ourselves, they said, we’re talking 
about the future of our children; we’re talking about the future 
of our grandchildren, and whether or not they will have assets 
that they can rightfully say, hey, those are ours; those are 
Saskatchewan’s to own, and so on. That’s the future that indeed 
we are talking about. 
 
So when I mentioned the aspect of assets, a lot of them asked 
me, they said, well, do you know anything about the other 
assets and profit margins that we have in the other areas? And I 
said, well, I could only, you know, reply back to the 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower one offhand, and I said I’ll do a 
little bit of research in the other areas. And sure enough, we did 
a little bit of research on it, and I got back to them on it. And we 
said, look, we see that SPC makes over $100 million this past 
year and, you know, the SaskEnergy portion was approximately 
60 and about 54, the utilities portion. 
 
But we also looked at the fact that when they started asking me 
questions, they said, what about . . . well, how did the 
SaskEnergy aspect, which is connected to the bell-ringing, tie in 
with the utility aspect of the question? 
 
And a lot of the people started saying, we would like to see the 
annual reports on those. And when we examined the annual 
reports, of course the annual reports showed that there was 
about nine, seven out of the 10 years where the utility section 
had been . . . on the electrical side had lost money — sometimes 
not too much; sometimes a little bit more, but it did lose on 
those seven. And when we looked at the SaskEnergy side, we 
saw that indeed they had made money 10 out of 10 years, and 
the reason was fairly clear as I got the feedback from the 
people. 
 

They said it’s probably because the gas section is probably the 
cleanest of the fossil fuels in burning, and we’re concerned on 
environment and that type of thing. Those are the types of 
issues that the people, you know, raise with me as I discussed 
the issue of the bell-ringing session with them. 
 
They also said that it’s probably because of the fact it’s rising 
and it’s making a lot of money, and a lot of the big companies, 
they said, want to privatize this thing, so they’re forcing the PC 
government to try and get them to sell off the most . . . I guess, 
the most jewelled possession of the utilities. And they said, that 
utility makes a lot of money, and it’s true that, you know, some 
of these big corporations want fair ownership on that. 
 
And a lot of people also told me, they said, don’t be fooled, 
they said; even if there is a series of different owners in this 
case, this bell-ringing is very important for you to get the 
message out. And the message, they said, is this: that sometimes 
these big corporations have interlocking directors. They said 
that the interlocking directors here sit in on the same boards in 
these big companies, so even if they’re legally a different 
company, they know what’s going on. So if they’re legally a 
separate company, and you could show in the historic records 
that they are different, the directorships are interlocking so that 
they know, even though that they are separate, they can make, 
you know, monopoly decisions, although there may be seven, 
eight owners in that regard. 
 
(1615) 
 
So I learned a lot as I talked to the people about the bell-ringing 
session. And the more we talked, the more they were very 
interested in doing participatory — what I call participatory — 
democracy, which is the very essence of this debate. And we 
talk about, you know, the right of the government to do 
whatever they want to do, and to even a certain extent even ram 
certain Bills and certain debates, you know, as quickly as they 
want to, or the right of opposition to criticize and to oppose 
whatever it is that they’re putting out. 
 
And when we looked at the petition, people said, you have a 
right to this bell-ringing session, they said, because it’s a really 
key issue. I mentioned before about the history. They said, I am 
going to put my name in there. I am going to put my name in 
this petition in support of the bell-ringing that you are doing, 
but more particularly they said in support of the public utilities. 
They said, we would like to still support our public utilities and 
that was clearly the message that was imprinted on the petition. 
And the people said, we are putting our names in there because 
we want you to make a strong message. I don’t usually like 
signing my name on a petition, they said, but in this case we’ll 
make an exception. In this case we would like to support you 
because you are supporting us. 
 
So I learned quite a bit as a rookie politician going out to the 
community level and being worried about this bell-ringing 
session and being very worried about, you know, the degree of 
impact it would have in regards to the overall important issue of 
privatization which we were debating. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1215 
 

So as I went along and we got different people involved, people 
said, this petition is very important for us, and a lot of the young 
people, you know, went to work at the community level, a lot of 
the professional people, a lot of farming people, a lot of workers 
went out. A lot of different types of people went out and got 
involved, not only in the signing of the thing but in the process 
of getting it signed. 
 
And I was truly amazed as a rookie politician in seeing the 
intensity and feeling that people did have about their 
Saskatchewan corporations. 
 
It became very clear that they didn’t want to see the thing 
completely turned over to the monopoly interests of big 
companies because they knew that the companies already 
control too much of our lives and that they could sway 
opinions, you know, in such a way that many issues that are 
important for us would not be touched. 
 
And I can only look in the context of today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I saw the issue of the Exxon Corporation. They 
completely disregarded environmental laws, and none of the 
politicians want to touch them because they control too much of 
the things. 
 
And that’s what people told me as I debated the bell-ringing, 
and we talked about the public utilities and the privatization 
issue connected to the bell-ringing. And the people kept saying, 
they said, we don’t want to be solely under the control of big 
companies; we’d like to have a little bit of a say. They said, we 
like the message that the opposition leader, Roy Romanow, had 
to bring out — pardon me, I’m not supposed to make any 
names — but the opposition leader had to say in regards to the 
mixed economy approach. And again, being a rookie, I slipped 
up here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so as we look forward, we saw the people saying, well the 
mixed economy approach that you’re talking about in regards to 
this bell-ringing situation is very important for Saskatchewan 
because that’s how we built it, some of the seniors told me as I 
went out, and because I wanted to talk about bell-ringing, they 
want to talk about the whole history of Saskatchewan. And of 
course, I can only present a brief picture of what they told me. 
 
They said, we built these things. We spent many years working, 
building these corporations so that we could sometimes control 
our public utilities as in the case of SaskEnergy, I was told. 
They also said that we also wanted to do joint ventures with big 
corporations. Not that we wanted to completely control all the 
industry in mining. For example, I was told, they wanted to do 
joint venturing, working side by side with big corporations, so 
that we have at least a stronger say and a little economic clout 
in decision making when we sat side by side and negotiated 
with big corporations in regards to this whole issue. 
 
So when we were discussing this whole context, we got into a 
lot of issues that touched upon the whole context of this 
bell-ringing, which is the privatization issue. And while we 
went on, we also talked about the importance of . . . people 
raised to me, they said, I am glad that along with bell-ringing 
you are doing what you call  

participatory democracy. I’m glad, they said, of the petitions. 
 
They say that putting your name to something is very important. 
Signing your name on something shows that you have 
commitment. Signing your name to something shows that you 
have real concern. It’s not something that you just talk about. 
Talking is important, they said, but you have to put your 
signature to something. We live in a situation where we honour 
contracts, where we honour our signature. When we put our 
name to something, it becomes, you know, a very significant 
aspect for our lives and whatever it is that we decide upon. So 
they said, look, this petition, this participatory democracy is 
very important. 
 
And as I look back at that now, you know, when I look back on 
those two weeks and I’m back here at the legislature, I look at 
the number of petitions and I look at the tremendous numbers 
— 80,000 people have already signed petitions on it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And at that time when we debated it and when I was a little bit 
concerned with the people, when I used to raise that issue about 
bell-ringing, it became very important that we were on the right 
track, that people were siding with us and saying this was an 
important reason why you need to do bell-ringing. They said, 
you have to make sure that our voice is heard. They said, make 
sure that our voice isn’t just shut down by technical aspects. 
They said those things that are very important in parliamentary 
democracy still need to be there and still need to be continued. 
 
And they said, make sure that you keep on having these 
meetings also, that you’ve started. We’ve got a whole series of 
small meetings where we were asked to come at the community 
level and we discussed these issues, you know, including 
bell-ringing and also the privatization of public utilities. So 
people were very, very, very well informed about the history of 
our province. They knew what the bell-ringing was about. They 
knew about the importance of debating the issue of privatization 
of our public utilities. 
 
So they had these . . . the other thing they said is that it’s good 
to have your name on something. It’s good to have the petition 
out, and stuff like that, but they said continue having these 
meetings on even a larger scale. So we proceeded to get larger 
meetings, and as a northern member we went to an area of P.A. 
and we looked at about a thousand people that come out. And 
they said, that gives you a good indicator, they said, to balance 
that aspect of bell-ringing with people and public participation. 
 
They said petitions are important but, they said, we want 
involvement. We want to be able to drive in our car from 
Nipawin or from Tisdale or from wherever in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to move to these central locations at a short 
notice and present ourself and make our views known to the 
province of Saskatchewan, to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And they said it was very important to do these things and a lot 
of them did become involved. And we saw over a thousand . . . 
we saw approximately a thousand people in P.A.; about 600  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1216 
 

people in Yorkton; over a thousand people in Saskatoon; and 
about 1,000 to 1,500 in Regina, depending on the different 
estimates. 
 
So we were able to make the connection between bell-ringing 
and the people’s movement in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And we became convinced, you know, during the second week 
when we got into the meetings, that we were on the right track, 
that indeed the issue of public utilities and how the people felt 
about it was a very, very strong one indeed. 
 
And when we looked at it, people said, my goodness, the 
government may break their promises on many little things here 
and there. We understand; we’ve seen the PCs do that over the 
history of the seven years. But they said, this is a major one; 
this is an issue that cuts in the historic heart of the history of 
Saskatchewan. They said, make a strong stand. 
 
So as I was debating with myself as a new MLA, I kept on 
thinking, you know, of whether to go back or to keep on 
following the people’s issue. We kept following the people’s 
issue on the second week there, and I learned a lot about 
looking at technical arguments, about bell-ringing and looking 
at the substance of the context of where a debate takes place. I 
knew I learned something from that. I knew that you could 
never only talk about how loud a bell rings or what size the bell 
is or all of these types in a debate; that the context of the debate 
has to look at the question on where the central issue did come 
from. 
 
And as I travelled along on the second week, and I went to 
Prince Albert, and I went to Yorkton, and I went to different 
communities and talked about this whole issue of not only 
bell-ringing but the privatization of public utilities, I got to 
know and I got to have a real sense of where the people were at 
in regards to that. It made my feeling a little bit more at ease, 
although I still felt it was a tricky issue all the way through. I 
really felt that, my goodness, you could only go so far on this; 
that at some point we would have to come back. 
 
And as I listened to people, that’s what kept crossing my mind 
as we debated as to whether we go bell-ringing or the issue of 
public utilities. 
 
When I looked at the debate and the very first aspect of it, I 
looked at it as one where I learned a lot from the people of 
Saskatchewan as I went out to discuss not only the bell-ringing 
situation but the privatization issue. 
 
I learned that people were not only willing to talk about things, 
to talk about the issues surrounding this, and to try and get more 
information about this and that, and for them giving me 
information about the historic past; they also said, we wanted to 
put our name into it in a petition. And 80,000 . . . more than 
80,000 is one where that has become a central point in our 
debate. 
 
We also looked at the aspect of the meetings. People have said, 
the context of bell-ringing has to be looked at in regards to 
participatory democracy of meetings, of public meetings. And I 
understand that the government has followed our example and 
went out and had their own  

public meetings. 
 
But I must say that ours were more of a dynamic aspect of a 
people’s movement. Because I thought as I looked back at it, 
we didn’t have the massive advertising budgets of the 
government. We didn’t have the practical staff to be able to do 
something in just a short two-week period. 
 
What it did prove to me was the strength of the people — the 
strength and the concern that people had about their 
Saskatchewan, the strength and the concern that the people had 
about their public utilities, the strength and the concern that 
people had in regards to the problem of privatization and the 
problem that complete ownership of big-business interests is 
not Saskatchewan history, that indeed we have to have public 
ownership working side by side in this issue. And that’s the 
message I got as I talked about the bell-ringing incident with the 
people, Mr. Speaker, as I travelled through the province. 
 
(1630) 
 
And when I looked at it I tried to understand why the debate did 
come in then on the issue of the bell-ringing. Here it was a 
people’s issue making a very strong stand against privatization. 
They want to stand up for their public utilities owned by the 
province, owned by the people. 
 
And when we looked at it, I tried to find a reason for the 
government’s intent on pushing through the one-hour limit on 
bell-ringing. And I must say that I was very disappointed. I 
looked at the press reports, and I looked at one press statement, 
and there it was. It said that the government may be thirsty for 
revenge. And I looked at it in quotes and when they were 
talking about the bell-ringing. And they said they were thirsty 
for revenge . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you read it? Read the whole 
article. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And one of the members says I should read the 
whole article, but I think the point is well made. I think the 
point is well made that the government knew that they were 
well beat on the issue. I think that the government well knew 
that the bell-ringing situation, when we looked at the polls, said 
that we were ahead 49 to 39 per cent. And we were ahead also 
on the privatization debate where people said there should be no 
privatization, you know, by a 70 per cent margin. So that the 
government was intent to try and shift this debate away from 
privatization and into a bell-ringing aspect, and that’s why the 
context of this debate then comes to be one of tying bell-ringing 
to privatization. 
 
But I think the real sense, Mr. Speaker, is this: I think it’s one of 
participatory democracy. It’s one of the democratic feeling that 
I got when I went out to see the people in regards to the 
petitions and so on. 
 
And when we see the right of a government to govern, we 
always permit that right, and only obstruct it when we feel there 
is a real issue at hand. Once in a while there comes an issue of 
the people, and we look at this. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1217 
 

And I was surprised myself, Mr. Speaker, as a new MLA, to see 
the response of the people as I went out, and the tremendous 
amount of knowledge that I gained in that short period of time 
of two weeks. 
 
And when I look back, and then I see this article saying, thirsty 
for revenge, I say to myself, well that’s a very poor reason for 
putting on a motion, to try and ram through and put a limit on 
democracy by limiting the bell-ringing. And it’s a very poor 
excuse. 
 
Revenge is something that, you know, very few people would 
like to be connected to. And when I saw this in the article in the 
paper, I thought to myself, maybe that person is partially right; 
maybe they are more than half right; maybe some people think 
it’s totally right. Other people will debate that issue. 
 
But people are saying that that’s not a very good rationale for 
putting a limit on bell-ringing. 
 
And when I looked at it, I looked at the converse of where the 
revenge was going to. And I thought it was not only a revenge 
against the opposition for dealing with an issue, for me, I 
looked at it as revenge, because a lot of the people signed their 
name on a petition and a lot of people spoke up in the meetings. 
And I thought to myself, hey, could it be a revenge against the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And I thought to myself, I hope not, I hope this government 
doesn’t stoop to that type of low in the history of Saskatchewan, 
because my feeling is that you can’t ignore the people. You 
can’t just say, oh I’m going to limit the people’s democracy by 
limiting the bell, you know, by limiting the time to one hour; 
that indeed all what the people said in the petitions and all what 
the people discussed during the signing of the petition, all what 
the people discussed in regards to the history of Crown 
corporations in Saskatchewan and the mixed economy approach 
that the New Democratic Party stands for, all this history was 
talked about and it could not be ignored. 
 
But what the government is doing in this particular instance is 
not only gaining a bit of revenge on the opposition, it’s ignoring 
the people of Saskatchewan. It’s ignoring their input, the input 
that they have had, the tremendous amount of feeling that 
they’ve put into this issue. 
 
They look at the history of jobs it had brought the people, the 
history of education, the history of health development, and all 
the money that Crown corporations have put into this province 
— hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars put into the 
public purse so that they could work side by side with private 
industry. And that’s the type of approach and the type of system 
that people were telling to me as I went throughout the 
province, so that there is a real sense of a bad record on the 
history of Saskatchewan when I see the tremendous ignoring of 
the people’s wishes. 
 
I hope that a certain amount did go through, Mr. Speaker. And I 
must concede that, you know, the attempt to get the public 
panels and so on, may be debated on your side of the House in 
regards to some people saying we need to  

have real input. Some people say maybe we should combine 
this with a good advertising project, and we’ll try and really do 
a fast sell to the people of the province, so that indeed we could 
try and run away from the people’s wishes and try and side 
_track this whole thing so that we could spend a lot of time on 
debating the bell-ringing. But that’s the type of connection that 
I’ve learned from the people as I went on. 
 
Some of the other things that people have asked me, they said, 
as a new member you must have been used to the new style of 
democracy, you know, that the PC government is running. And 
I said, yes I have, and there are regular aspects of the legislature 
which are very useful for both sides of the House as we go on 
through the parliamentary tradition and we look at the debate, 
you know, on both sides of the House where the bell-ringing 
becomes useful for the opposition. 
 
It was useful for the PC government when they were in 
opposition, it was useful for the Liberal government when they 
were in opposition, and it was useful for us when we’re in 
opposition because it provides us with a tool of bringing forth 
people’s issues and raising them to a new level where it’s strong 
feeling that they could be brought out that way. 
 
And people said, what about other aspects of democracy? They 
said, we have seen rotten examples, you know, prior to ’82, in 
the ’30s, and during the ’60s period, but they said, what about 
your specific time, since right from 86? 
 
So I looked at . . . I decided to examine it myself. And I 
remember when I first got into the House, Mr. Speaker, and I 
got into the context of debate on Bill 5, and of course I was 
sometimes naming members and making mistakes on this and 
that and trying to debate this new Bill 5 that was coming up. 
And some people were talking to me about the principles of 
democracy, and I was learning about all of this stuff on a very 
specific context. And some people were telling me, in regards 
to Bill 5, that it was done at a deliberate time before Christmas. 
It was a very sharp move by the government, and that we 
wouldn’t be able to sit over Christmas holidays and the like. 
 
And so there was a certain aspect of that type of thing that I 
related back to the people as we were talking about our debate, 
as we were out in the field doing the debating, whether we 
should come back or not during the bell-ringing session. So I 
said, well we look at the limitations there, I said. And as I 
responded back, I said, we looked at Bill 5 and, I said, what did 
I learn from it? I thought that democracy was one of debate 
from both sides of the House, I said, where we have a critical 
debate on changing structures of our government. And here was 
a role that provided the government, the Executive Council, to 
be able to do whatever they wanted to do in restructuring 
government so it wouldn’t have to go through the debate, so 
that it squelched the debate. 
 
And I told the person that we were discussing the bell-ringing 
session, and I said, that is the type of thing that I learned, I said, 
as a new member. But I said, I decided to read some papers on 
it, and I said, I went down to England and I went down to the 
States on this type of  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1218 
 

governing, and they said, it’s an executive-style governing 
where you give all the power to the executive so that they can 
make decisions to change the structure of government, to 
change rules and proceedings and so on. 
 
But in this particular one, I said, it was changing the structures 
of government. So when I was doing the debates, I said, well 
this is the type of thing that I, as a new rookie member, learned 
in the legislature. It’s not too long ago, in December, when we 
passed that Bill 5. So I said, that was my first example of 
democracy as a new member, and it was more of 
executive-style governing rather than proper debate in the 
House on an important issue such as restructuring of 
governmental departments. 
 
So the other thing that I looked at as I . . . And I wanted to make 
these small examples and not get into a long debate on all of 
them, Mr. Speaker. But just to point out as examples of 
democracy in this legislature when we were discussing the 
aspect of, you know, the right of the opposition to criticize and 
the right of the government to govern. And there always has to 
be a good balance on that. So as I give examples, I try and 
relate a specific example that I have experienced as I was 
talking to people on my two weeks out, as I met them, 
discussing this bell-ringing incident and the privatization of 
public utilities. 
 
And I used to say, well we used to have a little debate also, on 
not only the governing of the province of Saskatchewan, I said, 
we went at the right of governing at the municipal level. And I 
said, to make the story short, it doesn’t hit the rural areas that 
much, but the big cities where we discussed the debate on the 
ward system. And I said, the choice there wasn’t given us for 
the municipalities to not only have any of two choices, but the 
three choices, and one including the right of choice to have a 
ward system. I said they didn’t have that choice. I said, then I 
saw a limitation on democracy there; that was another example 
of limitation on democracy. 
 
So there was a limitation on democracy on limiting debate on 
restructuring of government. This was limiting the right of the 
choice for municipalities to make a right and proper decision as 
to what type of a political voting system they wanted in their 
municipalities at the city level. 
 
So as I talked with the people, as I went out to the local level, 
that was the other thing that I did mention to them. And it was 
again a limitation of democracy. And I looked at the other one; 
I remember, I said to myself, I was excited to come to the 
House and it . . . I was taught quite a bit about parliamentary 
democracy. And when I got elected, I came in here, you know, 
amidst the pomp and ceremony of coming into the House and 
so on. 
 
(1645) 
 
And we didn’t last here too long, and I looked at that period, 
and I was saying, gee, I may have made some mistakes here on 
my first, you know, little short session, but it didn’t really dawn 
on me that we’d be out for quite a while. And we stayed out for 
quite a while, Mr. Speaker, and we were out from October until 
June ’87. And here I was so excited about coming to the 
legislature and taking  

part in parliamentary democracy and learning about the rules, 
and I’m always still learning, Mr. Speaker, because I do still 
make mistakes from time to time and try to deal with the rules 
of the House, and I’m still learning as we go along. 
 
But as I looked at it I saw again a limitation, you know, that 
governments can limit times of when the houses are open, when 
you can come in and so on, so I learned about that aspect of the 
limitation of going through our regular parliamentary debate by 
not calling the House a long period of time. 
 
And the other thing I learned was when one of the PC members 
decided to resign that time on Eastview, and I looked back at 
that specific incident, and I thought that a by-election would be 
called relatively quick. But as we look back at that, it was a 
whole year before anything, you know, the democratic input of 
the people was ever allowed, you know . . . for democratic 
representation, I mean, Mr. Speaker, was allowed for the people 
of Eastview. It took about a year. 
 
And then I saw another example of democratic input. And I was 
relating some of this information to the people as I was trying to 
myself make a decision on this bell-ringing. And I don’t think 
when the Deputy Speaker was here, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned 
that it was a very risky business, you know, for us to go out on 
the House in that regard. And we were very concerned, and we 
didn’t want to stay out too long. But a lot of the people said, 
stay out, stay out, because this is a top-notch issue for us. It was 
an issue for the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s the essential 
message that we did get out. 
 
So I looked at some other aspects too. I look at the aspect of the 
tabling of Public Accounts. And Public Accounts are of course 
very important for us because we know where the money is 
being spent in the province of Saskatchewan. Moneys are being 
spent in education, in health, in economic development, in 
many other fields. And all of that is reported in Public 
Accounts. 
 
And again, the tabling of Public Accounts during the Blakeney 
period was done on a very regular, systematic basis. And when 
I look at this particular example, I look at the PC government, 
and there was a two-year delay on Public Accounts. And then I 
looked at it, Mr. Speaker, and I said to myself, this is another 
aspect of restricting our parliamentary tradition that people 
cannot govern unless they have information, and the opposition 
cannot ask the important questions that people have unless there 
is a tabling of documents. The government knew that by 
withholding the information, information tends to have less 
impact, you know, the longer it is from the time that it happens. 
 
So the other example that I’m giving here, Mr. Speaker, is as I 
related the bell-ringing to the people, I was talking out to the 
people, I said, well I saw this example of Public Accounts and 
not the tabling as a problem of democracy. I said, I’ve been . . . 
having tremendous experience in education, the same as you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a person who has been involved in the 
field, education and information is very important. And we 
know that in the school system, we know that in the 
universities, we know  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1219 
 

that in this House, that information is extremely important. 
Unless we have information, no decisions can be made. Unless 
we have information, no proper debate can be made. 
 
And when I look at the issue of participatory democracy in our 
system, I looked at that issue of that tabling of Public Accounts 
and I thought, my goodness, two years is way too long. There 
should be a regular tabling of Public Accounts so that we can 
improve our democratic process and our democratic 
information to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member for Morse. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I’d like to ask leave to introduce some guests, 
please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce the Cabri Hospital Board seated in your gallery here 
today. They are in at the SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services 
plan) office going through the tenders for their new integrated 
facilities down there, and I want to introduce them: Norm 
Johnson is the chairman of the board; Bill Bos, a member of the 
board; Mrs. Rose Kirkpatrick; and Dennis Penner is the 
administrator. And I’d like to have the members of the 
Assembly welcome them here and join with me in doing that. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And well, Mr. Speaker, I was just talking about 
the important principle of participatory democracy, and also 
democracy that occurs here in the legislature, and how it is 
extremely important for us to get information. And that when 
we’re debating the bell-ringing . . . and I looked at it and I was 
trying to get into the debate and trying to make up mind as to 
what to say, because there’s always a certain amount of 
limitations in the debate, and I saw questions, you know, being 
raised about that process. 
 
I tried to make my comments in an historical context during the 
period of the time that I did go out and interacted with the 
people on what a lot of people have come to recognize as 
participatory democracy. Because there was two aspects in our 
role here, Mr. Speaker, and that is the specific roles, you know, 
pertaining to the House and how they are interconnected and 
intertwine, and how they have an effect on the public. You 
know, the participatory aspect of democracy has to be linked, 
therefore, with the people. 
 
And so rules are made in the House so that they are not just 
empty process, from my understanding, Mr. Speaker;  

that they are made also to have a certain amount of substance 
surrounding them. There’s always a certain amount of 
substance on to why certain rules are brought out. In other 
words, no rule is ever created without a substance, you know, 
surrounding that rule. 
 
And it’s in that context, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve raised these 
points of democratic limitations that I’ve given as examples, 
and the ones that I gave were the ones on Bill 5 and the 
limitations on the involvement of governmental debate and 
restructuring of government, which is a move to more an 
executive style of governing, and the aspect of not tabling the 
Public Accounts and having two-year delays on it; the fact that 
the ward system choice was not fully given to the municipalities 
during the last municipal elections; and the fact that the 
by-election on Eastview where they wanted democratic 
representation, you know, who had to wait for a full year. And 
when we look at it, the aspect of the legislature . . . And I 
learned a few little things as we come closer, in surrounding the 
bell-ringing even. I learned some new things about how the 
legislative process occurs. 
 
I learned that in regards to the quorum, know that there had to 
be X number of people, you know, present. And as I look back 
at that, the members on the government side were caught, and it 
was sort of a little bit ironic, in a sense, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government said that they would come to the House and really 
debate the issue of privatization really hard before the 
bell-ringing session and right after the bell-ringing session. And 
I took that, you know, very straightforward to mean that they 
were very serious about debate. 
 
And when I saw the situation developing, you know, I looked at 
the House Leader talking about, you know, the issue which is 
supposed to be very embarrassing for the government in that 
they didn’t have sufficient quorum to debate the issues of the 
House. And I learned something again about democracy, Mr. 
Speaker, that democracy requires input by people and that the 
government side of the House who said that they were very, 
very intent on debating this privatization thing, all of a sudden 
didn’t have the people in the House to debate it. And it 
happened again just recently where they didn’t . . . we didn’t 
even have enough quorum to debate another issue. 
 
So when I look at the issue of legal procedures in the House and 
this procedure of bell-ringing, I tie it into my own short 
experience as a member of the House and my experience as I 
went out to listen to the people. People weren’t as strong about 
the issue of the debate on the bell-ringing as you saw on the 
percentage of vote. It was 49 per cent saying we were okay to 
go ahead with the bell-ringing and 39 said we shouldn’t go. 
 
But I personally knew that it was still a touchy situation that, 
you know, we had to come back to the House and that we had 
to, you know, follow through with the parliamentary debate. 
But the thing that I learned from it, Mr. Speaker, is that when 
there is a real strong issue where the future of Saskatchewan is 
at stake, when the future of people’s children are at stake, they 
want us to pressure, you know, a particular procedure a little bit 
longer than usual. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1220 
 

And I would say that as I look back, and I look back at that 
thing, and I come back and I saw the quorum, the government 
didn’t even have a quorum when we come back. And I thought 
they would have a quorum, Mr. Speaker, to . . . You would 
think that they were really ready, hard to come and debate an 
issue, that they would be really serious to do that thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — But, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t really that 
serious, yes. And I looked at the previous speakers before me, 
you know, starting this bell-ringing debate, and the only people 
that I saw debating this thing are our side of the House. I saw 
the member from Moose Jaw get up and make one of the most 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why aren’t we debating debt restructure 
legislation, the Provincial Auditor’s report? Why aren’t we 
debating those things? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — That’s right. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Jobs for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There are very many, many issues, Mr. 
Speaker, that the members raise that we should be debating in 
this House. But I’ve heard even on the bell-ringing session very 
important connection made by the member from Moose Jaw 
and the previous other speakers, you know, trying to deal with 
the other issue that we were talking about on the auditor 
question, you know, that came up this afternoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the aspect of debate that’s very 
important in regards to the auditor, and that was raised again 
this afternoon. And, Mr. Speaker, for me I saw this as a 
situation where there’s a connection between, you know, the 
procedures of the House and the obligations of the people who 
function in our House to be able to have a situation where they 
are free to do these things. And I thought that was getting to be 
a little bit touchy in regards to, you know, an important function 
area as our auditor. You know, if I was in his shoes, I would 
feel, you know, I would feel very strongly that, you know, a 
strong minister, you know, would say something . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


