


















































May 31, 1989 Hansard


 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 31, 1989 
 

 
1521 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should like 
to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a number of guest artists from the Ukraine who are 
attending Mosiac’89, and appearing at the Poltava Ukrainian 
Pavilion. They are Alla Kudlai, Nina Rudehenko, Vitality 
Bilanozhko. They are stars of Ukrainian Television Radio from 
Kiev. Also with him is Victor Stelmalh, editor of news from the 
Ukraine, Kiev. They are accompanied by Anna Lapchuk and 
others from the Poltava Ukrainian Pavilion. They are seated in 
your gallery. I would ask all members to join with me to wish 
them a very hardy, Vitaemo! 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add a few words to 
my colleague from Regina Victoria. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, representing a constituency in 
rural Saskatchewan that is predominantly Ukrainian, it is my 
pleasure also, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, to 
welcome the dancers to our province. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to 
introduce some students, but before I do that, I’d like to join 
members who spoke before me in extending greetings to our 
guests from the Ukraine. I know that they’re here to perform at 
the Mosaic, and I, as well as my colleagues and others, look 
forward to enjoying their talent during the Mosaic three-day 
event that is taking place in Regina. This is a regular event that 
takes place; we have guests who come from the Ukraine to 
entertain at the Poltava pavilion. And so I wanted to join other 
members in welcoming them and wishing them an enjoyable 
time while they are in Canada, and in Saskatchewan in 
particular. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw 
attention to the House, in the east gallery, some 28 grade 5 
students from Judge Bryant School here in Regina, in the 
constituency of Regina North East. They are accompanied by 
their teacher, Mr. Wilson. 
 
I’m going to meet with them after question period for pictures 
and some refreshments and any questions they may ask — and I 
know that they are going to have many. I hope that they will 
have an enjoyable stay here and get something out of question 
period, as they witness one of the democratic processes that we 
have in our 

parliamentary system of government. I ask members to join me 
in greeting these students to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, two ladies sitting in your gallery, Leona Weixl, and 
her daughter Debbie. Leona had worked for me while I was in 
the implement business. She’s a member of the Cudworth town 
council. She’s also a board member of the Carlton Trail 
Regional College. And I would like to ask the members to 
welcome them in the manner to this House, and I hope they 
enjoy the visit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to introduce to you, and through you to the other members of 
the Assembly, 52 students from grades 5 and 6. They’re seated 
up on the left hand side of the Speaker’s gallery there, 
accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Verna Taylor and Mr. Jim 
Emmons. 
 
I’ll be meeting with the students for pictures and refreshments 
at 2:30 in room 255, and I’d ask all members of the legislature 
to welcome these students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you, and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, seated in the west gallery, I have Orlin (Bill) 
Hanson and his wife. They are from the great state of North 
Dakota. Mr. Hanson, in fact, sits in the North Dakota House of 
Representatives. 
 
Mr. Hanson and a large following in the state of North Dakota, 
as you are well aware, are great supporters of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project, and it’s my pleasure to have them 
with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Problems with GigaText 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to direct a question to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, the 
government agency which has a sizeable interest in the 
GigaText company. 
 
Madam Minister, yesterday the Deputy Premier, in discussing 
what has become the latest of this government’s scandal, told 
the House here that a considerable amount of research and 
feasibility studies had been done looking into the translation by 
GigaText of statutes, and that they had thoroughly investigated 
it. 
 
Reported in The (Montreal) Gazette, Madam Minister, it 
indicates that in 1987 the federal government had done a study, 
evaluation of Dr. Young’s project, and it described  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1522 

 

it in these terms: snake oil, it called it — said he made 
outlandish claims and that when an independent test was run on 
the machine, it coughed, sputtered, and died. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, whether you were privy to the 
federal government’s investigation into the feasibility, and 
whether you would be able to table today the feasibility study 
that you did into this sputtering, coughing, and dying machine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you for the question, member. We as a 
government, the Crown Management Board had outside 
evaluation done of the company and of the technology, and we 
are confident that the technology is capable of doing what it 
purports to do. 
 
With regard to the tabling of the documents, I will take notice 
of that question on behalf of the Deputy Premier who was 
involved through Crown Management Board on the acquisition 
of the portion of the company. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Madam Minister, can you confirm that $2.9 million 
out of the $4 million that your government put into this project, 
frittered away on this project, went to purchase 20 outdated, 
over-valued, Lambda computers, which works out to about 
$145,000 each; and can you confirm that the computers came 
from the firm called GigaMos Systems, which is owned by one 
Mr. Montpetit, your partner in GigaText? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will neither confirm nor 
deny that. I will take notice of that question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the same minister. Madam 
Minister, could you confirm that part of the $4 million that your 
government invested into this project went to paying 35,000 a 
month for Mr. Montpetit to rent a private jet from GigaMos air 
services, owned 100 per cent by Guy Montpetit? And can you 
confirm, Madam Minister, that the company also paid Mr. 
Montpetit a travel allowance of 18,000 per month? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as was indicated by the 
Deputy Premier very clearly yesterday that . . . and I’m aware 
of the article in The (Montreal) Gazette that the member is 
quoting from because some of us also have read it. But as was 
indicated by the Deputy Premier very clearly yesterday, that 
once we were appraised of a international court case against Mr. 
Montpetit, we referred the matter of our $4 million to the 
RCMP here. And as I understand from the Attorney General, 
that investigation is ongoing. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the same minister. Madam 
Minister, will you confirm that Mr. Montpetit’s salary over and 
above all of the sizeable perks was 60,000 a year, and that 
GigaText paid 75,000 to a business associate of Mr. Montpetit 
for services rendered before 

GigaText was even incorporated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again, because the initial 
involvement with GigaText was with Crown Management 
Board, of which I am not a member, I will on behalf of the 
Deputy Premier, who is a member of Crown Management 
Board, take notice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the same minister. Madam 
Minister, could you confirm that $5,000 was paid by GigaText 
to board member Terry Leier, despite the fact that Mr. Leier, as 
an 80,000-plus a year solicitor for Crown Management Board, 
should have been working with the firm to guard the 
government’s interests? Can you confirm whether a sum of 
$5,000 was paid to Mr. Terry Leier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, now we’re getting at the 
gist of the question, these innuendoes and allegations, the same 
that were made by the member of North Battleford yesterday. I 
will confirm, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Leier, as a board member of 
GigaText, was reimbursed for legitimate expenses incurred as a 
member of that board and nothing else. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Madam Minister, as a supplement, Mr. 
Speaker, would you be prepared to table the receipts in respect 
to the expenditures of Mr. Leier, in respect to the $5,000 he 
received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is not uncommon for 
board members of public corporations or private corporations to 
be reimbursed for legitimate expenses incurred while on 
business for that particular company. And I say here, Mr. 
Speaker, that Mr. Leier was reimbursed legitimately by 
GigaText for expenses incurred on behalf of the company. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement to the same minister. Madam 
Minister, you say the payments were legitimate that were paid 
to Mr. Leier. Will you be prepared to table those documents to 
substantiate your statement, and have those same documents 
been turned over to the RCMP investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe, I believe that 
those things are probably part of the . . . over your investigation 
of the RCMP, because the RCMP is investigating the company. 
The RCMP would have access to all files, all things pertaining 
to do with the company. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A question to the Minister of Justice, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to ask the Minister of Justice whether he can 
advise this House whether in respect to the documents of 
investigation that are under way in respect to the RCMP, 
whether the expenditures made to Terry Leier, those documents 
supporting the expenditures have 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1523 

 

been also submitted, and would you be prepared to table them if 
you’re aware of them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 
would not expect (a) that I would be privy to the files of the 
RCMP. The RCMP who are investigating the particular issue in 
question, and the government involved, or any persons involved 
with the government, certainly co-operated with any 
investigation by the RCMP. Now for you to ask me do I know 
what is in the RCMP files, no I do not, nor would I think 
anyone expect that I should. With regard to the question then, 
should I release anything in the RCMP files, I think, as the hon. 
member as a practising lawyer would know, that once the 
RCMP have a file, then it’s clearly up to the RCMP. If they 
wish to make something public, they will. If they don’t wish to 
make something public, they do not. And that’s the 
long-standing tradition of the RCMP. And certainly it’s not for 
me to ask the RCMP: what is in your file, and can I have what’s 
in your file to make it public? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, a new question to the Minister of 
Justice. As a member of the Executive Council, in the RCMP 
investigation, have you any knowledge as to a request by the 
RCMP in respect to any documentation of expenditures relating 
to Terry Leier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the hon. member as 
follows. When this particular matter came to the attention of the 
government and came to the attention, through the media, of 
this particular trial last fall down in Montreal, the Department 
of Justice — the Department of Justice of our government — 
referred the issue to the RCMP. It was we that referred that to 
the RCMP. 
 
We also made it clear that everyone was to co-operate with that 
investigation. Now what they have in their investigation we 
don’t know, nor do you think anyone suggests that I should 
know what is going on. 
 

Payment to Regina Law Firm 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final question to the Minister of Economic 
Development. Madam Minister, would you confirm that the 
company, GigaText, paid almost $13,000 in legal fees and 
expenses to the law firm of Balfour Moss Milliken Laschuk & 
Kyle, of which Larry Kyle is a partner — the same Larry Kyle 
who is chairman of the board of SEDCO and who acts as legal 
counsel to the Crown investments corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again I think the question 
would be best directed to the chairman of Crown investments 
board. 
 

Considerations to Dr. Paillet 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a question to the 
minister of SEDCO. Madam Minister, would you confirm that 
GigaText has purchased a condominium for 

one Jean-Pierre Paillet, who is, I believe, the company’s current 
operations manager, and purchased this condominium at a cost 
of $137,500. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Another question to the same minister. 
Madam Minister, I have a new question to you. Could you 
confirm that the company also acquired a Mercedes vehicle, 
model 300CE, for Dr. Paillet for, I believe, $8,573 a year? And 
can you tell us if these costs are included in the $50,000 a 
month which this government is currently forking over to keep 
GigaText operating? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that 
SEDCO, through an appointed board, has taken over the daily 
operations of this company because we believe that the 
technology will be a valuable tool, will be an important part of 
our economic diversification here. I believe there are presently 
26 people working in this company. We hope to have a 
workable model ready about mid to late June. And we have 
confidence that this technology is at the forefront of artificial 
intelligence, and it will be a boon to have it in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary to the minister. Madam 
Minister, I’m asking again about the $8,573 to rent the 
Mercedes for this gentleman. Can you tell us in this House 
today whether or not SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) has authorized the expenditure of 
this 8,000-and-some dollars to rent this car? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would assume that when 
this person came into the province, when the company was 
initially set up, that may have been part and parcel of his 
employment terms. I will endeavour to bring that information to 
the House. 
 

Finances of GigaText 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. 
Madam Minister, while you’re investigating that, could you as 
well confirm that on October 31, 1988, GigaText had a bank 
balance of zero, and that the full $4 million advanced by your 
government had been spent, and the people of Saskatchewan 
had not one sentence, not one syllable translated into French to 
show for it. 
 
Madam Minister, is it not also true that your government’s 
actions have placed this province on what I would refer to as 
the bleeding edge of technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, here we have an 
opposition crying from their seats about something they know 
nothing about. They know nothing about . . . they 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1524 

 

have no concept of what this technology is, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say that to translate our statutes from English to French 
requires around 5,000 keyed-in characters. I believe that the 
company is at the point of having over 3,800 characters keyed 
in. 
 
What I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that I would offer to the 
member opposite, and to the member from Quill Lakes, to 
arrange for a tour of this company so they can demonstrate the 
type of thing that they are striving to do, and I would say with a 
degree of confidence, Mr. Speaker, that they will be able to do. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. 
Madam Minister, we’re not asking for the tour of this particular 
corporation, we’re asking for some facts surrounding the 
dealings that your government has had with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Minister, you’ve taken notice of 
every question that we’ve asked in this legislature today, but I 
have one more for you. I want to know: yesterday the Deputy 
Premier confirmed that Mr. Montpetit had the sole signing 
authority for the company, that he was the only person in a 
position to check the disbursements which were going out 
almost exclusively to himself from this corporation. Madam 
Minister, given that fact, the people of Saskatchewan had $4 
million invested in this company and Mr. Montpetit had zero, 
why would you grant him such sweeping signing powers? 
 
Why would you give him these blank cheques from the people 
of Saskatchewan? And why didn’t you have some kind of a 
system in place to ensure that the taxpayers’ money was being 
spent properly? Why didn’t you do that, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 
taxpayers’ investment, Mr. Speaker, is secured through shares 
in Nohrlus. I would again make the offer to the two members — 
I could do it tomorrow afternoon probably — take them over so 
they can see what it is this company is striving to do. 
 
They would have the people of Saskatchewan believe that we 
bought one whole big block of technology and you plug it in 
and it works. It works, Mr. Speaker, but the things have to be 
programmed. Things have to be entered before it can work. And 
as I said, the 5,000 characters that are required, I think it’s about 
3,800 that are presently keyed in. 
 
So I would again make the offer. If they want to see what this 
company does, I’d be more than happy to arrange for a visit. 
 

Meeting in Montreal re GigaText 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the same minister. Madam 
Minister, we don’t want a tour of the plant; we can go and do 
that ourselves. What we want are answers in this legislature; 
rather than the tour tomorrow 

afternoon we suggest you bring back answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And if you are suggesting that these are our 
allegations, I suggest you read the transcripts from the 
examination for discovery of the court case that’s currently 
going on in the city of Montreal. 
 
Now the waste of the $4 million has been shameful enough. 
Now all I can say is that we’re lucky it wasn’t more. And you 
know very well, and I know very well, and I want you to 
confirm this, that some time early in the fall of 1988, September 
or October, the Deputy Premier met with Mr. Montpetit for a 
three-day meeting in his Montreal suburb office, with Mr. Leier 
in attendance. There was also a Toronto-based consultant, Dr. 
Fabian, a Montreal associate of Mr. Montpetit named Dr. Hare, 
and a U.S.-based computer scientist associated with Montpetit 
by the name of Dr. Voschenkov. 
 
Now can you confirm this meeting for us here this afternoon, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t doubt that a 
meeting between Mr. Montpetit and the Deputy Premier 
probably did take place. Whether or not it was late October or 
where it was I wouldn’t have that knowledge. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well since you’re fielding the questions, or 
the Premier might want to answer if you can’t answer any of 
them, new question: would you confirm that the purpose of this 
meeting was to negotiate a further . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I don’t believe that it’s a 
new question. I believe it’s seeking further information about 
the meeting in question, and I’d like you to phrase your 
question in those terms. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’ll phrase the question like this, Mr. Speaker. 
Madam Minister, could you confirm that the purpose of the 
meeting was to negotiate a further Government of 
Saskatchewan investment of an additional $125 million with 
Montpetit, on what Mr. Montpetit refers to in court documents 
as the GigaMos project, a semiconductor manufacturing 
venture, and that the Deputy Premier was on the verge of 
signing this deal until the lawsuit blew up in Mr. Montpetit’s 
face? Can you confirm that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The additional 125 million is news to 
me, Mr. Speaker. But I could assure the member opposite that 
no individual cabinet minister can commit a government to that 
amount of money without cabinet approval or treasury board 
approval, or approval somewhere. So I think he’s just on a 
fishing expedition. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. You may be able 
to smile about that now, but wait until some of the other 
questions are being asked before you laugh too hard on that 
topic, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, Mr. Montpetit has testified in Montreal 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1525 

 

that your government commissioned a feasibility study of the 
project, and that study was carried out by a Dr. Fabian of 
Toronto, who was at the meeting in Montreal. Can you tell us 
how much that study cost, and will you have that study tabled in 
this legislature so we can see the expert advice you were going 
on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, 
SEDCO did not get involved in this company till late 
November, early December of 1988. The proper place to ask 
that question is to the minister responsible for Crown 
Management Board. On his behalf I will take notice, and the 
minister will respond. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, documents tabled at the 
court-house in Montreal clearly show that on October 31 of 
1988 GigaText had not a red cent left in the bank. In less than 
six months it had run through the taxpayers’ 4 million and had 
failed to produce one translated document. Yet at the same 
time, the Deputy Premier was in a suburb in Montreal meeting 
with Mr. Montpetit, and according to Mr. Montpetit’s sworn 
testimony, on the verge of committing another 125 million of 
taxpayers’ moneys to Mr. Montpetit’s operations. 
 
Mr. Premier, did the Deputy Premier have your authorization 
and permission, and the authorization of cabinet, to commit a 
further 125 million to Mr. Montpetit’s operations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, two points in 
response to the hon. member. One, certainly the government 
was and is looking for the best technology we can find to 
translate from English into French because of the obligations of 
the Supreme Court and the Bill that we passed here and, I 
believe, certainly supported by the opposition. In fact I believe 
it’s fair to say that they would perhaps even like us to translate 
more, and virtually everything, and that was their response. So 
we are, Mr. Speaker, looking for the best technology and the 
most efficient technology to do that. 
 
As the hon. member has said, when you’re designing this 
technology and putting it together, we knew that it’ll take some 
time, I mean a matter of months, so that in fact you can program 
it and put it together in the computer so in fact you can have 
very rapid translation, and accurate — I mean that’s the intent 
— and, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that if at all possible, we can 
take advantage of translating other things, like other languages, 
because internationally we get the request for that kind of thing 
as well. So in fact it is an opportunity for diversification. 
 
So if the member is asking me, have we looked at technology to 
find the best translation equipment possible? Absolutely. Does 
it take some time to translate it? Does it take some time to 
program the computers? Absolutely. And have we had 
consultations with people that have been scientists to do this? 
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the protection of spousal rights in Homesteads. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister is moving first reading of a Bill; 
however, we’ll need leave from the Assembly to go back to 
them. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act respecting the protection of spousal 
rights in Homesteads 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 
opportunity to go back to introduction of Bills. I would like to 
move first reading of a Bill respecting the protection of spousal 
rights in Homesteads. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say from the outset that 
it does not give me very much pleasure to be addressing this 
government motion today simply because, Mr. Speaker, simply 
because, Mr. Speaker, this is not the most pressing and urgent 
problem facing the people of Saskatchewan. We should not be 
. . . we should not be addressing this issue today. 
 
If the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Finance, who is 
chirping from his seat again, would take into consideration the 
most pressing problems of the people of Saskatchewan today, 
he would be addressing problems facing agriculture, he would 
be addressing problems facing our deficit, he would be 
addressing problems that are facing our young people because 
they’re unemployed and have no jobs in this province. That’s 
what he would be doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan, I want to make it very clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan where the opposition stands on 
pressing issues. Yesterday . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder if you could ask the Minister of Finance to 
please quit hollering from his 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1526 

 

desk while I am speaking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear where the opposition 
stands on the pressing issues confronting this legislature. 
Yesterday our acting opposition House Leader, the member 
from Regina Centre, wrote a letter to the deputy House Leader 
on the other side, and I want to read parts of that letter so that 
the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what we feel are the 
pressing needs of this legislature other than the bell-ringing that 
the government members are bringing forth. And this is what 
we have said to the government opposite: 
 

I am writing in response to your letter of today (that means 
yesterday) addressed to Mr. Lingenfelter, the opposition 
House Leader, regarding the expediting of government 
business in the Assembly. 
 

We said further: 
 

I would reiterate the opposition’s willingness to facilitate 
the consideration of government business before the 
Assembly, including budgetary estimates and government 
Bills. 
 

As you know, the government may call any of those items on 
the order paper at any time of its choosing, and it has only been 
your refusal to call them that has delayed their consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
should know that it’s not the opposition that calls the agenda for 
the day in the legislature, it is the government. And we have 
asked the government time and time again to address those 
problems that are facing Saskatchewan. Problems in agriculture 
— we have farmers who didn’t have sufficient money to put in 
their crop. Did they address those problems? No they didn’t. 
We have young people by the thousands leaving this province 
because they can’t find employment. Did the government 
address those problems? No they did not. We have people, Mr. 
Speaker, who can’t get into our hospitals because of the long 
waiting list. Did the government address those problems? No it 
did not. 
 
But what does it prefer to do? Day in and day out, hour after 
hour, it presents to this legislature the motion of the ringing of 
bells. They think it is a very pressing and urgent problem for the 
people of Saskatchewan, that we must stop the ringing of bells. 
The people have very clearly indicated, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
not an urgent and pressing problem. 
 
So when we wrote to the government yesterday, we ended our 
letter by saying this: the agenda of the Legislative Assembly is 
determined by the government, which may call any item of 
government business at any time, on any day other than 
Tuesday, private members’ day. 
 
I believe that the people of Saskatchewan would be much better 
served if your government would proceed with substantive 
items of government business instead of concentrating solely on 
your unilateral proposal for an arbitrary change of the rules. Mr. 
Speaker, that is our 

position. 
 
We urge the government opposite to turn to government 
business, substantive government business to address very 
urgent and pressing problems of Saskatchewan. Let us put aside 
the motion that is before us on bell-ringing. Let us turn it to a 
legislative committee as we have always done in this province. 
Let us then turn to government business and let the committee 
come to a consensus and bring forward a proposal to the 
legislature which we can all then agree to. That is not an 
unreasonable request. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me say the Minister of Finance again is 
chirping from his desk. He says 1995. If that was their thinking, 
why did the Minister of Justice originally put out the olive 
branch? Why did he suggest that it be turned over to a 
legislative committee? Is it because the Minister of Justice and 
the Minister of Finance don’t know what they’re doing 
opposite? Don’t they ever talk to each other? 
 
But we can see now who was opposed to it. It’s probably the 
Minister of Finance. When he came back, he said to the guys, 
look, I’m not going to stand for this. You withdraw that olive 
branch. And that’s what happened. Is it the Minister of Finance, 
Mr. Speaker, opposite, who refuses to continue with and 
address substantial government business that we should be 
addressing today? I believe, yes, it is the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why? One must ask the question: why, day in and 
day out, is the government bringing before this House this 
motion of changing the ringing of bells? And one can only 
surmise that it must be related to some other motives that this 
government has. 
 
And I think one has to only turn to the papers, and I will do that 
a little bit later. But I think one must conclude that the 
government wants this ringing of bells stopped so that then they 
can address the SaskPower legislation. They will bring in the 
SaskPower legislation and try to ram that through this House. 
And I say to the members opposite, you’re going to be here a 
long, long time — a long, long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — You are not getting, and I want to tell you 
people today, you are not getting this change to the ringing of 
bells, not for the foreseeable future unless you turn it over to a 
committee of the legislature like we’ve always done in this 
legislature — you are not going to unilaterally propose changes 
to this legislature without our consensus and without consulting 
the legal opposition in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — That is unprecedented. I want to say to the 
Minister of Finance, you can take all those trips you want. If 
you go away for another two weeks or you go away for another 
month or you go away for another two months, and if your 
government insists on bringing this motion back before this 
House, that will be the first thing that will greet you when you 
walk into this House. We will not let this go through. 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1527 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — It’s going to be a long, long summer. I’ll say to 
the people of Saskatchewan, we will do whatever we can in this 
legislature to save SaskPower. We will save SaskPower 
whatever it takes, Mr. Speaker. The people opposite did not 
have a mandate. They did not have a mandate to privatize 
SaskPower. The Premier of this province gave his word — not 
once, but many times to the people of Saskatchewan that he 
would not privatize SaskPower, he would not privatize the 
utility. 
 
And what has he done? — he’s done exactly the opposite. He 
has lost his mandate. Not only that, but a year ago in this House 
the member from Regina Rosemont asked the Deputy Premier a 
very specific question: are you dividing SaskPower because you 
want to privatize SaskEnergy? He said, and I’m not using the 
exact words because I can’t remember them, but he made it 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, that his answer was no. No, it is not 
our intention to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He didn’t tell the truth. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I agree with you he did not tell the truth. 
He was not completely honest with the people of Saskatchewan. 
That was their intention. That’s why they divided SaskPower. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite, we 
know what your motives are. The people of Saskatchewan 
know what your motives are. They have spoken. They have 
spoken very clearly. They have spoken very clearly, and they’re 
speaking again at your meetings. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Talk about the meetings last night, 
Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well the meetings last night in Regina — I 
believe there were four in Regina. One they cancelled because I 
think there was either one or two people there, so they cancelled 
that one. And another one I’m told there was 17 people there. 
And if you watch the other two, Mr. Speaker, if you watch the 
other two, the people were very clear in their determination to 
do whatever they could to stop the government from privatizing 
SaskPower. 
 
The people made it very clear; the people made it very clear 
where they stand. The poll conducted by Angus Reid when we 
were ringing the bells clearly indicated that approximately 67 
per cent do not support the government in privatizing 
SaskPower. They do not support them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, what else, what else could an 
opposition do? We would not be carrying out our 
responsibilities if we did not use every means possible to stop 
the government and carry out the wishes of the people of 
Saskatchewan. That is our job — that is our job. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Oh, I see the member from Regina South again 
chirping from his desk. Mr. Speaker, I wish that for once he 
would get up and tell the people of Saskatchewan where he 
stands on their mandate, where he stands on opposing the 
wishes of the people of Saskatchewan. Where does the member 
stand? Where does he stand on these issues? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is so riddled . . . the 
members opposite are so riddled with scandals as we have seen 
yesterday and today and last week, and I know again next week, 
that they simply cannot address the urgent problems of the 
people of Saskatchewan. Not only that, not only that, but they 
are so blinded on their privatization of everything in 
Saskatchewan, everything that is good — we’ve seen it from 
health care, when they privatized the dental plan, privatized 
prescription drugs. 
 
We have now, Mr. Speaker, last night as I addressed the 
Assembly, a study being done by the Minister of Health as to 
how we can privatize other things in the Department of Health. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have so many urgent problems in this 
province. 
 
Today in my office I received a copy of SADAC 
(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) research 
report. Very, very serious problems of our young people. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, on page 4 of the report we have the worst 
record of all the provinces in Canada when it comes to abuses 
of alcohol and drugs and assaults of our young people. Are we 
addressing those problems? Is the Minister of Health coming 
forward with any solutions to those problems to help our young 
people? Not one — not one. 
 
But what does he want? He’s going to force this legislature to 
change the rules on ringing of bells so that he can then proceed 
with their ulterior motive of privatizing SaskEnergy. That’s 
what they want. 
 
Oh, sure, there’ll be some people who will profit by their 
privatization. Ah, we found out today that one Terry Leier does 
fairly well. Oh, there are a number of others in this province, 
friends of the people opposite, who will profit by that 
privatization. But the ordinary folk of Saskatchewan will be the 
ones that are going to suffer, and we’re not going to let it 
happen. We’re simply not going to let that happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, don’t take my word for the 
motives of the people opposite. Let us turn . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . oh, the member for Regina South, I knew he 
wouldn’t take my word for it. 
 
But let us go to the Star-Phoenix. Let us go to the Star-Phoenix, 
and on May 11 the Star-Phoenix has an editorial which says, 
"Motive questionable" — motive questionable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to read the whole editorial, although 
it’s damning of the government opposite, but I’ll read some of 
it. It says: 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1528 

 

The government claimed the NDP would have refused any 
change. 
 

And they’re referring of course to the bell-ringing, that the NDP 
would have refused any change. 
 

But (it says) both sides may well have come to a 
compromise, if change indeed is necessary. 
 
There does not appear to be any pressing need for a rule 
change. 
 

I want the member from Shellbrook to note that. There does not 
appear to be any pressing need for a rule change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — So why? So why, Mr. Speaker, are they putting 
it before the House, day in and day out, when we have such 
pressing problems that must be addressed by the government 
opposite? Have they lost their desire to govern? Have they lost 
their mandate? Have they lost their objectivity to govern in 
Saskatchewan? I say yes, they have. I say yes, they have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, the Angus Reid poll could have 
been no clearer than in what it reported. I think less than 30 per 
cent of the people now in Saskatchewan support the members 
opposite. I think if a poll were taken today, it would be even 
less than that. When we see all the scandals that have been 
brought forward in this House; when we see how they feather 
the nests of their friends, how they fill the pockets of their 
friends, and how they profit, yes, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying, we’ve had enough, we’ve simply had 
enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on with the editorial. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan is no worse off because the bells jangled for 
a record 17 days over the SaskEnergy issue. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Better off. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — My colleague says in fact they’re better off, and 
the Star-Phoenix editorial agrees with you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — What does the Star-Phoenix editorial say? The 
Star-Phoenix editorial said: 
 

In fact, the public is probably better informed. People were 
spurred to take up the argument — the discussion took 
place everywhere, around kitchen tables and in taxicabs. 
 
The stand-off also got political action — the government 
will delay legislative debate while a panel it appointed 
travels the province. 

But there’s one thing the Star-Phoenix did not fully appreciate, 
and that is that it’s simply a delay. If you listen to the ministers 
opposite, it’s just that. We’re going to wait until October, and 
then we’re going to ram it through the House anyway. So that’s 
why they want this motion. That’s why they want this motion, 
and you will not get it. You will not get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite have told me 
that, well, you guys abused the system; you let the bells ring too 
loud and too long. What does the Star-Phoenix people say about 
that? They say: 
 

The Opposition was able to accurately measure acceptance 
of the bell-ringing tactic, returning to the legislature when 
people felt the point had been made. 
 

The Star-Phoenix agrees with us that when the people were 
informed, when they were educated, when they were educated 
about the problem, the NDP, the opposition returned to the 
legislature. We returned. That is the democratic procedure. We 
did nothing illegal. What we did was we used our roles to 
inform the people and the people said, yes, you are doing the 
right thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me finish the editorial. 
 

In this case, a legislative rule allowed the public to become 
more directly involved in democracy. The government 
needs to make a much stronger case for changing this rule. 
 

Mr. Speaker, here was a rule, here was a rule that was not a 
detriment to democracy, but it furthered the process of 
democracy. It gave the people an opportunity to become 
involved and to tell the government, no, we don’t want what 
you are putting forth, and asking the government, in fact 
pleading with the government . . . I know they are receiving 
letters; I know they are receiving phone calls where people are 
asking them to withdraw the legislation, to not break their 
mandate and not to proceed with SaskEnergy. But are they 
listening? No, they’re not listening any more. 
 
That’s why I say they’ve lost their right to rule. You’ve lost 
your right to rule because you’re not listening to the people, and 
you are doing exactly the opposite of what you promised the 
people when you went to the people in the election. 
 
And the Minister of Finance, he agrees. He says the government 
did err, and I have here, "Lane admits government erred." And 
he says the government made a mistake for not consulting with 
the public before it moved on privatization of SaskEnergy, 
which is SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance agrees that they made a 
mistake. But will they now, will they now say, all right, we’ve 
learned our lesson, we’ve listened to the people. No, what 
they’re attempting to do is to change the rules in this House so 
they can ram that legislation through at their convenience. And 
I say that this is not going to happen. We will simply not permit 
that to 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1529 

 

happen. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We can’t. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — As my colleague says, we can’t, and you’re 
right. We have an obligation to protect the public out there. 
 
And as I said, polls shows that 67 per cent, 67 per cent of the 
people reject the sell-off — 67 per cent of the people. And I 
would venture to guess if you took that poll today, Mr. Speaker, 
that that would be well over 75 or 80 per cent. Well over 75 or 
80 per cent of the people would be with the opposition in 
protecting Saskatchewan from those people opposite who are 
trying to sell off everything to their few friends. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said, therefore, that the motive of the 
government opposite . . . some have said it was revenge. And at 
first when he brought it in, when the Minister of Justice brought 
it in, I thought it was petty revenge. He was going to show the 
opposition: oh, you did it to us, legally yes; you used the rules, 
but I didn’t like it, so I’m going to show you people who the 
boss is. I thought that that . . . well, he was revengeful. 
 
Well, towards the end of his speech he held out the olive 
branch, and I said to myself: no, all right, he is willing to 
compromise, willing to send it off to a committee, and let’s look 
at some changes. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to make 
some changes to this House. The rules ought to be changed 
from time to time. 
 
But I’d like to see a number of changes, not just bell-ringing. 
While we’re looking at bell-ringing, let’s look at some other 
things. Let’s look at the responsibility of the government in 
tabling public accounts on time so that the Public Accounts 
Committee can scrutinize accounts that are timely and complete 
and accurate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The public would support that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, the public would certainly support that. 
Let’s also have some other changes. I would support that the 
budget for the Provincial Auditor be set by the Legislative 
Assembly, by a committee, Board of Internal Economy, 
because then the Provincial Auditor would have sufficient staff 
and sufficient finances to do his job so that his report could be 
in on time. Let’s not blame it on to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A longer question period, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, there’s another thing. I would like to have 
a longer question period. And, Mr. Speaker, there are lots other 
things. I, as you well know — and I’ve talked to you privately 
about this — I think your position would be enhanced. Your 
position would be enhanced, and that of the Deputy Speaker 
would be enhanced if you were elected by all the members of 
the legislature. I think your position would be much more 
effective if you were an elected person of all the members of 
this legislature. So let’s have a look at that. 
 
Oh there are a number of other things, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would like to see changed, I think, to make this Assembly 

a more effective place in which we can work, to enhance not 
only the position of the members opposite but also for the 
position of the members on this side of the House. 
 
(1500) 
 
Executive branch doesn’t need any more power; the executive 
branch doesn’t need enhancement. But certainly since my 
coming back to this House in ’86, I have seen more and more 
power taken by the Executive Council, and less and less control 
and power by the members of this Assembly. I would like to 
have a look at that rule and see how we can enhance the role of 
all the members. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Justice held out that 
olive branch, that it should go to the committee, I supported that 
and I thought, well here’s an opportunity to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And your leader supported it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And my leader certainly supported it when he 
spoke. Well, so I couldn’t really oppose it could I? — that’s 
only in jest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, really I think we need to make some changes. But 
why, why is this government so set on ramming this one little 
thing through, the changing of the bells? And it can only be 
because they intend to bring back the SaskEnergy legislation 
and then ram it through this House against the wishes of the 
people. 
 
That will not happen, Mr. Speaker, that will not happen. And 
I’ll tell the members opposite, this Legislative Assembly cannot 
work unless we establish trust between this side of the House 
and that side of the House. You are not going to do that by 
ramming through this kind of a rule change. You are not going 
to get this through, and you’re going to be sitting here a long, 
long, long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice indicated 
also very clearly that he . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Good speech, Herman. Keep going. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, he gives 
me further fuel to continue. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Filibuster, eh? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — The member for Regina South said that I’m 
filibustering. I agree with him — I am! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I am, because, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan have asked us to do whatever we can to stop the 
privatization of SaskEnergy. And the members opposite simply 
want this motion through so they can ram through the 
SaskEnergy Bills. And we say no, no, no. 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1530 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — We agree with the people of Saskatchewan. We 
agree with the people of Saskatchewan that that would be a 
negative motion and a negative effect on the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we certainly feel that that is the wrong way 
to go. The opposition feels that; about 70 per cent of the people 
feel that, and I think we would not be carrying out, as I said 
before, our duties, our responsibilities, if we didn’t do whatever 
we could to stop that from happening. 
 
And I have given the members opposite the assurance that we 
will stop at nothing legally that we can in this House to prevent 
that from happening. And I will give you my word and the word 
of all the colleagues on this side of the House that that is exactly 
what is going to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer also to several other articles. The 
Minister of Justice did indicate that this was an unprecedented 
move, that nowhere in the history of Saskatchewan had this 
taken place in this legislature where a government unilaterally 
brought in a motion to change the rules of this House. It has 
always been the custom of this House that when there have 
been rule changes, that we sent it off to a committee. The 
committee came to a consensus, brought it before the 
legislature. It was then discussed in the legislature, and it was 
passed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is the way it has been, and that’s the 
way it should be. And the government has no right, simply 
doesn’t have a right to try and bring this through unilaterally or 
bring this about unilaterally. And as I indicated before, it’s 
going to get a rough ride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ron Petrie of the Leader-Post quotes the Minister 
of Justice in saying this — and the Minister of Justice was 
referring to the atmosphere in this House, the lack of trust in 
this House — and I just want to read what the Minister of 
Justice said. It said: 
 

But Andrew wisely steered clear. 
 
(He said) "In my 11 years in the chamber I have not 
witnessed an environment where the distrust, where the 
rowdiness, where the personal bitterness and the inability 
of people . . . to strike gentlemen’s agreements have been 
at such a low ebb," he told the legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just elaborate on that. I think the 
Minister of Justice is right in saying that. I could not believe 
when I came back in 1986 of the distrust and the bitterness that 
existed in this Chamber. 
 
But I want to say to the Minister of Justice, what you are doing 
with this legislation, with this motion, you are only furthering 
that distrust. When you bring before this House a motion to 
unilaterally change the rules of this House, which as I said is 
unprecedented — we’ve always done it through committee — 
and then you say at the end of your talk, however I will 
reconsider and I will refer it to the legislative committee, then 
withdraw that suggestion, what can you expect? How do you 
expect it to improve the environment if you go back on your 
word because 

your caucus would not support you? The caucus wouldn’t 
support the Minister of Justice in forwarding this to a legislative 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislature simply cannot function and will 
not function if that is the way the members opposite, the 
government, are going to conduct the business of this House. 
Because you can’t trust them. You can’t trust what they say. 
 
We had two of our members sit down with the Minister of 
Justice to work out some of the other rule changes, and there 
were a number that they thought, well, we could change. And 
the Minister of Justice brought others forward, like lengthening 
question period, and other things. And as I indicated earlier, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there are some other changes that we should 
make. 
 
And when it was brought before our caucus, we accepted it. We 
thought it was not a bad idea, and we were going to send our 
members back to the Minister of Justice to do further 
negotiations. Ten minutes later, a note came in saying that 
everything was off, and that very same afternoon we were back 
on this motion. The government had decided that it was going 
to unilaterally push through, unilaterally push through this 
motion in order, Mr. Speaker, so that it can carry out its secret 
mandate — well, no longer secret; some of it may be, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We know that they want to privatize SaskEnergy. They also 
want to privatize Sask potash. But we don’t know how many 
other Crown corporations they have on the list that they want to 
push through before the next provincial election. And the 
reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why I think they want to privatize 
as many as they can is that because deep down in their hearts 
they know that they won’t be back on that side. So they’re 
going to carry out as much of their privatization of their free 
enterprise ideology as they can before the next election, satisfy 
their friends, their big business, and push it through before that 
next election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, an opposition has an 
obligation to carry out the wishes of the people, and so does the 
government have. But if the government doesn’t listen to the 
people . . . and the people spoke very clearly three weeks ago in 
the Angus Reid poll, and they spoke very clearly through the 
90,000 petitions that we tabled in this House, and there’s still 
more to come. They spoke very clearly. 
 
They’re speaking very clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 
meetings that are being held by SaskEnergy, that they do not 
want the government to proceed on the trend that they are on. 
And they’re saying to the government, withdraw those motions; 
withdraw that legislation; please confront and address the 
problems that are facing the people of Saskatchewan: problems 
in agriculture, as I indicated before; problems of our young 
people in the abuse of drugs and alcohol; problems of our 
young people out-migrating to other provinces because there 
are no jobs in this province. Those are issues that we should be 
talking about today. 
 
Why aren’t we addressing the estimates of the budget? 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1531 

 

Those are things we should be talking about in those estimates. 
But what are we doing instead? The government brings forth its 
agenda day in and day out on changing bell-ringing. That’s not 
urgent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not urgent at all. 
 
And it shows what can happen to a government that won’t 
listen; a government that becomes arrogant; a government that 
puts on the blinkers and simply moves ahead blindly with an 
ideology that is simply unacceptable to the people of this 
province. They have no mandate to do what they’re doing. 
 
They made a promise to the people of Saskatchewan. They 
made that promise through their leader and through the deputy 
leader that they would not privatize the utilities. And when you 
go back on your word, when you do opposite to what you 
promised, you’ve lost your mandate to rule. You’ve lost your 
mandate to rule. And the people have spoken very clearly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, there are incidents in Canadian 
parliamentary governments where bell-ringing has taken place 
before. Certainly Saskatchewan was not the first one. We saw it 
happen in 1982 in the House of Commons when the Progressive 
Conservative Party did not like an omnibus Bill put forward by 
the Liberal government at that time. And by the way, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I agreed with the Tories on that. It was an 
omnibus Bill; parts of it were good, others were not very good 
at all. 
 
And the Tory members sitting in opposition disapproved of 
what the government was doing and let the bells ring for a 
number of days — a number of days. And if I remember 
correctly, I think the Liberal government finally backed down 
and broke the Bill into two or three different sections. 
 
And it worked. The Tories at that time in the House of 
Commons thought that they were right, and I think they were 
right. I don’t think that we were right; I know we were right 
because the people spoke. 
 
About 70 per cent of the people are agreeing with us, saying no 
to the government opposite, and said yes to the bell-ringing, and 
said yes to the petitions, and saying to the government, please 
get off of that bell-ringing motion, please get off of 
privatization and deal with the pressing and urgent problems 
facing the people of Saskatchewan. But will they listen? No 
they won’t. Day in and day out, coming back with the same 
motion over and over. And in the meantime the problems are 
not being addressed. The problems simply are not being 
addressed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what did the Speaker of the day say in the 
House of Commons on bell-ringing. The Hon. Jeanne Sauve, 
she expressed an opinion regarding the use of bell-ringing by 
the Conservatives in the House of Commons in 1982, and this is 
what she says, and I quote: 
 

I may point out that obstructive tactics are allowed by the 
rules. 

Exactly the same thing that we did here . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, it’s obstructive. It’s obstructive. Oh, the 
minister of rural affairs says, come on Herman. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, what would we do? What could we do? The minister 
of rural affairs wouldn’t listen to his people; he wouldn’t listen. 
I suppose he didn’t even speak up in cabinet; no, he didn’t even 
speak up in cabinet. He wasn’t listening to his people, because 
we got thousands of people signing petitions out of his 
constituency. But did he listen to those? No, he didn’t. No, they 
didn’t listen. 
 
She says . . . she goes on to say: 
 

However, their use must be regulated so as to safeguard 
the government’s right to have the House consider its 
order of business, and the equally important right of the 
opposition to criticize, oppose, and even obstruct a 
government measure. 
 

(1515) 
 
That was March 18, 1982 by Jeanne Sauve. She said it must 
give the opposition the right to criticize and obstruct 
government business if we feel within our obligation that they 
are not abiding by the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it was very clear, and is very clear, that the people do not 
want the privatization of SaskEnergy, they do not want the 
privatization of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 
which probably will be coming later on, but they’ve certainly 
spoken on SaskEnergy. 
 
Why don’t the members opposite listen? Why don’t they carry 
out the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan, withdraw this 
motion — withdraw this motion and get on to substantive 
government business? Get on to substantive government 
business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t 
think it is too late for the Minister of Justice to bring back in 
that olive branch, to say to this House: all right, I’ve tried, but I 
couldn’t get it through. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s nothing wrong with that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — No, he’s simply saying that: all right, I offered it 
and my caucus wouldn’t let me do it. They asked me to 
withdraw the olive branch, and we have now reconsidered and 
we will bring the olive branch back in. We will turn it over to a 
committee, and let’s get on to government business. Let’s then 
address the estimates. Let’s address some of the substantive 
problems that are facing the people of Saskatchewan and we’ll 
fully co-operate with the members opposite; we’ll fully 
co-operate in that committee, but not just on bell-ringing. 
 
As I indicated before, this House needs some updating of its 
rules. It can’t function the way they are right now. And as we 
have seen, it doesn’t function. It doesn’t function. And I don’t 
think it is only personalities. I think some of the rules simply 
are outdated. We need to update them and we need to get on 
with the business of running this 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1532 

 

government and running the legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that can be done. But I want to say to 
the members opposite that if this motion is not withdrawn and is 
not submitted to a committee, as has been done in the past, we 
will be debating this motion next month and the month after and 
the month after that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, there 
goes the member from Regina South chirping from his desk 
again. He’s always chirping from his seat. That’s where he 
makes his best speeches because, you know, he’s not on record 
then, because if he put on record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what he 
says from his seat, the people from Regina South would throw 
him out so fast that he wouldn’t even have a place to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m simply saying to the members opposite, I do 
think that we need to have another look at this, and the best way 
to address this problem, in my opinion, is to refer this to a 
committee. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In your humble opinion. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — No, in my opinion . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In your humble opinion. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — There goes the member from Regina South 
again, always interrupting, Mr. Speaker, always interrupting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but see, that’s the problem with the members 
opposite. The member from Regina South takes this so lightly, 
he makes fun of everything that takes place in this legislature. 
He doesn’t think that it’s important that we address the 
problems of the farmers in Saskatchewan; he doesn’t think that 
it’s important that we address the problems of the unemployed, 
the people who are leaving this province and have no place to 
go. 
 
Oh no, he wants to talk about bell-ringing, a very urgent and 
pressing problem. But to him, agriculture, the unemployed, the 
out-migration, hospital waiting lists, people can’t get an 
education in this province, have to go somewhere . . . those 
aren’t urgent problems. But bell-ringing, oh, that’s really urgent 
for the member from Regina South, that’s really pressing. And 
so he supports that. 
 
And I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan he is as arrogant on 
this issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as he was with the ward system 
when he brought in legislation unilaterally opposing the urban 
municipalities of Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
arrogance that we have, not only on those issues but on this 
issue also, on the bell-ringing, when they won’t listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan. When the people of Saskatchewan 
have spoken, they have indicated to you that they do not 
support you on the privatization of SaskEnergy. They’re asking 
you to address the other problems. 
 
I am simply saying to you, bring back that olive branch; let’s 
submit this to a committee; let them address it; let them address 
other rules of this legislature, and let us then get on with the 
business of running this province. Let us get on with the 
business of doing the estimates. Let us get 

on with the business of addressing the problems of agriculture 
and of education and of unemployment, so that, Mr. Speaker, 
we can do and carry out the wishes of the people of this 
province. If that is not done, if that is not done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, then I think progress will not take place in this 
legislature. 
 
We, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the opposition have also a 
mandate, and that is to protect and carry out the wishes of the 
people of Saskatchewan who have spoken. Approximately 70 
per cent of the people have said, we agree with you in the 
opposition. We will carry out those wishes and we will do our 
utmost to stop the government unilaterally changing this rule 
and unilaterally passing privatization legislation against the 
wishes of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those words, I will very clearly indicate that I 
will not support the motion before us on bell-ringing. Thank 
you very kindly. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There is one sentiment that I concur with from the member 
from Saskatoon South, and that is that it does not give me a 
great deal of joy this time to participate in this particular debate. 
I think it is a sad commentary on the state of affairs that 
Saskatchewan has deteriorated to; however, I think that the 
member from Saskatoon South, having just spoken, the people 
of Saskatchewan probably have witnessed one of the best 
reasons why a motion such as the Minister of Justice has come 
forward with to limit the time of ringing of the bells, why that 
motion should be put forward. 
 
I think we have witnessed a sad situation of a lot of empty 
rhetoric coming from the member from Saskatoon South. 
There’s a lot of deflection of the purpose by irrelevancy and 
clouding the issues. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel very convinced 
that what we are witnessing here is a blatant affront upon the 
democratic process. 
 
It’s rather ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am an individual 
who has spent a fair number of years in the educational system. 
I had the opportunity of starting school at the age of five and 
going through university for five or so years and then spending 
22 years also in the teaching field. And what I did on a constant 
basis during those periods of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 
answer bells, bells, bells, bells. 
 
One of the reasons why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I chose to curtail 
my teaching career, at least for the moment, was to escape from 
bells. And I came into the Saskatchewan legislature. It seems 
very ironic to me that one of the things that I am facing most at 
this particular time is bell-ringing. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a sad commentary on our 
affairs here, because this legislature was unceremoniously held 
hostage for 17 days — a literal hijacking of the Saskatchewan 
legislature. And my constituents back home in Rosthern are 
telling me that they do not take kindly to that kind of thing. 
They are telling us that this must not be allowed to be repeated, 
that this must not be allowed to continue on. 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1533 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I just heard from the member 
from Saskatoon South could be construed as a back-to-back, a 
series of threats. You’re not going to get away with it, he says. 
We are going to continue to hold this legislature as ransom. 
We’re going to continue on our process even though we are not 
walking out. We are quite willing to filibuster and to do away 
with a legitimate purpose for which this legislature has been 
commissioned. And with people like that, with the number of 
radicals that that member from Riversdale has to contend with 
in his caucus, it is no wonder that he has lost control of that 
caucus. It is no wonder that we are forced to deal with the 
legislative hijacking. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not foresee things changing in 
the foreseeable future unless we can gain control of the 
legislative process. And I refer you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
Wednesday, May 31 edition of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 
And the headline in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix says, 
"‘Romanow’s radicals’ hold up legislature." "‘Romanow’s 
radicals’ hold up legislature." 
 
This is not members from this side of the House. This is an 
article and a headline carried by the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, 
which I think is probably not being recognized as being a 
favourite son or supporter of this particular government. 
 
But what are some of the comments made? Well, this particular 
article states, and I quote: 
 

NDP members are reluctant to give up their right to ring 
the bells and have vowed to use every legislative tactic in 
the book to block the motion. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s another paragraph, and I’m 
sure members opposite, if they are interested in the rest of this 
article, will feel free to stand up and read the rest of the article, 
and I invite them to do that. But there’s one other further article 
. . . part of the article: 
 

"Clearly, in my opinion, Romanow’s radicals are in 
control and I’m having a difficult time. Frankly, I don’t 
believe they are interested in co-operation," Hodgins said 
outside the house. 
 

Our deputy House Leader recognizes the problem for what it is. 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re looking forward in this 
legislature is a totally inoperative legislature which should be 
representing the views of the people. We know, for example, 
that the member from Regina Elphinstone, in conjunction with 
the NDP surrogate member, Barb Byers, have claimed that they 
are going to render the province of Saskatchewan ungovernable. 
 
And that’s a scary thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have 
an opposition that has publicly stated that this is what their 
agenda is. And we, the members on this side of the House, are 
saying that that will not be the case. And that is why I have 
gotten to my feet to make a point to the people of Saskatchewan 
that we will not be held hostage; that they will not be held 
hostage; that their voice will be heard where it is legitimately 
supposed to be, and that is right in these halls. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Now Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we on this side 
of the House asking members opposite to do something that is 
unreasonable? Are we doing and are we asking them to 
co-operate on a line of approach to make this legislative more 
operable? Are we doing anything unreasonable? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I suggest to you, and I suggest to the people of 
Saskatchewan, no we are not. No we are not. 
 
There are two main jurisdictions within this Dominion of 
Canada that allow bells to be rung continually for an 
unpredetermined length of time. One is, of course, the province 
of Saskatchewan. We know what problems we are 
experiencing. The other jurisdiction is Ontario. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what is happening in Ontario right now, the 
bells are also ringing. 
 
I might add that there is another jurisdiction, I do believe the 
Northwest Territories, are somewhat similar. And of course that 
august assembly called the Senate also does not have a 
restriction on the length of bell-ringing there, but that is to be 
understood. I understand many of those gentlemen might have a 
difficult time getting to the place of voting with any great 
speed, so we will allow them probably to continue along that 
line. 
 
(1530) 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my point was, are we asking anything 
unreasonable of the opposition? I don’t believe we are. Because 
if you take a look at the different jurisdictions, there is Nova 
Scotia and Manitoba that have a time limit on their bell-ringing 
of 60 minutes — 60 minutes. And 60 minutes is what we are 
asking for, and it does not seem to be unreasonable. 
 
What about the House of Commons? What about the Mother of 
Parliaments in Canada? The House of Commons, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, has a 30-minute time-ringing limitation. New 
Brunswick, Newfoundland, Quebec — how much do they 
have? They have 10 minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 10 
minutes. Alberta has eight minutes. British Columbia, Prince 
Edward Island have a time limit for bell-ringing of five minutes. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could use other examples of some 
of the Commonwealth countries, democratically elected 
governments, just as we are here. And I could mention 
Australia. I could also refer hon. members to New Zealand. 
How much time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do they have in Australia 
and New Zealand? Two minutes — two minutes. And so I’d 
suggest to members opposite, it is not unreasonable for the 
government to ask for a one-hour time limit to the bell-ringing. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having made that point, I want to 
just refute some of the comments made by the member from 
Saskatoon South. He made a great issue of quoting from some 
magazines and from editorials and so on. Well he failed to, I 
suppose, mention the Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 
 
What does the Moose Jaw Times-Herald think of the 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1534 

 

strategy employed by the NDP members opposite? And I’m 
sure that the members opposite are going to get a kick out of the 
first paragraph that I’m going to quote, which states: 
 

Government members have the difficult task of ruling this 
province (and I think we would all concur with that). If we 
don’t like what they’re doing, we can boot them out of 
office come election time. 
 

That’s the ultimate recourse that the people of this province 
have. And that by legislation is curtailed to a maximum of five 
years. Within that five-year period of time the government has a 
mandated right to govern this province, not the opposition. It is 
not up to the opposition to pick up their ball and go home every 
time something happens that they may not agree with. 
 
But let me get back to the article, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

At the same time (the editorial continues), we expect our 
opposition members (what is their role — what is their 
role? — we expect the opposition members) to serve our 
interests by opposing legislation introduced by the 
government. 
 

You have that right. It’s not only a right; it’s a responsibility. 
The people of this province are expecting you to do your job by 
keeping us on the proper track. That’s your responsibility — not 
to walk out, not to hold this legislature hostage for 17 days so 
that none of the work of this province can be continued. 
 
The article continues: 
 

However, when it comes to an opposition party walking 
out of the legislature and refusing to return until it gets its 
way, the voters are not being fairly represented. 
 

The article continues from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald: 
 

That’s exactly what has been happening in Saskatchewan 
since last Friday when the New Democrats walked out of 
the legislature in protest of the government’s privatization 
plans. 
 

It continues: 
 

. . . NDPers were not elected with a mandate to walk out 
of the legislature just because they feel justified in taking 
such action. 
 
It’s fine to fight the government’s plans tooth and nail, but 
do it in the work place — the legislative assembly — and 
not (out) on our main streets. 
 

That’s what the Moose Jaw Times-Herald has to say, and I want 
government members to take note of that. I want them to take 
note of that before they come in here in a threatening gesture, as 
the member from Saskatoon South did. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s one more article that I would just 
like to draw your attention to, and this comes from the 

May 1, 1989 Yorkton Enterprise, from the Yorkton Enterprise, 
an editorial. And this editorial is entitled "The wrong 
approach:" 
 

When the provincial New Democrats walked out of the 
Saskatchewan legislature to protest the Progressive 
Conservative Party’s decision to sell off a crown 
corporation, the NDP stepped on the sordid side of 
politics. 
 
But, by walking out of the Legislature, the NDP has so 
distanced themselves from their mandate and so 
ostracized the people of Saskatchewan from their right to 
be governed by the party of their choice, that we must 
wholly condemn their actions. 
 

This is the Yorkton Enterprise. And the article continues, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

The NDP, instead of being the intrepid protectors of the 
left, have become more the spoiled little brat who picks 
up his ball and goes home. 
 

Those are not my words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are the 
words of the public. These are the words of an editor in a rural 
constituency, in a rural-urban region, if I may use that 
phraseology. But he continues on: 
 

The NDP has foregone the system. Instead of wrestling 
power from the Tories through legitimate means, they 
have played a hand in a game of political cards 
Saskatchewan voters should look at with distaste and 
contempt. 
 

Those are not my words, Mr. Speaker, those are the words of 
the editor from The Yorkton Enterprise. 
 
And I want to conclude with the two paragraphs that follow: 
 

It is not a hand with which the people of Saskatchewan can 
win. It is a hand where the dealer, in this case the provincial 
NDP, has dealt from the very bottom of the deck. 
 
The depths from which those cards have been dealt has lent 
a stench and a putridity on a hallowed system which should 
and probably will, hang over the NDP and seriously detract 
from any claims they may lay to being a legitimate political 
power. 
 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce some 
guests who are in your gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery there’s some 49 students, many of them who 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1535 

 

are from E.D. Feehan School in Saskatoon, and I’d like to 
introduce them on behalf of the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount. They are accompanied by Jeannette Darroch, C. 
Willick, M.P. Paquet, and M. Bonneville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also with them are 25 students from Ste. Foy, Que pébec, who 
are here with these students as exchange students, I understand, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Pour nos amis Québecois, l’opposition officielle et le Nouveau 
Parti Démocratique voudrait faire bon accueil aux étudiants de 
Ste. Foy, Québec. Nous souhaitons les trés bons souvenirs de 
votre séjour en Saskatchewan lorsque vous rentrez chez vous. 
Nous souhaitons que votre visite à la législature de la 
Saskatchewan sera mémorable. J’ai un rendez-vous avec les 
étudiants, M. le président, pour faire une photographie en 
quelques minutes. Merci; bienvenue; welcome. 
 
(Translation: To our young Quebec friends, the official 
opposition and the New Democratic Party would like to extend 
greetings to the students from Ste. Foy, Quebec. We wish you 
happy memories of your stay in Saskatchewan when you go 
home. We hope that your visit to the Saskatchewan legislature 
will be a memorable one. I have a meeting with the students, 
Mr. Speaker, for photographs in a few minutes. Thank you; 
welcome; welcome.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming the students from E.D. 
Feehan High School in Saskatoon, and also their visitors from 
Quebec. 
 
Many of these students attending E.D. Feehan High School live 
in the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair, and I certainly wish 
them a warm welcome and would ask all of my colleagues to 
join with me this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much again, Mr. Speaker, 
and I too would like to welcome the students here. We are 
engaged right now in the middle, or somewhere along the line, 
of the debate on the ringing of the bells, and it is the 
government side that is having an opportunity now to put forth 
some of their points in this debate, and I’m sure it will be 
followed by some of the members from the opposite side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to carry on much further. I had 
some of what I thought were important, salient points to bring 
forth in this debate. I have made most of them, and I do believe 
that what we are witnessing here by the Assembly being held 
hostage is certainly an abrogation of the fundamental 
democratic principle upon which this 

country, this province is based. And I do not see where it is in 
the best interest of the people of this province to have this 
Assembly silenced as it was for 17 days. 
 
Silence in a democracy is a death knell, I would suggest to you, 
in such a system. I would further suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Neudorfs in Germany know that the precursor to the 
sound of jackboots is silence in an Assembly such as ours. And 
that’s why that this motion is perhaps a grain of sand, or 
perhaps a chunk of mortar in a barricade against this flood of 
intolerance and rule-breaking and anarchical tyranny that we are 
witnessing here. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, very firmly, that the Legislative 
Assembly is the corner-stone for free speech; it is the 
democratic foundation upon which we are built; it is the 
embodiment of the principle of responsible government. And 
that is what I stand for, and that’s what the members on this 
side stand for. And it is a hope that that is what the members 
opposite will also see their way to stand for. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that those who vote against this 
motion are voting for the closure and the silence of this 
Assembly. At a whim, at a pure whim, they are saying that they 
want to usurp the basic principles of democratic process for 
short-term ideological gains. And that, Mr. Speaker, must not, 
cannot, and will not be allowed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the motion, 
as indeed all members of good conscience from both sides of 
the House in fact will do — indeed, must do. And I thank you 
for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to get involved in this debate because it seems that the members 
opposite, as they’ve been getting up and speaking for the last 
two or three days since they’ve come back to work, often seem 
to pick on me for whatever reason. 
 
And I’m not interested in filibustering this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
but rather just speak for a few moments on some ordinary 
common sense. I hear them repeating — and there they go from 
their chair again — but I hear them repeating time after time, 
perhaps the best reason that I and my members, my constituents 
from Regina South have, and that is the fact they fail to realize 
one basic principle, Mr. Speaker, and that is the fact that they 
are indeed opposition. They are not the government of the day. 
They were elected to form Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, and 
she expects them to perform in that way. And I don’t believe 
that they do. 
 
We are debating now, Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing situation 
that exists in two provinces only. And here we now spend more 
time going through this debate, as the NDP, by the member 
from Saskatoon South’s own admission, they will be 
filibustering and, you know, spending more time in here talking 
about something that only makes common sense. 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1536 

 

(1545) 
 
And you know, the NDP they keep harping about an election. 
Well it’s not up to them to call that election, Mr. Speaker. And 
when the time does come for the Premier to call one, we will 
welcome it with open arms. And the people will judge us 
accordingly at that time. The people will judge us, not the 
opposition members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, they mentioned that the government does call the 
agenda, and indeed the government does call the agenda. But 
obviously the NDP doesn’t want anything to do with the agenda 
that the government calls. And I think that it’s about time that 
the opposition understood that yes, indeed, the government does 
call the agenda. 
 
How can we debate properly in this place if at the end of the 
day the NDP choose to go on strike by ringing the bells. I mean, 
there is no way of doing it. The old former opposition by the 
former leader, Allan Blakeney, and when he was here with 
seven members, effectively, Mr. Speaker, in 1982, if he would 
have wanted to take his ball and go home, he could have rang 
the bells for four or five years. 
 
Now are the NDP opposition, members opposite, trying to tell 
me and my constituents of Regina South, and indeed all of the 
people of Regina, that that’s how this place is supposed to 
work? They don’t expect that. They don’t expect that from the 
eight elected members of the NDP in this city. They expect the 
NDP members to be able to get up and debate, and debate 
properly and not use the nonsense of the bell-ringing — the 
bell-ringing nonsense we saw before, Mr. Speaker, a year go 
when I carried legislation in this very Assembly. 
 
And what did they do? They had phone calls coming into their 
lounge. Do you recall that perhaps, Mr. Speaker? And the bells 
were ringing. Do you remember that joke? The bells were 
ringing, people phoning in. Boloney, they were phoning in. 
They’re phoning in now. They’re phoning in to me and they’re 
saying, tell the NDP to get back to work and quit the 
bell-ringing. That’s what they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The Star-Phoenix had it right: 
"Romanow’s radicals hold up House." Now that’s what the 
Star-Phoenix said, and they’re famous for quoting from the 
Star-Phoenix, so there’s a dandy. 
 
But I’m really surprised, Mr. Speaker, at the new leader. I really 
did truly expect more from the new Leader of the Opposition. 
But it does tell me that that headline is right. It does tell me that 
what the new leader admitted publicly, that he is having 
disunity in his caucus, is true, and the radicals indeed have 
control of that caucus. 
 
Now they start talking about other rules, and yes, it’s true that 
they too must be reworked, Mr. Speaker. You know, perhaps 
those other rules could indeed go to a legislative committee. 
There’s the matter of television where the members opposite, 
the NDP, freely admit that they debate to the TV screen. That’s 
who they’re talking to. 

They’re not talking to the government; they’re talking to the TV 
screen. They figure that they’re some great star. Well I’ve got 
news for them. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Order. Just calm 
down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that the 
NDP really get excited when I talk. I don’t know why, but . . . 
 
You know, even the media disappear from here now, Mr. 
Speaker. Why? Because they can go and do their work in the 
comfort of their lounge and do whatever, and have one eye on 
the TV screen in here and have another TV set and watch a 
baseball game or something like that. And that’s how they 
cover the news that comes from this place. 
 
There’s a lot of outdated things in here, Mr. Speaker, that the 
rules should be looked at. But the matter of the bells certainly is 
the most important because it only exists in two provinces. The 
other provinces changed for a reason, and the reason makes a 
lot of sense — so that you can get on doing business. 
 
The bells, Mr. Speaker, are designed to call the members in, not 
to take the members out. And everybody out there understands 
that. My constituents, the people of Regina, have been telling 
me all along, why do you let the NDP ring the bells? Why do 
you let the NDP ring the bells? 
 
And certainly, before we can proceed with any other work in 
this Assembly, the issue of the bells must and will be dealt with. 
And as firm as they may be, as firm as they may be, and as 
much as they want to debate this in this Assembly, that’s fair 
game. But they know and we know that one day the bells will 
ring on the very issue of the bell-ringing. 
 
Will they seize that opportunity to again march out of the 
Assembly and go on strike? Will Barb Byers and the House 
Leader of the Opposition, who publicly said that they were out 
to stop government, to stop this Assembly, will those radicals 
prevail, Mr. Speaker? That will be an interesting situation when 
the bells ring to call the members in to vote on the bell-ringing 
issue. And we’ll see where they sit there — the Barb Byers and 
the member from Regina Elphinstone. Obviously our 
government can’t proceed with business until the threat of that 
kind of nonsense is gone with. 
 
I watch visitors come into this Assembly day after day, and 
right now I see some more coming into the galleries, Mr. 
Speaker. Can you imagine what they thought about this 
democratic government, this great democratic country of ours, 
when visitors, perhaps from out of country, would come in, 
look at the Assembly, hear bells ringing, see us here while the 
NDP opposition is out, not even within the building, selling 
their propaganda? 
 
And then they wonder how a democracy works and how the 
great democracy in Canada works. Because the first question is, 
don’t the bells call the members in? That’s the underlying 
factor, Mr. Speaker, that we have to remember on all this. And 
soon the bells will be ringing on this issue. 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1537 

 

The people, Mr. Speaker, the people, if they do not like our 
management, if they do not like our philosophy, if they do not 
indeed like our legislation, they will deal with us when the time 
comes. And that’s the way it should be. And until when that 
time comes, the NDP opposition over there, Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition, entitled to debate, yes; entitled to go on 
strike, no. Definitely not. They are not permitted to bring union 
hall tactics into this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I believe that it’s about time that the new 
Leader of the NDP, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 
discovered that he is the Leader of the Opposition. He indeed is 
not the Premier of this province; he probably will never get 
there. In the meantime, run the opposition. Don’t let that radical 
from Regina Elphinstone run it, as he said publicly he was 
going to do. Obviously he’s still trying to be the leader of the 
NDP. He hasn’t given up his fight yet, and he’s armed with all 
these other little radicals, trying to take over that leadership. 
 
Perhaps maybe one day the new provincial leader will move on 
to the federal scene. They are leaderless there, and they have no 
hope of getting any kind of a leader there as well. Surely 
somebody with some gumption to keep that together would be 
the leader there. 
 
But in any event, the people know that the bells are the only 
responsible way to call in the members. They know that it’s 
only in two provinces, Mr. Speaker, that this doesn’t work. And 
they’re asking me to implore that the NDP come to their senses 
and do what indeed the people expect them to do, and that is to 
be an effective opposition. They have no problem with them 
being an effective opposition. 
 
And I’m speaking to all the people on behalf of all my 
constituents, Mr. Speaker; not partisan — I’m not speaking 
about Tories or Liberals or NDP — but all the people out there. 
They just say, get on and govern. You are elected as the 
government. Whether I like your government or not has got 
nothing to do with it, but you were elected to govern. Don’t let 
them pull off that nonsense. Please get them back to work. 
 
So let’s vote on this motion, Mr. Speaker. Let’s get this thing 
into place. Let’s get on with what this Assembly was designed 
to do. Let’s get on with debates; let’s get on with our business; 
let’s indeed call a vote on this. 
 
I said that I wasn’t going to speak long, Mr. Speaker, and at this 
point in time I just want everybody obviously to understand that 
I support the motion. And I know that my member from 
Shaunavon has more words to say on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to begin my address today by reading for 
the Assembly and for the people who are watching us in the 
Assembly today, the motion that we’re dealing with. And it’s 
on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew, the Minister 
of Justice: 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended by adding the following after rule 33(1): 
 

(2) When the Speaker or the chairman of Committee of 
the Whole, or Committee of Finance, has put the question 
on a motion and a recorded division is requested under rule 
33(1), the bells to call in the members shall be sounded for 
not more than one hour, provided that while the members 
are being called in, either the government or official 
opposition member serving as House Leader, Acting 
House Leader, chief whip, or deputy whip may approach 
the Speaker or chairman to request that the division be 
deferred, in which case the Speaker or chairman shall 
announce that the said division has been deferred until a 
specified time, but in any case not later than before the 
orders of the day or the second sitting day thereafter. 

 
Then it goes on to say: 
 

(3) When a recorded division is deferred pursuant to rule 
33(2), the Assembly shall continue with the business 
before it. 

 
(4) When pursuant to rule 33(2) the Speaker has directed 
that the division be deferred: (etc., on number five and so 
forth.) 

 
Mr. Speaker, I read that motion for the edification of the 
members here and for those who are watching here for a very 
simple reason. And that is, is that that motion, the changing of 
the rules of House of this Assembly, it is in our humble opinion 
not quite the most pressing business facing the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We think that there are many other things out there which 
deserve the attention of this Legislative Assembly. We think for 
example, Bill No. 41, An Act to amend The Agricultural Credit 
Corporation (of Saskatchewan Act) is more important than 
dealing with the rules. 
 
But we in the opposition, Mr. Speaker, don’t decide what the 
government business of the day is to be. Mr. Speaker, the 
government decides that, not the opposition. And so those who 
are here trying to somehow imply that the opposition is holding 
up the work of the House are filled with boloney — quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, are full of it — up to here. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, we in the opposition do not decide what the business 
of the House is. 
 
But why are we dealing with this resolution at this time, Mr. 
Speaker? I think it is very, very clear to each and every person 
in this province who is watching the proceedings of the House, 
this proceedings of this Legislative Assembly. The reason we 
are dealing with rules changes, despite the pressing needs out 
there in Saskatchewan, is so that the government can ram 
through its attempt to sell off SaskPower. That is what this 
debate is about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want to be able to muzzle the opposition, to cut off a 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1538 

 

tactic that the opposition has by precedent and by history, used 
in this province, the precedent of . . . the tactic of ringing the 
bells to draw to public attention an issue which we in the 
opposition see as an important issue. 
 
In revenge, Mr. Speaker, for the opposition bringing the attempt 
of the government to sell off the power corporation of 
Saskatchewan, in an attempt to bring revenge on the opposition, 
the government is ignoring all the other business of 
Saskatchewan — not dealing with the questions of 
unemployment, not dealing with the questions of the 
agricultural crisis, of debt restructuring, of all those things 
which it should be doing. 
 
Instead, what we’ve seen is day after day after day, the 
government bringing forward its rules and regulations Bills in 
order to ram through what the majority of people in this 
province — the majority, Mr. Speaker; the overwhelming 
majority — of people in this province, something that they are 
opposed to, and that is the government’s attempt to sell off 
SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why, that is why that the opposition rung 
the bells. And that is why that the opposition is proud of the job 
they did in ringing the bells, Mr. Speaker, proud because it 
helped to stimulate one of the most democratic exercises that 
this province has seen in a long, long time. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, what this debate is about at one level, it is about the 
government’s attempt to ram through the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 
(1600) 
 
But at another level, at another level which is much more 
fundamental in terms of the history of parliamentary democracy 
in this province, but also throughout the British Commonwealth 
— on another level, it deals with what is the role of the 
opposition. Here, Mr. Speaker, we have one of those rare 
opportunities in history where theory meets practice. What we 
are asking and what we are saying, Mr. Speaker, we have asked 
ourselves the question, should we go out and ring the bells to 
stop the privatization of SaskPower? 
 
We answered that by saying, yes, Mr. Speaker, because to ring 
the bells and to mobilize the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan against the sell-off of SaskPower is the duty of a 
responsible opposition. It is the duty of a responsible opposition 
to bring to a halt things which the populace in their 
overwhelming majority have opposed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the members of the government side 
are trying to hide, what the members of the government side are 
refusing to deal with is precisely that question. They can make 
speeches all they want, quoting newspaper articles saying, well 
we don’t think that the New Democratic Party should have done 
it. 
 
And that’s the right of editorial writers, to answer to their 
owners. And their owners say, we don’t think it’s good that this 
issue be brought to the public attention. Editorial writers have 
that right to make that comment. 
 
But we think, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, that it is 
the responsible role of an opposition, when confronted by an 
outright abuse of power and an outright 

abuse of a mandate given to a government over which there is 
some question as to its legitimacy, its legitimacy in regards to 
carrying out a mandate which it hid from the people of this 
province in the first instance, and which does not enjoy even in 
terms of parliamentary arithmetic in terms of the election, does 
not enjoy the confidence of a plurality of the people of this 
province. 
 
And so that brings to mind some question of that government’s 
legitimacy, and I say that in the full technical knowledge of the 
word legitimacy, and of that mandate. And so I say, Mr. 
Speaker, in that regard it is important that people of this 
province understand that it is perfectly in keeping with their 
traditions of the development of parliamentary democracy to 
use the tactics available to an opposition to bring to the 
attention of the people, in this case, the sell-off of SaskPower 
against the overwhelming wishes of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that we are at a point in our history where we 
have seen theory meet practice. Because, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of the theory of what we are dealing with, we are dealing with 
on the one hand, the rights of the opposition, the duties of the 
opposition in legislative assemblies not only here in 
Saskatchewan but throughout the British parliament, the British 
Commonwealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that question that confronts us here today in 
dealing with the question of rule changes is a question which 
has been dealt at great length by many, many other people, 
some of whom have much greater knowledge, most of whom 
have much greater knowledge of parliamentary tradition and 
practice than myself. 
 
But I want to, as I begin, advise you of some of the material 
which is available for the members of the government, and I 
would advise that they begin to peruse some of the material 
available to them as to what constitutes the legitimate role of an 
opposition, in this case the role of the opposition in bringing to 
a halt the sell-off of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would refer to publications. For example, 
Government Through Opposition: Party Politics in the 1970s 
by Frederick Allyce; or Gregory Archibald’s book, The Role of 
the Opposition in Parliamentary Legislature: Alberta as a Case 
Study; or Rodney Barker, Studies in Opposition; or Andre 
Bernard, Système Parlimentaire et Mode de Scrutien; or Edwin 
Black’s Opposition Research: Some Theories and Practice in 
the Journal of Canadian Public Administration; or opposition 
party’s The Anti-New Deal Tradition. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many, many publications 
that deal with this. I have here a bibliography prepared for me 
by the Library of Parliament in Ottawa in regards to this 
question. There are approximately 70 articles in the 
parliamentary library in Ottawa alone which deals with the 
question of the role of the opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why are we here debating this motion? 
Okay, on the substance . . . first of all, of the motion itself, Mr. 
Speaker, the substance of the motion makes it impossible for 
the opposition to engage in the 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1539 

 

kind of bell-ringing tactic that the opposition employed a little 
while ago in bringing to the attention of the public the sale of 
SaskPower. 
 
It would muzzle the opposition, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, in 
a right which has been determined in parliament here in 
Saskatchewan, the legislature of Saskatchewan, in other 
legislative assemblies in Canada, and also in other legislative 
assemblies throughout the British Commonwealth. 
 
It is a right, Mr. Speaker, a right of an opposition established by 
historical tradition to in fact utilize whatever tactics that 
parliament as a whole has determined to be legitimate 
parliamentary tactics in order to conduct the business of those 
who are governed by whichever parliamentary jurisdiction that 
one happens to be operating in. 
 
The substance of the Bill, that is the substance of the Bill to 
outlaw bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you, flies in 
the face of the traditions here in Saskatchewan, but also, more 
importantly, flies in the face of a tradition of a movement in 
history established since 1215, that is at the Battle of 
Runnymede in which the questions of absolute power, the 
question of the use of power and the abuse of power first gained 
attention within the realm of Britain. 
 
Now the Battle of Runnymede, Mr. Speaker, as you are well 
aware, but other members of the government may not be so 
well aware, was the battle at which the baronial figures of 
British history took on an absolute power, that is King John. 
King John . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . and forced King John, through their use of a 
legitimate opposition tactic, which in that case was civil war 
because there was no parliamentary forum such as we have 
today, forced King John at that point in time into codifying 
what many people have said to be the underpinnings of the 
basis of British parliamentary democracy. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is contained within the Magna Carta, the 
great charter, the great charter which has outlined the rights that 
people have in opposing, such as the legislature here did, we in 
opposition did, in opposing the sell-off of SaskPower. 
 
The Magna Carta, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you. I will thank my colleagues for that 
support because the Magna Carta, Mr. Speaker, grants, as the 
very basis of British common . . . pardon me, British 
parliamentary law, certain fundamental rights. Those rights 
include the right to have representation in regards to taxation. 
The American Revolution, Mr. Speaker, I may say, despite its 
influence from Voltaire and others, can trace the ancestry of its 
activities back to the battlefield of Runnymede and to the 
articles contained in 1215 in the Magna Carta. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker . . . And there are many parliamentary 

experts, among them Sir Edward Coke — Sir Edward Coke, 
Mr. Speaker, if you’re familiar with the works of that famed 
parliamentary historian, said that there is a continuous line that 
runs through all of the British parliamentary system stretching 
from, on the one hand, the field at Runnymede, to each and 
every legislature in the British Commonwealth today. 
 
Now Sir Edward has passed away, and he was speaking at a 
somewhat earlier time. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that his words 
in regards to how we conceived the Magna Carta and the 
activities of the opposition, and our activities in regards to the 
bell-ringing of SaskPower, can tie together very nicely. Because 
Sir Edward’s thesis was . . . is that the movement towards 
progress, the movement towards progress in politics and in the 
development of the British parliamentary system has been a 
movement from, on the one hand, wresting power from a small, 
élitist, authoritarian, in fact, absolutist power, and taking that 
power and more and more spreading it out, with ups and downs 
in the course of history, but more or less taking that power out 
and putting it into the hands, first of all, of representatives in the 
legislature; but more importantly, giving average, everyday 
citizens of whatever democracy that those citizens are engaged 
in, taking that power and putting it into their hands and giving 
them some right, giving them some direct right in the activities 
of those who govern them. That is the movement of history in 
regards to the development of parliamentary democracy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with that Bill, in dealing 
with this motion put forward by the Minister of Justice, does 
that motion enhance the process of taking power from the hands 
of absolutism and putting it into the hands of people in the 
conduct of their daily affairs, or does it in fact take us a step 
backwards? I would submit, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that 
in dealing with this Bill that it is a step backwards. I would also 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I would also submit, Mr. Speaker, that the 
activities of the opposition in ringing the bells and developing a 
political debate in this province around the sell-off of 
SaskPower was a step forward for democracy in this province, 
contrary to what the other members, the other members on the 
government side of this Chamber have to say about it. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, let’s put it in this context. If in 1215 
King John had prevailed, if King John had prevailed, would we 
have developed in terms of the political situation and the 
political rights and freedoms that we have here today? The 
question is no. Maybe . . . we would obviously be some steps 
away from that kind of absolutist monarchy because there are 
not many left in the world. Obviously the history is . . . has 
some movement forward, but without the role of the opposition, 
in this case the barons, who probably with outside what was 
then determined to be legitimate opposition by the absolutists 
— in fact I know that it was outside what was termed legitimate 
by the absolutists, in this case King John — without that kind of 
opposition from the barons on the field of Runnymede, we 
would not have established the same kind of fundamental 
political liberties and rights 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1540 

 

that this legislature enjoys and that the people of this province 
enjoy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So, Mr. Speaker, it is not up to the King Johns 
of this world to determine what is legitimate political dissent. It 
is not up to those who hold the power to decide what is 
legitimate for the opposition to engage in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If, for example, Mr. Speaker . . . And the member from 
Rosthern earlier made reference to events during the pre-war 
years in Nazi Germany. I want to say this, Mr. Speaker: if those 
people in Germany who objected to the rise of absolutism under 
the parties of national socialism, under the Nazis, if those 
people had taken more interest in what Hitler would have 
probably determined to be legitimate political opposition, we 
may have not had to go through the wars of World War II; that 
in fact, that those in opposition are the ones who determined in 
Nazi Germany what would have been legitimate political 
opposition. 
 
(1615) 
 
And after all, Mr. Speaker, in Germany at that time there were 
mass political parties; there were strong trade unions; there was 
the right to freedom of speech; there was the right to freedom of 
assembly; there was a parliamentary tradition established during 
the establishment of the Weimar republic. If, however, Mr. 
Speaker, other courses and other actions had been taken, then 
maybe World War II with all its horrors might not have been 
visited upon the peoples of this earth. 
 
And after 1933 in Nazi Germany, Mr. Speaker, the government 
. . . and it had a certain legitimacy because after all von 
Hindenburg, who was the chancellor of Germany at the time, 
granted to Hitler the status of legitimacy by asking him to form 
the government. And we all know what happened after that, of 
course. We had things like the immediately curtailing of 
democratic freedoms in the Reichstag. We had the curtailing of 
democratic freedoms and witch hunts and repression outside 
among the general populace by those who claimed to be 
upholding the rights as their rights to govern, their absolute 
right to govern. And we all know what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
We all know what happened in Nazi Germany because those in 
Germany who supported freedom did not act in freedom’s 
cause, and we ended up with what history records for us as an 
horrific period of human endeavour. 
 
But you see, the point I’m making there, Mr. Speaker, is very 
simply this: the opposition in Germany during the times of 
Hitler, it was up for them to determine what would be 
legitimate opposition, and not for Hitler. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the right and the duty and the role of the 
opposition here in Saskatchewan today to determine what is the 
legitimate role that an opposition is to play. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we learn from 
history in the development of parliamentary institutions and the 
development of parliamentary precedence and the development 
of the role of the 

government and the role of the opposition, is that that process is 
not one of legality. It is not a legal, formalistic process. It is a 
process in which politics takes precedence. 
 
And there’s a recognition, I think, of that fact throughout by 
those people who write, as I’ve pointed out, in terms of the 
bibliography of the role government and the role of the 
opposition, that the fundamental tenet and the fundamental 
shaping of the course and development of parliamentary 
democracy is not a codification of rules and regulations so 
much as it is the development of a political struggle, or as 
Benjamin Disraeli said in this regard, dealing with the British 
parliament, "Principle is married to necessity." 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what is happening here in this legislature 
— and I want to touch on that some while later — but I want to 
get back to the point that I’m making in terms of the role of the 
opposition and its opposition to the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
That is, is that this opposition, the members of this side of the 
government, defined what was legitimate, and in doing so, did 
so with the full knowledge that there would be political rewards 
to reap as well as a political cost to pay. And of course, whether 
the rewards were to reap or the costs were to pay were 
dependent solely and entirely upon the political judgement 
exercised by members on this side of the House. 
 
In this particular historical instance here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, I would submit that the ringing of the bells has reaped 
political rewards for members of this side of the House and has 
reaped some fairly serious political price on the members of 
that side of the House, because the members on this side of the 
House understand and understood that the people of 
Saskatchewan do not want to see the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 
They do not want to see their assets sold off. They want to see 
their political representatives stand up for them, to defend them 
in an attack upon their rights, their assets, by a government 
which broke its promise, by a Premier which broke faith, by a 
government which, we submit, has no mandate and hence no 
legitimacy to do what it is doing. Because that’s what we’re 
dealing with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are dealing not here with just a rule change in the abstract, 
we’re dealing with a political struggle here between a 
government which wants to sell off the assets, to take a course 
to sell off the assets of the people of this province, to take a 
historical course which is opposed by the people of this 
province, opposed by them in overwhelming numbers, and by 
an opposition which is standing up an utilizing what every 
tactic it may employ to speak up and do its job: to represent the 
fundamental will of the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, 
that is what we are dealing with here. 
 
If this is, as I said before, a place where practice and theory fall 
in. 
 
We took, Mr. Speaker, if you like, the political gamble because 
we knew, we knew very well what the members 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1541 

 

of the government were going to say, that we were going to 
hijack democracy. That’s the first charge that they laid against 
us, that somehow we’ve hijacked democracy. Well let me tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, the history of that government, the history of 
that government shows the total hypocrisy of its statement. 
 
After, Mr. Speaker, I was elected in October of 1986 to this 
legislature, I waited until, I believe it was June 20 if I’m not 
mistaken, or June 12 of the following year before the budget 
was presented . . . June 17 before that was presented, before I 
saw a budget put forward by that government. Right? 
 
Who hijacked democracy in that case? Right? Who hijacked 
democracy, in which the threat of lawsuits hung over a 
government? Lawsuits hanging over a government because the 
government refused to carry through with what it legally was 
supposed to do, that is to bring a budget forward to the people 
of the province and to this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who hijacked democracy in that case? It seems to 
me that’s about an eight- or nine-month period in which the 
government reneged on its . . . not only reneged — failed to do 
its duty, was derelict in its duty. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is one person responsible for that hijacking of democracy, 
and that person is the Premier of this province. That is the 
person. That person is the Premier of this province. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, because the government got . . . well to be 
polite, I guess it got beaten up somewhat after it did call the 
legislature and after it did present its budget. It then, after the 
legislature finished, waited for another — how many months 
was it? Eight or nine months. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nine months this time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Nine months, they tell me. Waited for nine 
months to recall the legislature; held the legislature hostage for 
nine months; refused to allow the voices of democracy to be 
heard in this Chamber. Wouldn’t call the members into this 
legislature to do its work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that for those members on that side of 
the House, for those members with that record of hijacking this 
legislature, for those members with this utter disregard for 
parliamentary tradition, for them now to stand up and accuse 
the opposition of hijacking democracy is nothing more than 
pure hypocrisy, and those who espouse that position, Mr. 
Speaker, are nothing more than hypocrites. When it comes to 
that, they are nothing more than hypocrites, Mr. Speaker, for 
those who say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And why, Mr. Speaker? Why? Because 
fundamentally these people do not have respect for what is 
essential in the democratic process. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
many people have tried to define democracy. I looked up the 
other day in the Oxford concise English dictionary, and it 
defines it as, "government by (all) the people, direct or 
representative . . ." Government by the people, direct or 
representative. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are components to that, as you know. 
There’s several components to that, one of which of course is 
elections. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
an election, we want one, and the people of this province want 
one. They don’t want to have the time of the legislature wasted 
in useless debates over rule changes, an act which is foreign to 
the whole history of this House. They don’t want the 
representatives of the people to take the time to debate this 
measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Fundamentally the people of this province are saying, we want 
an election. They want an election. The polls prove they want 
an election, Mr. Speaker, because they want to get rid of this 
government. And that is the first . . . and that, may I say, Mr. 
Speaker, is the primary component of democracy, is the 
election. For elections, despite all their faults, and they have 
some, are even at worst, they’re representative of the popular 
will. 
 
Now we, Mr. Speaker, for our part, are ready to be tested on the 
question of the popular will. 
 
The second component, Mr. Speaker, in regards to what 
constitutes the democracy as defined by government of the 
people, direct or representative, is the right of the people to 
participate in the affairs of the province — the right to 
participate, either directly or through the representatives, to 
participate. 
 
Now I want to ask you, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition 
brought to the attention of the people of this province the 
government’s attempt to sneak through the sale of SaskEnergy, 
despite what it had said earlier, despite the fact that it broke its 
promise never to do so, I want to ask you, Mr. Speaker, was the 
action of the opposition designed to enhance the role of the 
people directly or indirectly through the representatives in 
dealing with the matters that affected them? Was that, Mr. 
Speaker, enhanced by what the opposition did? Or was it 
limited by what the opposition did? 
 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, any fair-minded citizen in this 
province, whether they’re Conservative or Liberal or New 
Democrat or whatever, would say that what we in the 
opposition did was enhance the rights of citizens in this 
province to directly participate in the affairs that affected them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have yet to hear to the contrary by any other 
member of this legislature. I have yet to hear to the contrary, 
Mr. Speaker, by any other . . . (inaudible) . . . that what we 
denied citizens the right to participate in the affairs that directly 
affected them. One just has to look, Mr. Speaker, at the number 
of petitions that were presented to this legislature in regards to 
the attempt of the government to sell off SaskPower. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they broke their promise never to do it, 
but the people of this province, by way of petition, which is an 
accepted parliamentary practice with a long, long history . . . In 
fact, one only has to read the agenda of the House of the 
legislature. For example, today under routine proceedings, after 
prayers, Mr. Speaker, what is the first item of business of this 
House? What is the first 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1542 

 

item of this House, Mr. Speaker? Presenting petitions — 
presenting petitions. 
 
We stopped the bell-ringing for . . . we stopped this government 
for 17 days from driving through a Bill which would privatize 
SaskPower. We went out to the people of this province, held 
meetings where thousands and thousands and thousands of 
citizens participated directly by way of question, by way of 
discussion, by way of debate, and by way of presenting 
petitions, Mr. Speaker, where we now stand at somewhere 
around 100,000 people in this province exercising their 
democratic right — exercising their democratic right to directly 
govern themselves in the affairs of the province; in this case, 
directly exercising their right to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower through way of presenting petitions. Because that’s 
the first item of business of this House day in and day out, is to 
present petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition are proud of the job 
they did, going out, getting people to express their political will 
through the use of the forms of petition. I don’t think there is 
one member on this side of the House that is less than 
immensely proud of the job she or he did in collecting those 
petitions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And what do we have, Mr. Speaker, as the 
second order of business of this House today? Reading and 
receiving petitions — reading and receiving petitions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, don’t tell me, don’t let anybody in this 
House tell you, sir, or tell any member of the opposition that we 
don’t have the right to read or receive petitions in this House. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, what we did in stopping the sale of 
SaskEnergy, going out and getting those petitions, we 
undertook it upon ourselves to try to impress upon the 
government the massive opposition there exists in this province 
to an action and a course of action which the overwhelming 
majority of people in this province oppose. 
 
And we did it through reading and receiving petitions, the 
second item of business that occurs on a day-by-day basis in 
this House. Then, Mr. Speaker, I can go along and read what is 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I can then deal with what we find on the 
agenda on a day-by-day basis. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, I bring the question of the agenda 
to the attention of this House. Because the agenda itself, in the 
history of the development of parliamentary democracy in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in the development of 
parliamentary democracy — presenting petitions; reading and 
receiving petitions; presenting reports by standing, select, and 
special committees; notices of motions and questions; 
introduction of guests; oral questions; ministerial statements; 
introductions of Bills; orders of the day — all have been agreed 
upon and were put together as a daily agenda; not through 
coercion, Mr. Speaker, not through coercion, but were dealt 
with through a concept of co-operation, a concept of the 
opposition and the government working together to 

define the rules, in this case the agenda of the House, to define 
those rules of what would work and what would carry through 
on a day-by-day basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the question of that kind of political 
co-operation, the question . . . no matter how much the heat of 
battles get, whether its real battle as in the case of Runnymede 
or the verbal sparring that takes place in this place on a daily 
basis, there is an underlying element that that co-operation must 
exist. In order for Magna Carta to be signed, in order for the 
development of some fundamental political liberties, at some 
point in time there was co-operation between the subject and 
the ruler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just me saying that. I’d like to quote, if I 
may, from page 167 and 168 of a book called People and 
Parliament. It’s by Nigel Nicholson, printed by Weidenfeld and 
Nicholson, 7 Cork Street, London, written in 1958. And it deals 
with, Mr. Speaker, the development of people, parliament, and 
political parties, written from the point of view of a 
Conservative member, a member of the Conservative Party of 
Great Britain, with a very high regard for the notions of what 
lies behind democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Nicholson — and I’ll read you two 
paragraphs — talks about how co-operation must serve as a 
corner-stone for parliament to function. It says: 
 

The difference between Burke’s views on democracy and 
our own is illustrated by Leo Ameroy’s definition of our 
system as . . . 
 

And I think this is what’s important, Mr. Speaker, here, because 
it gets to the nub of what Mr. Nicholson is trying to make in his 
book. 
 

. . . democracy by consent and not by delegation. 
Government of the people, for the people, with, but not by 
the people. 
 

Even that definition, with which I wholly agree, might now be 
considered by some as already outdated since it still contains a 
trace of Burke’s oligarchic attitude, namely, that parliament 
knows best. And hence by parliament, there’s an implication 
throughout the preface of the book, Mr. Speaker, that from 
parliament, that is cabinet, and then from cabinet into the inner 
cabinet and hence on to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, in regards to the role that people 
have, in terms of developing consent and co-operation: 
 

. . . they demand the right to interfere in government, the 
right to be wrong, the right to suffer the consequences of 
their own prejudices. They will not be treated as children 
or incompetents. 
 

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, for those members of the 
government who are thinking of getting home this summer or 
thinking of getting home next summer, we will not be treated as 
children or incompetents when it comes to defending the rights 
of the people of Saskatchewan to stop the privatization of 
SaskEnergy . . . 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1543 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . and to stop this rule change from being 
rammed unilaterally down the throats of this legislature. You, 
sir, may think you want to act as boss, or some kind of strict 
authoritarian figure, a schoolmaster, or some kind of dictator, 
but let me say this again: we will not be treated as children nor 
incompetents in that matter. 
 

They employ (Mr. Speaker) a member of parliament . . . 
 

And here we’re speaking of the people and the relationship 
between us in the opposition and our opposition to these rule 
changes, and those who have elected us to act as the opposition. 
 

They employ a member of parliament as they would 
employ a plumber or piano tuner to do a job. His (and I 
say hers to avoid sexist language) job is representation. 
That does not mean that he (or she) is to be controlled at 
every stage of his work by their instructions any more than 
is the plumber or piano tuner. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, and this is particularly relevant, particularly 
relevant to the members of the government, Mr. Nicholson goes 
on to say: 
 

But it does mean that they must pay attention to their 
wishes. They will not be fobbed off with the alternative 
theory that true representation sometimes means doing the 
opposite of what they ask. 
 

In this case, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that the ramming 
of . . . the attempt by this government to ram through a totally 
unwarranted rules change, and the rationale provided by the 
members of the government for doing that, is nothing other than 
trying to fob off the people of Saskatchewan with the 
alternative that true representation means doing the opposite of 
what they ask. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, what are the people of Saskatchewan 
asking for in this regard? First of all, they’re saying, don’t sell 
off our Crown corporations, don’t privatize SaskEnergy, don’t 
even attempt it. That’s what they’re asking, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t matter what kind of road shows that the government can 
put forward, such as the fiascos that occurred in Regina last 
night — tens of thousands of dollars of taxpayers’ money 
wasted for meetings in which nobody comes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well they were coming by the pairs. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — They were coming by the pairs in one meeting 
— one pair, one meeting — and I would certainly like to know 
how much that meeting cost the taxpayers of the province. 
 
They don’t want that kind of nonsense. The people of 
Saskatchewan are sick and tired; they’re fed up to here with that 
kind of nonsense, that kind of total fobbing off, to quote from 
Mr. Nicholson, if you like; that kind of 

waste, that kind of mismanagement, that kind of attitude which 
says: we, the government, are the true representatives. We know 
what’s best for them. We know what’s going to happen to them. 
We know what’s best for them. They’re too ignorant. 
 
That’s what the government is saying. And they’re trying to fob 
off an alternative theory that their true representative 
government, supposedly true representative government, is 
legitimate. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, that this government is not legitimate. It 
does not have the mandate to sell off SaskPower. The people of 
Saskatchewan have given us, through overwhelming support, 
the right to say that. 
 
Once again, practice and theory meet. The practice of the 
opposition is to speak up, to oppose the misuse and the abuse of 
power by the government, in this case, the selling off of 
SaskPower. 
 
The people of the province have given us the right, the 
parliamentary right in its true legal and practical sense, the right 
to employ the tactics that we did. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of this province want an opposition to stand up to 
tyranny in whatever its form, and they don’t want this rule 
passed. 
 
They see, Mr. Speaker, the sell-off of SaskPower as not being 
in their interest. They see it as a betrayal. They see it as a form 
of tyranny, of an artificial tyranny put together with dollar 
democracy and parliamentary arithmetic that they, in the reality, 
the overwhelming reality, oppose. And they have given us the 
legal as well as the moral right to use whatever tool is in our 
arsenal to oppose that. And they don’t want, Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t want these rules rammed down our throat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — They don’t want these rules rammed down our 
throat, Mr. Speaker, because they know from bitter, bitter 
experience, Mr. Speaker, precisely that when tyranny goes 
unopposed, it runs rampant. There are no checks and balances 
on it, and they are the ones who will bear the brunt of tyranny. 
 
Oh yes, there may be legislators, as there were in Nazi 
Germany, who carted off and put in concentration camps, or 
shot or hung or gassed or whatever . . . My friend and colleague 
from Moose Jaw North doesn’t like me using those barbaric 
examples, but history has been barbaric, and history has been 
barbaric because those who are opposed to a lessening of 
democratic rights suffer the consequences. They suffer the 
consequences even though those consequences are unintended, 
let me tell you, Mr. Speaker. They don’t particularly like having 
the consequences of not opposing tyranny brought down on 
their necks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in saying that, it’s important to look back on 
history, the history, first of all, of this legislature and how rules 
were introduced, how rules were put together, and how we 
govern ourselves as members of this legislature. It’s also 
important to look at those who in opposition, which once were 
termed to use tactics which were once 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1544 

 

deemed illegitimate, have all of a sudden have become, in the 
eyes of history, legitimate. 
 
(1645) 
 
I’d mentioned earlier on, Mr. Speaker, the Runnymede and the 
battle of 1215 in which the Magna Carta issued forth in all its 
glory to put forward some fundamental political rights for 
citizens. Now, Mr. Speaker, it obviously was not a perfect 
document. No document can ever, ever, ever encapsulate the 
beating heart of democracy as it flowers forth in all its vibrancy 
to give meaning to the political wishes of the Demos of the 
people. There is no document that’s able to capture and 
capsulate that fully, but the Magna Carta, at least in terms of 
English history, was the first document to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we can move forward in English history, 
because there we had, on the one hand, an absolutist king versus 
a rising nobility, if you like, a nobility which wanted to exercise 
its powers — not for the benefit, I may say, of the peasants or 
of the artisans or of the landless in England at the time, those 
poor and those who lived a wretched and miserable existence 
and whose average life tension . . . life span was 36 years of 
age. They didn’t fight for Magna Carta for those interests, Mr. 
Speaker, they fought for Magna Carta for their own interests, 
primary of which was not to have the king come in and loot 
their treasuries without their say-so and without their consent. 
 
But as English parliamentary history developed, Mr. Speaker, 
and as English parliamentary history moved forward — I 
shouldn’t use the word parliamentary history in this; it’s a 
misnomer — but as English democratic history, upon which the 
present parliamentary system is based, moves forward, what we 
found is not nobles versus the king, but we found merchants 
and artisans in the emerging towns and villages of Britain, in 
the Londons, in the Westminsters, and so on, aligning 
themselves together so that they themselves had a direct say in 
the conduct of their affairs, and that they had themselves the 
right to put forward their representatives, including your 
ancestors, Mr. Speaker, in the parliamentary sense of the first 
Speaker. 
 
We had a struggle in Britain, a massive and bloody civil war, a 
massive civil war in Britain between, on the one hand, those 
forces led by Oliver Cromwell and his supporters, and on the 
other hand, those who were led by the supporters of the 
monarchy, i.e. ending up in Charles II. 
 
We had the establishment of the Long Parliament. And let me 
tell you, if the members think that their stay in this particular 
legislature was long, may I remind them that they look back in 
history to determine the length of time that the Long Parliament 
was established in Britain, because by the time that these 
members who are present here, with the exception of the female 
members we hope, will be leaving here with long, grey beards if 
they were to replicate that, and they may. 
 
If they may . . . if they continue to try to press forward, if they 
continue to try to press forward with this unconscious rule 
change, if this unneeded and 

unnecessary piece of legislature blither, if they want to keep 
driving that at us, they’ll be here until their beards are touching 
their feet and the Long Parliament will be matched by the 
legislature in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I see the Minister of Education looking somewhat askance 
at that. Well let me remind the minister, when they tried to 
scathe and tried to fool the people of this province in 1987, they 
sat here for a considerably lot longer period of time than they 
wished. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that same fate for 
them is in store — 1991 looks like a good stopping point for 
this long parliament, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Because the same . . . because, Mr. Speaker, just 
as the issues that faced the people between Cromwell and the 
absolutists of the days of the English civil war — just as those 
issues were important to those people, let me tell you that the 
issue of the sale of SaskPower, the issue of the sale of honesty 
in government — because this involves the question of the 
breaking of faith and hence the denial of the government’s own 
legitimacy; this involves the question of why the bells were 
ringing to stand in protest against that kind of breaking of faith 
— just as those issues were important to the people of 
Cromwell’s day, so too are the issues which face the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just as the opposition formed and re-formed 
in the days of the Long Parliament between the Roundheads 
and the Diggers and the Levellers and all those people, all of 
which had legitimate political platforms, all of whom had a 
world view, all of which tried to proceed from their own point 
of departure in regards to what was good for their class or what 
was good for their sectarian interest; just as they proceeded, so 
too are we are proceeding today; and so too is the government 
proceeding in that same kind of authoritarian manner which led 
to the events surrounding the Long Parliament. 
 
Once again absolutism tried to, without the consent of all 
parties concerned, tried to impose its will on its subjects. And, 
Mr. Speaker, just as in Saskatchewan in 1989 the people of the 
province rose as one to oppose the privatization of SaskPower, 
so too did they during the days of Cromwell and the Long 
Parliament, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they used tactics, Mr. Speaker, they used tactics which I’m 
sure you as Speaker are well aware of. At that time when the 
absolute monarch didn’t like what the parliament had to say, he 
took it upon himself to deal with the mouthpiece of parliament, 
in this case the Speaker, and did away with that Speaker, and 
did away with him on a somewhat permanent basis through 
forms of execution. 
 
And they did that, Mr. Speaker, and they did that because at that 
point in time, absolutism saw the rule of parliament, that is, the 
right of those gathered in the parliament. And by at that point in 
time, I may stress, that that parliament was not representative, 
not representative of the people of England, but were 
representative only of a small cross-section of people of 
England, the 
  



 
May 31, 1989 

 

 
1545 

 

squiredom. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, those absolutists tried to impose upon 
parliament its view of what parliament should be, and it did it 
without the consent, did it without the consent of those 
involved, and hence we had that long and bloody and inglorious 
period of British history in the English civil war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we saw at that period of time, we saw a 
certain establishment of certain institutions, which I will a little 
later on in my speech go into in my presentation because it 
relates directly to the role of the opposition, and in this case as 
we stand here in opposing this rule change and in opposing the 
privatization of SaskPower, we stand upon that historical 
prerogative, the same kind of historical prerogative that those in 
opposition to absolutism in the Long Parliament stood for. 
 
And we, in fact, have historical basis for what we have done, 
unlike those of the government opposite, whose only historical 
basis in terms of ramming through, this chipping away at 
democracy, of taking away something which has been 
established as a right, and that is the right of the opposition to 
oppose and to take upon itself not only its role as an opposition 
but the responsibility as an opposition; it’s taken upon itself the 
role of the absolutists in history, the potentate, the potentate, the 
dictator, the Ayatollah Khomeinis of Saskatchewan. That’s how 
they see themselves, Mr. Speaker, unilaterally imposing on the 
people of this province and on the representatives of the people 
of this province, through an absolutist measure, the change in 
the rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the methods employed by those in opposition at 
that time were again viewed as illegitimate by the absolutists 
but, you know, became to, as we look now from the vantage 
point of this point in history, came to be seen as legitimate and 
necessary, given the historical times. Once again, principle is 
married to necessity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we can go from there, Mr. Speaker — that point in the 
development of the . . . the development, because we’re now 
dealing with the development of the British parliamentary 
system. We could go forward. The evolution of the British 
parliament to the old reformation, if you like, of parliament, the 
doing away of the rotten boroughs, Mr. Speaker, because there 
was mass opposition by people in Britain at the time to the 
creation of these rotten boroughs where you had five or six 
people who had the right to vote and would elect the squire into 
the House of Commons. Right? 
 
And do you know, Mr. Speaker, it took what at that point in 
time were illegitimate means of opposition, illegitimate from 
the point of view of those in power, to do away with the rotten 
boroughs. But has much changed here, Mr. Speaker? Has much 
changed here? 
 
We have, in this legislature, the tabling of a report by an 
electoral commission which begins the march backwards to the 
rotten boroughs by a government which has a consistent history 
of limiting the forward march of history into direct participation 
in public affairs by the people of this province. And when, Mr. 
Speaker, and if the Bill 

dealing with the gerrymandering of the electoral constituencies 
of this project come forward, we will have the same type of 
situation as presently confronts us in dealing with the changes 
of the rules. 
 
We have a Bill which establishes, not a new modern form of 
democracy which takes into account the modern technological 
devices that we have and the examples around the world that 
allow people to directly participate in their affairs, but from 
these absolutists we hear once again the sound of the jackboots 
trying to drag us back into feudalism when it comes to the days 
of democracy. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that occurred during — 
I call it the period of Gladstonian democracy — was a whole 
method of procedures and rules which were put into place to 
develop consent as to the way in which parliament was to be 
conducted. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it was the kind of consent that this 
government would do very well in trying to pursue, because 
instead of trying to ram SaskPower down the . . . making a 
decision to sell off SaskPower, then trying to ram that decision 
down the throats of this Assembly and down the throats of the 
people of Saskatchewan, to sell off those assets, instead of 
trying to . . . and then after having made that decision, 
attempting in the most blatant, politically stupid manner, if I 
may use the term, to send out a travelling road show that 
nobody listens to because nobody comes to it, because it 
doesn’t have any legitimacy because . . . You know, they come 
in pairs to it because they know that it doesn’t have any 
legitimacy, that it’s nothing more than a few Tory puppets like 
Oscar Hanson trying to defend a few . . . trying to defend what 
is a political decision by the government and a horrendous 
political decision from the point of view of the government. 
 
Instead of trying to, instead of trying to engage in that kind of 
waste of taxpayers’ money and political flimflammery, why 
didn’t the government go and try to build consent in this 
project, in this province, try to build some sense of co-operation 
in how we are best to go forward to develop economically. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did they do? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — What did they do? Instead of trying to build that 
co-operation, they tried to loot the public treasury for their own 
political purposes, to fill the pockets of their friends — right? 
— and to engage in a unparliamentary and undemocratic form 
of action such as the introduction of this Bill into the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., the House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The House adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


