




















































May 19, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 19, 1989 
 

1245 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly today a group of grade 7 students 
from the Elizabeth School in Kindersley. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Dave Burkell; by their chaperons Jim Baker, 
Vivian Krogstad, and Marilyn Gray. 
 
Dave Burkell has undertaken to bring a group of these students 
to the Assembly each year, and I think that’s a credit to him. He 
is also a credit to the community of Kindersley, very involved 
in the sports program, particularly track and field program. I 
welcome them. 
 
I hope to meet with you after question period to discuss what 
you see happening in question period today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce five grade 8 students and their teacher, 
Miss Shelly Vertefeuille, from Greenall School in Balgonie, on 
behalf of my seat mate, the member for Qu’Appelle Lumsden, 
who is not able to be here today. 
 
I welcome you to the Assembly and I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings. And I look forward to meeting and discussing with 
you following question period. I’d like all members to give a 
welcome to these students from Balgonie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you and members of the Assembly, sitting 
in your gallery, Eileen Stone, a friend from Saskatoon 
Eastview, a constituent, the daughter-in-law of the late Arthur 
Stone, a long-time member of this Assembly. Mrs. Stone 
follows the proceedings in the House very closely and is just 
down visiting for the day. I would invite all members to join 
with me in welcoming her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to, at this time, introduce to you, and through you to other 
members of this Assembly, some 70 grade 8 students from 
Martensville. They are accompanied by their teachers Michelle 
Schaff, Ralph Epp, and a former colleague of mine, Loretta 
Bell, and chaperons Cindy Penner, Winnie Loewen, and 
Maureen Morin. 
 
I might just add, Mr. Speaker, that the number of students, 70 in 
all, is indicative of what Martensville is all about — a booming 
metropolis just north of Saskatoon; Saskatoon just south of 
Martensville. I have my office located in Martensville, Mr. 
Speaker, and Martensville now is recognized as being the 
fastest-growing town in  

Saskatchewan. 
 
I would just like all members to help me welcome these guests 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Allegations in Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the member from Maple Creek. 
 
My question is to the Premier today, and it has to do with the 
very serious allegations and the very serious nature of the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor for the year ended 1988. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would ask you whether or not you would agree 
that it is the duty of yourself and your cabinet to ensure, I would 
say even to guarantee, that the rights and privileges of the 
Provincial Auditor are defended; that he’s allowed fullest 
possible access to the pertinent information to do his job, 
namely the watch-dog of the taxpayer’s dollars; and if you so 
agree, assuming that you do, my question to you is: how in the 
world do you justify a damning, searing indictment that this 
report is, which accuses your government and the officials of 
your government of breaking the law time and time again and 
preventing the auditor from doing his job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises a 
number of points, has been raised in the Provincial Auditor’s 
report, of a denial of information by some Crown corporations 
to the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. One of those was that 
he was denied access to the agreement with regard to Saskoil, to 
see whether or not he would be the auditor for Saskoil or 
whether Saskoil had become a private company. That 
information was in fact provided to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
He complained about not having the minutes of CIC (Crown 
investments corporation of Saskatchewan), and therefore he 
was denied information, Mr. Speaker. That information was 
provided to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
He asked about SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation), Mr. Speaker, about ministerial travel. Well that 
information, Mr. Speaker, was provided to the Provincial 
Auditor on a timely basis and was filed with the public 
accounts. Not just the statement as some people in the media 
have said, but also the procedure followed and the details of 
ministerial travel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So many of the points made by the Provincial Auditor in there 
are extreme exaggerations, I submit. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, and I 
am going to, with the greatest of respect to my friend and 
colleague, the Minister of Justice, I direct this to the Premier 
because I feel that the Minister of Justice is under  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1246 

 

a cloud for this entire Legislative Assembly by virtue of his 
scurrilous attacks on the integrity of an office of this Assembly. 
And unless and until such time as this has been satisfactorily 
resolved, your, as I interpret it, breach of the rules of this House 
by privilege, I think, sir, you have no legitimacy to answering 
this question. 
 
And therefore I come to the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I say to the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, how in the world is it that you, as the leader of 
this government, the leader of the province of Saskatchewan, 
responsible for the expenditure of tax dollars, how do you 
explain this damning indictment that the Provincial Auditor 
tabled a few days ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the proper forum by which 
to call witnesses is the Public Accounts Committee. The Public 
Accounts Committee, which is now, I might add, open to the 
media, which it wasn’t prior to the 1982, have the right to call 
witnesses to deal with this question. They can call the 
Provincial Auditor; they can call anyone else they wish, Mr. 
Speaker. And the members of this side of the House are 
perfectly . . . stand ready, willing to call anyone to that Public 
Accounts Committee to deal with this particular auditor’s 
report. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I must say as a new question 
that I am amazed, quite frankly — I hope I’m not interpreted as 
being too rude — but at the gall of the Minister of Justice 
having attacked personally the Provincial Auditor, answering 
the questions pertaining to the Provincial Auditor with that 
cloud hanging over his head. And presumably the Premier 
simply will not get up, and refuses to get up. I guess I am 
stymied on this, and I have to direct a question to somebody in 
the front benches. My question will be again to the Premier, and 
I will allow him to decide who he directs the question to. I say 
that Mr. Willard Lutz’s report says, Mr. Speaker, as a new 
question, the following: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client . . . (I cannot effectively carry 
out my role because in the Legislative Assembly) there 
were a number of cases where I could not get information 
that, by law, I was entitled to receive. 
 

My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: Public Accounts’ 
mandate is to deal on a line-by-line basis the spending practices 
and the accounting procedures of individual departments in 
governments. What we have by this quotation, however, is a 
problem of another magnitude and of another dimension. The 
institution of the Provincial Auditor no longer exists in 
Saskatchewan except by name. That institution, sir, belongs to 
this House — all of us, not to a committee. 
 
And my question to you, sir, is that we should be dealing with 
the detailed, line-by-line expenditures and accounting practices 
of the Public Accounts Committee as the Minister of Justice has 
indicated, but we need to be dealing with even a more 
fundamental issue, and that is whether or not we have, any 
more, a Provincial Auditor in the province of Saskatchewan and 
what you people are  

doing by stonewalling the information to the auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to that 
question, I would hope that you will allow me some latitude to 
read into the record today a letter sent to the lawyer for CIC by 
the lawyer for the Provincial Auditor. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In that letter — and I will answer the 
question if the hon. member is prepared to listen. In this letter, 
which I will table in this legislature as the rules require, 
following question period. 
 
The lawyer for the Provincial Auditor sets out in a letter to the 
lawyers for CIC, four conditions that he wishes to see action 
taken on. The conditions are: number one, that he be allowed to 
go to the Board of Internal Economy to get his budget; that he 
doesn’t have to go to treasury board; that his estimates are not 
debated in this House. Point number one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker: that he be able to audit, either 
jointly or by himself, all departments of government, which is 
allowed now, and all Crown corporations, which has not been 
the case since 1978. 
 
Number three, Mr. Speaker, is, and I will read: 
 

That he would of course expect to receive, on retirement, 
the same allowance and economic adjustments that are 
provided to deputy ministers. 
 

Number four, Mr. Speaker: he also recommends that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Number four, Mr. Speaker: he also 
recommends that his successor be appointed internally — in 
other words, that he has a say in who his successor is. 
 
Now let me read the final paragraph . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — New question to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a new question. I will not respond to what can only be 
described as a scurrilous smear on the reputation of the 
Provincial Auditor. My question was not directed in that 
context. 
 
My question was directed to the Premier, and I will repeat it 
again. My question to you, sir, is that this report says that there 
is an attack on the institution of the Provincial Auditor, that he 
can no longer do the job. That is a responsibility of this 
Assembly. That’s what this report says. I’m dealing with this 
report. 
 
I’m saying to you, sir, as the chief officer of this Assembly, 
next to the Speaker, and the leader of the province of 
Saskatchewan, will you take the necessary steps to find out who 
is breaking the law, who is denying the Provincial Auditor the 
information, and restore the  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1247 

 

integrity and the independence of this person to do the job for 
the taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response I’m going to 
read the final paragraph. And what it says: “I am advised . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I remind the hon. member that 
the contents of what he wishes to introduce must be related to 
the elementary question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I am about to read, Mr. Speaker, is 
directly related to what the Leader of the Opposition has said, 
Mr. Speaker, and it says: 
 

I am advised if speedy acceptance of this proposal is 
confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor will amend 
his report to reflect that satisfactory steps have been taken 
(to negotiate the deal.) 
 

Mr. Speaker, if a Provincial Auditor says, I will change my 
report if you do this, if you do this, if I have a proper retirement 
package and if I can determine who my successor is going to 
be, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that is improper. My question to the 
Leader of the Opposition is this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. Your Minister of 
Justice . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. Your minister has in 
effect made a serious allegation in this legislature pertaining to 
the Provincial Auditor, the allegation being that the Provincial 
Auditor’s report is conditioned upon arrangements being made 
for the Provincial Auditor’s personal situation, in part, and that 
therefore this is fraudulent. That is an allegation of criminal 
impropriety on the part of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I’m going to ask the Minister of Justice to repeat those 
statements and allegations outside this Legislative Assembly so 
that the Provincial Auditor can defend himself. And I am also 
going to ask, in order for that allegation to be clarified, that the 
Provincial Auditor and all of the relevant officials be 
summonsed to the bar of this House to explain and defend 
themselves against the scurrilous attack of the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. The 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I have read into the record 
today a statement by a solicitor acting on behalf of the 
Provincial Auditor. That solicitor has suggested that the 
Provincial Auditor will amend his report upon certain 
conditions being put forward. And in that letter he sets out  

four things that he has concerns with. Number one is whether 
he reports and gets his budget from the Board of Internal 
Economy. That’s a decision, Mr. Speaker, for this Assembly. 
 
He makes reference to who his successor will be. That is not his 
function; that is the function of the government and of the 
Assembly and of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
He makes reference — and I ask why — reference to what his 
severance will be on his retirement. What has that got to do 
with his report? Why is it even contained in the letter? 
 
And the questions I have, Mr. Speaker, the questions that have 
to be asked, Mr. Speaker: has the hon. member talked to the 
Provincial Auditor about this? Has the hon. member talked to 
the Provincial Auditor about his severance package? Has he 
talked about who the new appointment is going to be? I ask 
that, and I think that’s a legitimate question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the . . . New question 
to the Minister of Justice. I will tell the Minister of Justice in 
clear and certain terms that I have not spoken, written, directly 
or indirectly contacted or communicated with the Provincial 
Auditor in this regard. And I invite the Minister of Justice to 
make that allegation outside this Chamber. 
 
I say your allegation, sir, which you have read and adopted, 
says that the Provincial Auditor has conditioned this report on 
the basis of some personal objectives which he seeks to attain. I 
say, sir, that that is an allegation of the highest gravity, because 
it says the person has conducted himself against the laws that he 
is obligated to act, and that he would be prepared to change this 
report if a personal condition was met. 
 
I say that that person has a right to defend himself. And I say to 
you, sir, and I say to the minister who is in charge of you, the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, I want that Provincial 
Auditor before this Legislative Assembly, under oath, 
answering questions under oath as to exactly your allegations 
and this report. And will you agree to do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member has indicated that he 
has not talked to the Provincial Auditor. I would then request 
that he canvass his caucus and see whether or not other 
members have talked about these issues to the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
I can say to the hon. member that following question period — 
and I believe this is a serious letter — this letter will be tabled. 
And I also believe that the Provincial Auditor should be brought 
to account and to answer those concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where that is to be done, where it’s been done 
historically, in this province and in other provinces, is in the 
Public Accounts Committee. I didn’t invent that. That’s what’s 
been happening for 100 years in this  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1248 

 

country, and that’s the proper place that it should be done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What this letter leaves as an inference, Mr. Speaker, leaves as 
an inference is that he wants four conditions. He says that I 
want to have my estimates prepared by the Board of Internal 
Economy, not by treasury board. And I want my estimates, 
that’s in effect what he’s saying, and I want my estimates not in 
this committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small wonder. If one looks at the audit of the 
Provincial Auditor and the costs as he put forward, and the 
costs of the private sector auditor — let’s take an example, STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company), the bus company — 
the cost to do the audit by the Provincial Auditor is over 100 per 
cent higher than it is to do a private sector audit. No wonder he 
does not want to appear before the treasury board to justify his 
expenditures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to bring this to the attention of the 
members. I’ve been rather lenient this morning, as you can tell, 
on the length of questions and answers. It’s a serious matter, but 
I believe we’re kind of getting into debate, and I’d like to ask 
the hon. members answering the question to tighten up their 
questions and answers. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. May I 
say parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, you will note the words of the 
Minister of Justice about your servant, sir, the Provincial 
Auditor. You will note what the allegations are about your 
servant. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your servant. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, that’s right, your servant. I want to ask 
the minister, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, how 
long ago did the government have the letter to which the 
Minister of Justice has referred; what action has been taken by 
the government upon receipt of the letter; and has the letter 
been referred to the Institute of Chartered Accountants (of 
Saskatchewan)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The answer to the question, Mr. 
Speaker, is I received this letter late yesterday afternoon — late 
yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I look at this . . . I 
believe it is proper. I, in fact, believe this is proper that it be 
taken to the Institute of Chartered Accounts, and the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants look at in fact what this letter said, and I 
am advised there are other letters that are marked without 
prejudice that I have not and do not have the wherewithal to 
make public. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think the government 
opposite’s got this all wrong. The government . . . Well the 
members laugh opposite, but they’ve got it all wrong. The 
Provincial Auditor’s report has put you on trial, not the 
Provincial Auditor, by virtue of that letter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Put you on trial. Mr. Premier, I’m going to 
ask you to take your place in this House and tell me whether or 
not you have undertaken to investigate who it  

is in Crown investments corporation, who it is in the executive 
that has interfered and broken the law as the Provincial Auditor 
alleges in the Provincial Auditor’s functioning and fulfilment of 
his jobs? Have you undertaken those steps to determine who 
has broken the law, and when will that report be available to 
this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The question, Mr. Speaker, the question, 
Mr. Speaker, is this: does the Leader of the Opposition, does the 
Leader of the Opposition condone the solicitor for the 
Provincial Auditor in letter form suggesting that “I will amend 
my report to reflect that satisfactory steps have been taken,” if 
you do this? Does the Leader of the Opposition condone the 
Provincial Auditor through his counsel requesting that he will 
amend his report if this is done? Does the hon. member 
condone that kind of action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Dental Equipment 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in 
charge of the property management corporation. Mr. Minister, 
the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, points out in his report that 
the Department of Health transferred to your department more 
than $2 million worth of dental equipment to be sold, yet he can 
find no evidence of what your department did with the money 
or the equipment. Can you explain to this House, Mr. Minister, 
what happened to the dental equipment, or what happened to 
the $2 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll refer to the Provincial 
Auditor’s report in which he says a number of things with 
regard to SPMC. One of the things he says is that the auditors 
would not provide information to him with regards to travel by 
minister’s on executive air. That information was requested on 
January 20, and provided on March 15. 
 
With regards to the exact details of what the hon. member has 
asked, we will undertake to find an answer to that and bring that 
back. But that would not seem to me to be the gist of his 
questions today. 
 
But I will undertake to get that information . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to remind the hon. 
member that if he is taking notice on a question . . . as he well 
knows the rules do not allow for him to make preliminary 
remarks on another matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question was to the minister of 
charge of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 
and I direct my question to you again, sir. Mr. Minister, is your 
department so disorganized that you can lose $2 million worth 
of dental equipment, or $2 million of revenue when you sold it? 
Is it so disorganized that you can’t locate the money? What  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1249 

 

are you doing in SPMC? Would you tell me, Mr. Minister, 
today, where is the money? Who’s got it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
order. The hon. members are having debates amongst 
themselves when in fact the Minister of Justice should be 
answering a question. 
 
Order. Order. Order, order. The Minister of Justice has risen to 
answer a question. I recognize him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Preamble to that, to answering the 
question, Mr. Speaker, I say to the students in the gallery, I 
wonder if your conduct was like this in school or whether or not 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. The member, get to 
the point of the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the last 
response, that that information that we don’t have in question 
period today; we will undertake to get it, if you like, and report 
it back to the legislature at the next sitting day of the legislature, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Let’s get on to the next 
item of business. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 
the day, I rise to seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion 
on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. I’ve earlier today 
advised the Premier of my intention to do so in writing and 
would now ask to take just a very brief moment to advise the 
House of what I have done and what I propose. 
 
The issue is the Report of the Provincial Auditor and the grave 
and unprecedented concerns — by the way, now escalated 
grievously by the Minister of Justice and the Premier — 
concerns which the auditor has called to the attention of the 
legislature. 
 
In order that these very serious matters may be fully and 
immediately addressed and satisfactorily resolved, it is 
imperative that they be examined here in this Assembly. It is 
also necessary that in accordance with the provisions of The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, and the 
precedence of this House, certain witnesses be summoned to 
appear before the bar of the Assembly to be questioned on the 
issues raised by the auditor. 
 
I would note, Mr. Speaker, that this is the procedure that was 
used in the Assembly in 1977 when the Progressive 
Conservative opposition raised serious issues, and both 
government and opposition agreed that a key witness be 
summoned for questioning by members. I would propose, sir, 
that this take place on Tuesday next, which would ordinarily be 
a private members’ day, and we would forego that day. 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I have earlier this morning invited the 
Premier to second this motion and reiterate the invitation at this 
time. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the 
following motion and would sincerely hope, in the light of the 
grave allegations made by himself and the Minister of Justice 
today about the Provincial Auditor, that they would agree to 
second it. 
 
The proposed motion is as follows. By leave, seconded by my 
colleague, the House Leader on the opposition side: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to Section 19 of The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 
command the attendance at 2:30 p.m. on Tuesday next 
before the Committee of Finance of the following, to 
answer questions regarding issues raised in the Report of 
the Provincial Auditor; and that the Committee of Finance 
sit at 2:30 p.m. on Tuesday next for the express purpose of 
these examinations: 
 
the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Willard Lutz; the chairman of 
the Crown investments corporation, Mr. Wolfgang Wolff; 
the chairman of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Paul Schoenhals; the chairman of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, Mr. Donald Stankov; the president of 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, Mr. 
Otto Cutts; the chairman of the Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications, Mr. Garth Kennedy; the chairman of 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, Mr. Gavin Koyle; 
the appointed auditor for the Crown investments 
corporation; the appointed auditor for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan; the appointed auditor for 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation; the appointed 
auditor for the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation; the appointed auditor for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications; the appointed auditor for 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, and the chief 
executive officer of the Institute of Chartered Accountants 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in the light of the grave developments of this 
morning and the government’s failure to uphold the law as the 
Provincial Auditor has so urged and pleaded, and in the light of 
the fact that it is your servant and that institution which is at 
issue, I ask leave, beg leave of this Assembly to introduce this 
motion to deal with this matter urgently on Tuesday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to make the 
following statement on the matter that was raised in the House 
yesterday. 
 
Yesterday the member for Regina Elphinstone raised the  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1250 

 

question of privilege concerning certain statements made by the 
Provincial Auditor in his 1988 annual report. The member’s 
case of privilege reflected the auditor’s charge that he had been 
obstructed from doing his duty to this Legislative Assembly. At 
that time, I waived the normal required period of notice and 
allowed various members to address the case presented by the 
member for Regina Elphinstone. I deferred my ruling in order 
to consider the case itself and the related comments of 
members. 
 
Before ruling, I would like to point out that a long series of 
Speaker’s rulings have established the practice of this Assembly 
with regard to privilege. In summary, members should realize 
that it is not the role of the Speaker to decide if a breach of 
privilege has been committed. This is a question only the House 
can decide. It is my role to decide whether a prima facie case 
of privilege has been established by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone, which would justify giving this matter precedence 
over all other business of the House. 
 
The Provincial Auditor’s Act defines the auditor as an officer of 
the Assembly. It is clear that officers of the Assembly are 
entitled to the protection outlined in Erskine May’s 
Parliamentary Practice, Twentieth Edition, page 162, which 
states: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges, not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 
 

It is readily apparent from this quotation that anything that 
tends to impede an officer from conducting his duty can be 
construed as a form of obstruction. 
 
In the arguments presented yesterday, two distinct points were 
raised under the same question of privilege. The first matter, 
raised by the member for Regina Elphinstone, concerns the 
obstruction claim by the Provincial Auditor as cited in his latest 
annual report. The second issue relates to comments made by 
the Provincial Auditor by the Minister of Finance . . . or rather 
made about the Provincial Auditor by the Minister of Justice. 
 
Indeed, the member for Regina Lakeview claimed the 
minister’s comments amounted to intimidation, which she said 
undermined the auditor’s credibility. In my view, the words 
quoted were not in themselves sufficient to constitute an 
interference with the officer’s ability to carry out his duties. I 
therefore find that that this second matter does not constitute a 
question of privilege. 
 
I now want to deal with the first issue raised, which is the claim 
that the Provincial Auditor has been impeded in the 
performance of his duties. This is an extremely serious matter. 
In order for members to adequately fulfil their responsibilities 
as elected representatives of the people, they must be able to 
rely on the services of those officials whose duty by law is to 
provide members with information necessary to the functioning 
of the House. 
 
The claim being made is that the Provincial Auditor has been 
interfered with in the performance of his function. There is a 
responsibility of the House to determine  

whether there has been obstruction in this case. In order to 
clarify this important issue, and in light of the representations 
made yesterday, I believe that I must give the Assembly the 
opportunity to debate and determine whether a breech of 
privilege has indeed taken place. 
 
I therefore rule that, on the face of it, a sufficient case has been 
made to justify the Assembly dealing with this matter at this 
time, and I thereby place the matter in the hands of the 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
before us today a very, very serious issue. And that issue, Mr. 
Speaker, as I will show in this Legislative Assembly during my 
remarks, is an interference by a member of the government in 
this Assembly on an officer of the Assembly itself. And that is 
the accusation that has been made, or the allegations that have 
been made by the Provincial Auditor that he has not been able 
to carry out his function as the chief watch-dog on the 
expenditures of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And he cites, Mr. Speaker, a number of examples; in fact, I 
have marked about 20 to 25 examples in the auditor’s report 
where he clearly indicates that he has been interfered with either 
by the executive branch of government or members of the 
executive branch or high officials of agencies, departments and 
Crown corporations of the government. 
 
We will show this, Mr. Speaker, in our debates today. I thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing this debate to come before the 
House because as I’ve said from the outset, it is a most serious 
matter. An officer of this Legislative Assembly, our servant, the 
member who works for us, makes allegations against the 
executive branch of government, and other officials, that they 
have interfered on a number of occasions in not allowing him to 
carry out his function as an officer of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a democratic society we must make certain that 
the executive branch always is subservient to the Assembly or 
the Legislative Assembly of that particular province or that 
government; otherwise, Mr. Speaker, we do not have a 
democratic government. 
 
The members of the Legislative Assembly have a function to 
perform, and that is to represent the citizens of their 
constituencies. And in so doing, they must be able in this 
Legislative Assembly to, first of all, speak freely; secondly, to 
be able to exercise their duties and their functions in this 
Assembly with all the information that they can possibly garner 
in order to carry out their responsibilities. 
 
The Provincial Auditor very clearly indicates in his annual 
report that the members of this Assembly are not able to carry 
out their functions and their duties because, Mr. Speaker, he has 
been interfered with in his function by the executive branch — 
that means the cabinet — and by other officials of the 
government. That’s a very serious allegation; a very, very 
serious allegation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is really not the first time that those  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1251 

 

allegations have been made by an officer of the Assembly. They 
have been made in the past but they have not been to the same 
degree. This year, Mr. Speaker, is an exceptional year in that 
the auditor on almost every second, third, or fourth page of his 
report indicates that he can’t function because of lack of 
information that has been made available to him, lack of 
co-operation, and lack of access to information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Provincial Auditor is appointed by the 
Assembly, we ascribe to him certain duties and functions and 
responsibilities. He answers to us, and that is why you table his 
report and not a minister of the Crown, because he is our 
servant. And when he makes allegations in his annual report, it 
is incumbent upon us to make sure that we safeguard and 
protect that officer in his abilities to carry out his function. 
That’s what we are doing today. 
 
(1045) 
 
We would be irresponsible as members of the Legislative 
Assembly if we did not come before this Assembly to make our 
case for the Provincial Auditor, because we are his spokesmen. 
He is our servant; we must protect him. And if the executive 
branch, if the cabinet interferes with that function, then they are 
interfering with our rights and our duties and our 
responsibilities. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I have 
indicated, this is a very serious matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite — and I think we have said, 
and the auditor alludes to it, that this year his function has been 
cut down enormously. Last year he did about 90 per cent of the 
work of scrutinizing the books of the government. This year 
he’s done about 50 per cent. 
 
Let me, Mr. Speaker, show you what an enormous decrease that 
is in the role of the Provincial Auditor, not, Mr. Speaker, 
assigned to him by us, but by the executive branch of 
government. This government spends approximately $6.9 
billion. Ninety per cent of that would be about 5.7 billion. Last 
year the Provincial Auditor examined the books, the 
expenditures and revenues of the government, of about $5.7 
billion. This year he was able to examine less than $3.5 billion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can see what happens. We can see what 
can happen when the Provincial Auditor is not able to get the 
information that is required — a question, for example, that I 
directed to the ministers today on what happened to $2 million. 
Because the Provincial Auditor does not have access to that 
information, or because somebody refuses to let him have 
access, or someone refuses to give him the information, he is 
not able to report to this Assembly, and to us, what has 
happened to $2 million of taxpayers’ money. 
 
That is a serious allegation against the members opposite, 
against this government. And when it comes to question period, 
even the minister responsible for that department refuses to 
answer. He is the minister responsible. He is answerable to this 
Assembly. He is answerable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But what do they do? There are no answers. Is $2 million such a 
small amount of money today that we can simply  

scoff at the question as to what has happened? And I, Mr. 
Speaker, without any fear of being contradicted, will say that 
there are hundreds of millions, hundreds of millions of dollars 
that are simply unaccounted for in the auditor’s report. He can’t 
find out the information. He doesn’t know whether there is 
massive cover-up. He doesn’t know. I’m not accusing the 
government that there is massive cover-up. All I’m saying is we 
don’t know, and we have a right, as members of this Legislative 
Assembly, to have access to that information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, before I forget . . . The Minister of 
Justice today said that the proper channel for the examination of 
the auditor’s report is in public accounts. I was simply amazed 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, of the bizarre happening in public 
accounts. We on the opposition, who generally ask the 
questions in public accounts, generally are the ones who 
examine the various departments and agencies and Crown . . . 
No, well not Crown corporations departments. We are usually 
the ones to ask the question and decide which departments are 
called before the public accounts. 
 
What happened yesterday, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you what 
happened yesterday. We had the bizarre occurrence of the 
government members repeating verbatim to the officials of 
questions that we had already asked and answers that had 
already been tabled. 
 
Not only that, but we were told last night by the vice-chairman 
of public accounts, the hon. member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, that they now intend to call an additional 
five or six other departments that they want to ask questions on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts examinations that we are 
doing right now are for the year 1986-87. They are fully two 
and a half years old. Much of that information is irrelevant, it’s 
untimely, and the auditor makes the exact same observation. 
 
What we ought to be doing now is to turn to the 1988 Public 
Accounts, the auditor’s report. That’s what we should be doing. 
But we are again being interfered with in carrying out our 
responsibilities by the members opposite. 
 
And I’m saying to you, Mr. Speaker, what are they hiding? Are 
they being interfered with in carrying out their responsibilities 
again by the executive branch? Who is instructing the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster to filibuster the public accounts 
procedures? Who is instructing him? Is it the Premier? Is it the 
Minister of Justice? Is it the Minister of Finance? Because I 
don’t think it’s the members opposite, the back-benchers, who 
made this determination. 
 
Why suddenly do they want to drag out the 1986-87 Public 
Accounts examination, which are outdated, let me tell you? 
Why aren’t we on the more timely and also late already Public 
Accounts of 1987-88? I’ll tell you why. Because the executive 
branch doesn’t want us to examine the Provincial Auditor’s 
report of 1988 at this time. They’re hoping to drag out the 
public accounts for another two or three or four weeks and 
hoping that the media will forget — that the media will forget 
and  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1252 

 

everybody else will forget — or Mr. Lutz may be gone by that 
time, if the executive branch have their way, and we will not be 
able to examine those Public Accounts and those allegations 
that are made by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are in a sad situation when the executive 
branch, when the executive branch, without any quibble or any 
shame, feel that they, out of necessity, have to attack an officer 
of this Legislative Assembly, when this officer has no 
opportunity — no opportunity — to defend himself of the 
allegations that are made against him. I think it’s sad for 
democracy and it’s sad for the province of Saskatchewan that 
we have come to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me continue. The members opposite say that 
. . . or the executive branch say that they have no quibble or that 
they . . . No quibble. I suppose that’s the term I should use. 
They have no quibble with the Provincial Auditor examining 
the books of Crown corporations that have already been audited 
by private auditors. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you don’t provide the Provincial 
Auditor with sufficient funds and you don’t provide the 
Provincial Auditor with sufficient staff, how can he perform his 
function? That’s what they have done. In the last two or three 
years they’ve so dramatically cut his finances, they’ve so 
dramatically cut his staff, that he is unable, he is unable to audit 
the books on time; he is unable to examine the books of the 
companies and the Crown corporations that have been 
examined by private auditors. He’s simply not able to do it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the House that not only 
have they not given him adequate staff and adequate finances, 
but, Mr. Speaker, there has been absolutely no co-operation by 
the members opposite on the treasury benches. The Minister of 
Justice, time and time again, has not only said that he was 
opposed to this particular Provincial Auditor but has attempted 
from time to time to make scurrilous attacks, not on the 
competency of the Provincial Auditor, but personal attacks. 
 
If he had arguments to present to this Legislative Assembly to 
indicate to us that the Provincial Auditor is incompetent and is 
not doing his job, then let him bring that before this Legislative 
Assembly so we can deal with it. But I don’t believe that he has 
the right to make those scurrilous attacks on an officer of this 
Assembly. He is not just the servant for the Minister of Justice. 
The Provincial Auditor serves all the members of this 
Assembly. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat shameful that 
the Minister of Justice, who is the Minister of Justice, let me 
say, who should be above those kinds of things, he should lead, 
he should show the example, and what does he do? Instead he 
leads the attack on an officer of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor again on a number of 
occasions shows in his report that he was simply refused access 
to information — simply refused access to information. Before 
I get to that, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to page 4 of the 
auditor’s report. On page 4 the Provincial Auditor says: 
 

I cannot (I cannot) effectively carry out my role to watch 
over the public purse for my client, the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

I want to read that again. He says: 
 

I cannot carry out my role to watch over the public purse 
for my client, the Legislative Assembly. 
 

He does not say, my client, the executive branch, but my client, 
the Legislative Assembly — all of us, Mr. Speaker, you 
included. 
 
And if there is interference, if there is non-co-operation, 
whether that is instigated by the executive branch or whether 
individuals are doing it on their own, the Provincial Auditor is 
simply saying that he cannot carry out his function. And I 
would hope that the executive branch would make the tools 
available to the Provincial Auditor so he can be an effective 
watch-dog on the expenditures of public funds. 
 
He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Public Accounts are not complete, correct or timely. 
 

The Public Accounts are not complete, correct, or timely. What 
information is the government not putting into those Public 
Accounts, which are absolutely necessary for us as members of 
the Legislative Assembly to carry out our functions? What 
pertinent information is embarrassing to the government 
opposite that is not included in the Public Accounts? We don’t 
know and we can’t find out. 
 
But we could find out, Mr. Speaker, if we had the Provincial 
Auditor before the bar of the Legislative Assembly. Those 
questions could be directed to him and we could ask him, 
exactly what do you mean by that; what information is not 
included; what information were you denied that you asked for; 
what is the government hiding over there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will guarantee you that if the auditor was able to 
get sufficient staff, sufficient moneys to do his job, there would 
be a revelation in this province — there would be a revelation 
in this province that has never happened in the history of this 
province. 
 
I maintain that there is massive cover-up on the government 
opposite, massive cover-up, and of things that we have pointed 
to this morning is just the tip of the icebergs. They think that $2 
million is peanuts. Well, I suppose if there are hundreds of 
millions of dollars of cover-up and you are aware of them, then 
$2 million is peanuts. But not to the ordinary citizen, Mr. 
Speaker, not to the ordinary citizen. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, is alluding to waste and 
mismanagement. He does not say that there is corruption. We 
don’t know if there is corruption. But if the ministers of the 
Crown refuse to answer — refuse to answer where $2 million 
has gone to or where the equipment has gone to, what must one 
conclude? Either they are incompetent on the opposite side, or 
they’re in  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1253 

 

such disarray in that particular department, or, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a cover-up. I believe you only have those three alternatives. 
And the Provincial Auditor is making some of those allegations. 
 
(1100) 
 
I want to say again, he is not saying that there is corruption — 
those are my words — but he does say that he does not have 
access to — he does not have access to information that he 
needs in order to carry out his role as an officer of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says a number of other 
things, and I want to refer to one. And the Minister of Justice 
has constantly said that this is just a turf war, a war between the 
private auditors and the provincial auditors — it’s just a turf 
war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Justice doesn’t realize — and 
he should because he’s not only the Minister of Justice but he’s 
a minister of the executive branch of the government — he 
should know that there is a difference in the clients that are 
being served. And the Provincial Auditor on page 7 makes this 
very clear, where he says, and I want the members opposite to 
know: 
 

Appointed auditors as professionals serve their client, the 
Executive, with the same integrity I serve my client, the 
Assembly. 
 

There is a difference. If the executive hires a private auditor to 
do the auditing of certain departments or Crown corporations, 
they write the parameters as to what they want them to audit 
and what they want them to bring forward. That is not the same 
mandate that the Provincial Auditor has received from the 
people of Saskatchewan through the Legislative Assembly. 
There are different goals. There are different objectives. 
 
Let me return, Mr. Speaker, let me return to what the Provincial 
Auditor has said right from the beginning. He says: 

 
(I)  can no longer effectively serve the Assembly because 

(and he gives the reason): 
 

he now sees the financial transactions for about 50 per 
cent of the public spending; 

 
That means about $3.5 billion is not audited by the Provincial 
Auditor. Oh, they’re audited possibly by private auditors, but 
not by the Provincial Auditor. And the private auditors serve a 
different client than the Provincial Auditor does. The private 
auditor serves the cabinet. The Provincial Auditor serves the 
people of Saskatchewan and the members of the Legislative 
Assembly. And there is a difference — there is a difference. 
 
The Provincial Auditor says he cannot be effective because: 
 

when reliance on an appointed auditor is not justified, it is 
no longer possible to carry out the work done by the 
appointed auditor. 
 

He makes it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the tools that is 
required for him to do his job, simply cannot be done, because 
the government opposite has put the squeeze on him as far as 
staff is concerned and as far as finances are concerned because 
they want more and more of the auditing to be done by private 
auditors so, Mr. Speaker, the audit of those Crown corporations 
will be not be answerable to the Legislative Assembly. And I 
want to go to the Provincial Auditor’s report a little later to 
corroborate that, to verify it. 
 
He says, Mr. Speaker, that he cannot do his job effectively 
because he’s denied access to information. And time and time 
again, Crown corporations which the government has 
privatized, but in which they still hold a significant amount of 
assets, have refused to let the Provincial Auditor either audit 
their books or refused him the information because they say that 
they have been instructed by the executive branch not to 
provide that information to the Provincial Auditor — a direct 
interference, Mr. Speaker, by the executive, by the cabinet, in 
not allowing the Provincial Auditor access to information that 
he requires in order to do his job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interference — and the Provincial Auditor has 
listed dozens of them in his book on page 10 and 11 — where 
he says that he is simply not able to because the information is 
not available to him. He says, for example, on page 12: 
 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation (SPMC) 
has refused to give me information about ministerial travel 
expenses. 
 

We, for example, have, Mr. Speaker, this morning found out 
that the minister refuses, the Minister of Public Participation 
refuses to give us the information on the $2 million that has 
gone awry, that has gone awry. The Minister of Public 
Participation refused to answer, refused to answer this morning 
for his department of $2 million that has simply disappeared — 
$2 million that has disappeared. And I say to the Minister of 
Public Participation, if $2 million is that small amount to you, 
it’s no wonder that we have a deficit of $4 billion in the current 
account. 
 
If that’s the way you manage the funds of the province of 
Saskatchewan, I can see why we’re $4 billion in debt. Two 
million dollars to the ordinary citizen is a lot of money. It may 
not be a lot of money to you the way you’re spending it, but it’s 
a lot of money to the citizenry of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say a little bit further: 
 

In my opinion, this action by SPMC is an interference with 
an officer of the Assembly in the discharge of his duties. 
 

And what does the minister do this morning? He refuses to 
answer to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it the purpose of the executive branch to 
decrease, not only the role . . . I’ve been in this Assembly for a 
long time . . . 
 
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1254 

 

An Hon. Member: — Too long. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, and the member from Maple Creek says, 
too long. And I want to say to the member from Maple Creek, 
that’s not for you to decide; that’s for the people of 
Saskatchewan to decide. 
 
But that’s the kind of attitude that we get from the treasury 
benches. That’s the kind of attitude we have from the treasury 
benches who don’t believe in democratic democracy. They 
don’t believe in democratic government. They want to rule by 
decree; they want to rule by decree. And that’s why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have before us today the Provincial 
Auditor saying that there has been interference by members of 
the Executive Council, and maybe even by the member from 
Maple Creek. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But he’s wrong; he’s wrong. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Oh, she says, she says the Provincial Auditor is 
wrong. It’s not for her to decide whether the Provincial Auditor 
is wrong, it’s for the Assembly to decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me continue. On page 13, the 
auditor says: 
 

In addition to my inability to get information from 
C.I.C. . . . 
 

I want the member from Maple Creek to listen: 
 

In addition to my inability to get information from C.I.C., 
S.P.C., (Saskatchewan Power Corporation), S.P.M.C., 
SaskTel, and P.C.S., (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), I was refused access to the accounts of a 
crown controlled corporation, Westbridge Computer 
Corporation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t they open up the books of 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation? They tout it as an 
example of the public participation success. I heard the Deputy 
Premier say this is an example of success that we’ve had. Why 
wouldn’t they make it available to the Provincial Auditor so he 
can say, yes, it has been a tremendous success. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And to the public. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And to the public. What are they hiding? What 
deal did they make in WESTBRIDGE with the private 
entrepreneurs that they do not want the public to be aware of? 
What? I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you one thing, 
that SaskCOMP last year made a profit of $3.4 million. I also 
know that WESTBRIDGE, through no tendering, got a contract 
from SaskPower of over $60 million for the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just have a look at that. Why is 
WESTBRIDGE successful? Is it because the government has 
thrown all the government business it can to WESTBRIDGE to 
make it look successful? Is it, Mr. Speaker, because SaskCOMP 
was so successful, had $3.4 billion? Now they’re saying that 
WESTBRIDGE is a very  

successful example of public participation. What are they 
hiding if it’s been so successful? Is it, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
a major cover-up? 
 
We will know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether there is or not 
when the government changes in the next election. That will be 
brought forward to the people of Saskatchewan. We’re not 
going to find out now. We know how this government functions 
and we know how the cabinet functions. We probably won’t 
find out until the government changes, as I say, in the next 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is a basic principle involved in 
democratic government and the scrutiny of public funds that the 
auditor very clearly states on page 15. And he says in 2.76 on 
page 15, “Freedom from public scrutiny provides the ability to 
work in secrecy.” Let me repeat that. “Freedom from public 
scrutiny provides the ability to work in secrecy.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw 
North, often has said since he has been elected to this Assembly 
that the government operates behind closed cabinet doors, 
behind closed cabinet doors, out of reach of the public, out of 
scrutiny of the members of the Legislative Assembly, all done 
in secrecy, all done in secrecy. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, in a democratic province like Saskatchewan, 
why does not the public servant, the Provincial Auditor, have 
not only the grudging acceptance by the members opposite, but 
the willing acceptance by the members opposite and the 
co-operation by the ministers so that he can carry out his role as 
the watch-dog of the expenditures of moneys by the executive 
branch. 
 
Time and time again, Mr. Speaker, in his report, the auditor 
says that things are not done on a timely basis, and therefore the 
members of the Legislative Assembly can’t carry out their 
function in scrutinizing the Public Accounts. 
 
He says by the time that the Public Accounts are tabled, fully a 
year or a year and a half later — and in some instances, I will 
show later, not tabled at all — that members of the Legislative 
Assembly simply cannot perform their function. We need that 
information on a timely basis. 
 
Really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to examine books that are two and 
a half years old or three years old is really irrelevant. We need 
them, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now we get 
the sarcastic remark again from the member from Maple Creek. 
She says that I’m irrelevant, and I want to say to her again, you 
can’t govern by decree. And when the people decide to elect 
me, that is not your choice, that is the choice of the people of 
Saskatoon South. 
 
I want to remind the member, maybe she’s been too long on the 
treasury benches, and that you feel that it’s not important, the 
democratic procedure is not important. But the Provincial 
Auditor does; the members of this Legislative Assembly do. 
And I would remind the member opposite that she better start 
thinking about that  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1255 

 

too. 
 
A lot of people have fought for democratic government, and 
with a stroke of the pen it can be damaged. And we have 
already seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the executive branch 
can do. If they can do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to an officer of 
the Legislative Assembly, if they can do that to the Provincial 
Auditor, why can’t they do the same thing to the members of 
the Legislative Assembly? 
 
Well, somebody would say, they’ve done that. Of course they 
have, in Bill 5 that was passed last year; Bill 5 that was passed 
last year gave tremendous powers to the Deputy Premier as a 
member of treasury board or of the Executive Council. He has 
now sweeping powers to do almost anything that he wishes 
without coming before the Legislative Assembly that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they pushed through the House. They didn’t 
give us sufficient time to debate it, and now they have those 
powers, and again decreased the role significantly of members 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also turn to page 18 where — and this is 
probably the most serious accusation that the Provincial Auditor 
makes — it’s under the heading, non-compliance with the law. 
Non-compliance with the law. 
 
(1115) 
 

My officials noted instances where the tabling of annual 
reports and/or financial statements in the Assembly did not 
comply with the law. Appendix IV contains a list of these 
statements and/or annual reports. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to now turn to appendix III 
and appendix IV. In appendix IV, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
a list of 37, I believe . . . no, 64, I believe, a total of 64 financial 
statements or annual reports that have not been tabled in the 
Legislative Assembly in the manner required by law. 
 
I want to remind the Deputy Premier, you are not above the 
law. We make the laws here. The Assembly makes the laws. 
They are approved by the Lieutenant Governor, and then you 
are expected to abide by those laws, not just by the letter of the 
law but also the spirit of the law. And I think that is very 
important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Provincial Auditor indicates again that there are a number 
of reports that have not been tabled on time. In fact we had a 
very serious case of this last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I can 
remind you of that, when the estimates of the Department of 
Health came up. When did the minister table his report? Just an 
hour or two before his estimates came up. Now that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . my colleague reminds me that it was not an 
hour or two before; it was exactly the same time that we started 
his estimates. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, may be in keeping with the letter of 
the law, but it certainly does nothing in keeping with the spirit 
of the law or enhancing the importance of the roles of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly or  

enhancing the principles of democratic government — 
absolutely does nothing. 
 
And I think it is time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we in this 
Assembly get back to the democratic principles which says that 
there shall be representation by population, number one. 
Number two, that the members of this Assembly have the right 
to full information, to accurate information, and to timely 
information, in order that we can carry out our role as members 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very often we must do that 
depending on the functions and duties and roles of officers that 
we appoint of this Assembly. And one of the most important 
officers is the Provincial Auditor, and if he does not receive the 
co-operation of the executive branch opposite, there is no way 
— there is no way — that he can carry out his function, and 
neither can we carry out our function. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Provincial Auditor also refers to 
appendix III, page 1, audits that have not been completed on 
March 24, 1989 — fully a year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the 
fiscal year, less one week. One year, less one week, after the 
fiscal year has come to an end, we have not had 26 . . . 26 
departments or agencies or Crown corporations who have not 
been audited. We have such important ones as Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker; fully 
$1.2 billion was given to the agricultural credit corporation by 
the Department of Agriculture, and Finance, in the loan 
production program and the cash advance program. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last Public Accounts it was 
clearly indicated that there were some problems with the 
production loan program and the cash advance program in as far 
as there was not sufficient inspections done and the monitoring 
was very loosely done. And there may be some very heavy 
losses in that particular area. And is that the reason, is that the 
reason why that particular account has not been audited? We 
don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We don’t know, and that 
information should be made available to us. 
 
Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan has not been 
audited. Crown investments corporation is the department 
where hundreds of millions of dollars of moneys are invested 
throughout the government and throughout the province — 
hundreds of millions of dollars, and we do not have the audited 
reports. In fact, they have not been audited. At least, they have 
not been completed. 
 
Department of Finance, comptroller’s division, has not 
completed its audit. Department of Highways, Department of 
Supply and Services, Law Reform Commission, market 
development fund, and so on, Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan — Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the one 
that they want to privatize — has not been audited, or at least it 
has not been completed. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on 
and on and on, and as I’ve said, fully 26 various departments. 
 
You know another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this will  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1256 

 

interest you, too. You know the one that hasn’t been completed 
is WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the auditor said that WESTBRIDGE, for example, told 
him that they didn’t have to be audited by him, and they refused 
to let him have access to information or even to audit their 
books. Now we find that they’re not even audited. 
 
What, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the government opposite trying 
to hide in some of these Crown corporations and some of these 
departments that they have not been audited. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in order for us to carry out our role as members of the 
Legislative Assembly we need that information. Is that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, why the members on public accounts are 
filibustering, that they do not want us to get to these? Is it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that they hope that this session will come to an 
end some time in September, October, or November, or 
whatever, and they don’t want these to come before public 
accounts? Is that the reason for it? 
 
The member from Wascana should be able to tell us because he 
was one of the members that was filibustering yesterday. In 
fact, I would say probably the main one in the committee who 
was doing the filibustering. What does he know? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what have the members from treasury 
board, what have the members from the Executive Council told 
him? What have they instructed him to do? And what reasons 
did they give him to filibuster Crown corporations? Is it 
because they are hiding something? Is it because they are 
covering up? Is it because there is a big scandal in one of these 
departments somewhere? We don’t know, we can only assume. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of people out there 
who are going to assume the worst, and I don’t blame them. I 
don’t blame them. The waste and mismanagement and the 
irresponsibility of the members opposite can only lead you to 
conclude that there is something rotten in the state of Denmark, 
and in this particular case, in the provincial cabinet. I think 
there is something very surprising in the provincial cabinet. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many things that one could 
talk about in the Provincial Auditor’s report. It is a damning 
statement of the government opposite; it is simply a damning 
statement. And for members opposite not to come to grips with 
the accusations and allegations made here, is totally 
irresponsible for members of the executive branch. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say this: it is a disgrace, it 
is a disgrace when they personally attack and make scurrilous 
remarks about an officer of the Assembly of this province. That, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be unacceptable and they will be held 
accountable. 
 
The people of this province will not easily forget — will not 
easily forget — the members opposite refusing to provide 
information, not only to the Provincial Auditor, but refusing to 
provide information to the members of this Assembly and then, 
as a last resort, making an attack — and I say a scurrilous attack 
— on a member of the Legislative Assembly, an officer of the 
. . . 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks by simply 
saying that we cannot simply push aside some of the damning 
statements that are made. I think the statements that are made 
by the Provincial Auditor . . . you can examine any Provincial 
Auditor’s report in all of Canada, I would think in the history of 
Canada, you would not find — you would not find — a more 
damning report on any government than we have before us 
here. I think it is unprecedented. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is incumbent upon the members 
here and the government, particularly the executive branch, to 
come to grips with those accusations and allegations that are 
made, and let’s resolve some of those damning statements. 
Let’s get some answers to those damning statements that are 
made, and let’s clear the deck. 
 
And with those words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to move the 
following motion, seconded by the member from Riversdale, 
my leader, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. And the 
motion is the following: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and 
that this Assembly direct the Government of 
Saskatchewan to make available full information and the 
necessary co-operation in order to allow the Provincial 
Auditor to fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified 
in the statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for recognizing me as the seconder of this very 
important motion. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in my judgement this debate, 
this discussion this morning, has all of the importance and the 
relevance of perhaps any issue that I’ve debated and attended in 
my some-odd-20 years in the provincial legislature. 
 
And it’s taken a bizarre turn of events as a result of question 
period today, Mr. Speaker, a bizarre, but I must also say sad and 
unfortunate turn of events which has only escalated, escalated 
an already grave, serious issue before the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of Justice’s verbal, selected readings of portions 
of a letter which he tabled after question period, and which I did 
not have access to until after question period, in my judgement, 
Mr. Speaker, amount to nothing more, nothing less than a 
misrepresentation. I am barred by the rules of this House of 
saying, a deliberate misrepresentation, so I will not. But I will 
allow you, sir, and the members of the public and the member 
of the government side, to determine whether or not it is a 
misrepresentation, or whether it’s something more serious than 
that. The answers of the Minister of Justice, in  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1257 

 

the context of what the letter really says, and tabled, as we have 
now read, when you judge the letter as against his answers, 
whether or not, if it were not for parliamentary rules, the term 
“deliberate misrepresentation” could have been attached. 
 
(1130) 
 
I can’t make that accusation, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not going to. 
But I am going to say that what the minister has done has 
grievously misrepresented, has badly misrepresented the 
contents of the letter. And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, in his 
answers at question period, left the clear impression that the 
Provincial Auditor was involved in some form of negotiations 
dependent upon the nature of his report, which negotiations, in 
effect, would colour the ultimate end result of his findings or 
the essence of the report. That was the clear innuendo. That was 
the clear message of the Minister of Justice, make no mistake 
about that, on the selected readings of the letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this, in my years in this legislature, is 
unprecedented. I have never seen either an opposition or a 
government attack an officer of this Assembly — and may I 
say, sir, a ranking senior officer such as the Provincial Auditor 
of this Assembly — making the clear suggestion of 
impropriety, if not criminal impropriety, if not criminal 
impropriety; namely, I want to fatten my pension or get my 
circumstances straightened away by way of retirement, and then 
you might get changes in the report. If not criminal, certainly 
allegations of impropriety. I don’t believe the record will show 
that there has been anything of this nature, of this gravity, by a 
minister of Justice of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, made in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This, sir, is a person who is your servant. This, sir, is the servant 
of the Speaker and of all the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, who is defenceless, who does not have a seat in this 
House, who has his report as his words, who has served the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan in the capacity of 
Provincial Auditor since 1971, I believe — I could be wrong — 
loyal service for 28 years, through all kinds of governments. 
And before that time as Provincial Auditor, he was also serving 
as an official in the Department of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Here we have the Minister of Justice of the government, and an 
hon. member of this legislature, saying the words that he did on 
a selected interpretation of the literature which we did not 
receive until after question period, which I think is really a 
damning indictment of the government’s deliberate, consistent, 
and unjustified pattern of interference, obstruction, and — 
putting it bluntly — downright attack on the individual and the 
institution of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The minister has got himself in a major dilemma, having 
suggested in question period, impropriety. The Minister of 
Justice, it is his obligation now as Minister of Justice to have 
that fully investigated and determined. That is a dilemma, when 
the accuser is also the person who does the investigation. It is a 
dilemma when the accuser is a partisan of such partisanship, 
who fails to respect the integrity of the office of the Justice 
minister and, I would  

argue, fails to respect the integrity and the independence of this 
high office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to compound the error, to 
compound the error, the Minister of Justice goes outside of this 
Assembly and, I’m advised, refuses to give his verbal 
interpretation of the letter outside the Assembly. He refuses to 
do so because he knows that in all likelihood the Provincial 
Auditor will have no other recourse but to protect and defend 
his honour and to have this matter heard in a court of law in 
order to clear his name and reputation. And the Minister of 
Justice refuses to back up his words in the legislature, outside 
the Assembly. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this is the worst of all situations — the 
attack on the Provincial Auditor protected by immunity within 
this Chamber, and presumably reported by the journalists as 
they’ll have some obligation to do. And then the dichotomy, the 
black and the white, the right and the wrong, outside the 
Chamber when the minister flees the journalists and their 
questions — no other way to describe it — and does not have 
the evidence, does not have the conviction, does not have the 
courage to repeat outside what he said inside. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, we have reached a grave impasse on the 
future of the Provincial Auditor and the role of the Minister of 
Justice. This government has committed political hari-kari by 
the intemperate words of the Minister of Justice in the 
government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And moreover they won’t allow the 
Provincial Auditor to come before the bar of the House. This 
was done in 1977 with Mr. Hewitt Helmsing, Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association executive director, when there was an 
allegation that hospitals were dirty and filthy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. All the members summonsed the witness and he 
was examined under oath because you, sir, as you know, have 
the power of a court to deal with the discipline of the members 
and the questions and the issues pertaining to the House. It’s 
been done. 
 
And when we asked the Premier to accept this, this was 
rejected. And so how are you viewing . . . how does one view 
the position of Mr. Willard Lutz, the Provincial Auditor? He is 
condemned here. He has no recourse outside. He cannot come 
to the members of the legislature to explain his circumstances, 
because what is said here is privileged. He is absolutely boxed 
in by what one can only describe as a deliberate, purposeful 
attack, not on Mr. Willard Lutz alone — that’s bad enough, yes, 
on him — but on the very foundation of this parliamentary 
system, the role of the Provincial Auditor, sir, on the very 
foundation of what parliamentary democracy is — 
accountability. No taxes until we know what it’s going to go 
for, on the responsibility of the auditor to be the watch-dog, not 
only for the opposition, but for all members and for all the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. If 
there was any doubt that this government deserves the 
condemnation and will receive this condemnation by the 
electorate of the province of Saskatchewan, it is this scurrilous, 
gutless  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1258 

 

attack that they launched on the Provincial Auditor today. Make 
no mistake about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to read into the 
record what this letter says. First of all, this is a letter tabled by 
the Hon. Minister of Justice, the one that I did not have in 
responding to his questions and answers, but he did have. I’m 
going to read the full letter, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to 
invite you, sir, and invite the members of the journalistic corps 
and the members of the public to make their judgement on what 
this letter says. 
 
First of all, it is dated April 20, 1989. It’s written over the 
letterhead of barristers and solicitors in Regina, Merchant and 
Burnett, and it is written particularly by a solicitor in that firm, 
G.J.K. Neill, Mr. Gordon Neill, a respected, long-time member 
of the profession and the bar in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The letter on April 20 goes as follows. It’s addressed to Mr. 
Larry Kyle, QC, of Regina, Saskatchewan. The letter says this, 
Mr. Speaker — this is the letter from the lawyer of the 
Provincial Auditor: 
 

Dear Larry: Re: The Provincial Auditor, your file (so and 
so.) Thank you for your letter of April 18, which I 
received late yesterday afternoon. 
 

I’ll stop there, Mr. Speaker. First sentence: it’s clear that Mr. 
Kyle has written to Mr. Neill of April 18. Quote (I’m now 
reading from the letter again): 
 

You initiated this process (referring to Mr. Kyle) to see if 
there was some common ground (now get this, Mr. 
Speaker) some common ground (to do what?) some 
common ground (I quote from the letter) which would 
result in the Provincial Auditor being able to fulfil his 
statutory duties with the full co-operation of the executive 
government without impairing accountability. 
 

Yes, I emphasize that: 
 

. . . result in the Provincial Auditor being able to fulfil his 
statutory duties with the full co-operation of the executive 
government. 
 

That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what the Provincial Auditor 
wanted straight across the piece, and this government initiated 
this dialogue which prompted in this letter saying, how do we 
get on to get the Provincial Auditor’s objectives achieved. 
 
The letter then says this: 
 

The annual report in draft form which your clients have 
apparently seen (your clients, Mr. Speaker, here are the 
government; they apparently have had this draft form in 
their hands before we did), I am advised (the letter says), 
reflects the Provincial Auditor’s concern in what he 
considers to be interference with him in the performance 
of the function of his office impairing the accountability 
process. 
 

Perfectly consistent with everything that the Provincial Auditor 
has said. I read, quote: 
 

My client has suggested that joint audits of the crown 
corporations and crown-controlled corporations would go 
a long way to overcoming some of the difficulties. 
 

I stop, Mr. Speaker, to deviate from the text. We know that 
that’s exactly consistent with what the report says of the 
Provincial Auditor. I read again from the letter: 
 

This (the auditor’s lawyer writes) was rejected by your side. 
 

I underline these words, Mr. Speaker. The lawyer for the 
auditor writes: 
 

My client has suggested that the executive government 
ensure that he has full access to whatever information he 
deems necessary (as his Act provides) together with a 
statutory amendment (a statutory amendment) to allow 
him for the review of his budget by the Board of Internal 
Economy rather than the present system. 
 

I’m going to stop there. Why is the Provincial Auditor saying 
he wants a statutory amendment to have his budget determined 
by the Board of Internal Economy as opposed to the present 
system? You know why? Because the present system is that his 
budget is dependent upon what the Minister of Finance and the 
Premier give him. And what they’ve been giving him in the last 
five or six years are less and less and less funds — he says so in 
the report — so much so that he can’t do his job. 
 
But the Board of Internal Economy is our board, your board, 
Mr. Speaker. It is the board of the Legislative Assembly. He 
views himself to be an officer of the Legislative Assembly. He 
says, I want a legislative amendment so that I can get my 
budget determined by the Board of Internal Economy because 
— I read these words into it because his report says so — under 
the current system, under this government of PC people 
opposite, they are squeezing me to the point where I am not 
able to fulfil my statutory duties, and that’s wrong. I need that 
amendment. That’s what he says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Perfectly consistent with what he said in his 
report. 
 
I continue: “If this were done . . .” “If this were done . . .” What 
was done, going back to the earlier sentence? Two things: 
guaranteeing access to whatever information is required, 
number one. And number two, if this were done, number two 
being the Board of Internal Economy setting the budget and not 
those people opposite . . . 
 

If this were done he indicated that he could retire quietly 
upon the appointment of his successor, knowing that his 
successor would be able to fulfil the responsibilities of the 
office in a more harmonious atmosphere. 
 

  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1259 

 

I’ll stop there. Now, is this anything else but the highest 
motivation of a Provincial Auditor to accomplish two things 
from this government: guaranteed of access of information and 
guaranteed independence of the Provincial Auditor to the Board 
of Internal Economy. He says, if you’d give me that, I could 
retire knowing that my successor will be able to, under the 
circumstances, fulfil the job that I’ve not been able to do, in 
more harmonious circumstances. That’s what he says, if this 
were done. 
 
And then I continue: 
 

He would, of course, expect to receive on retirement (if 
this should happen — this is not his words, but mine — if 
this should happen) the same allowances and economic 
adjustments that are provided Deputy Ministers in 
accordance with The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

He’s not asking for anything extra. He’s not asking for any 
powers. He simply says he wants the allowance and the 
economic adjustments that he is entitled to by the laws of this 
land. That’s all he’s saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Then he goes on to say, the lawyer for the 
provincial accountant . . . for the Provincial Auditor. He says: 
 

He also recommended that his successor be appointed 
internally (recommended that’s all) in accordance with the 
convention that has been established in this Province 
(because he was appointed internally), Ontario, Manitoba, 
Alberta, P.E.I., Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia. These 
proposals have been rejected by you (the letter says). You 
have made no counter proposal. 
 

That’s the letter. 
 
Then you take a look at the second page of the letter — I’m 
reading every word for it. I wonder what the member from 
Pelly thinks about this? The second page. I quote now the letter. 
This is the Provincial Auditor’s lawyer writes: 
 

The Provincial Auditor is prepared to continue in office so 
the appointment of a successor is not emergent. 
 

(1145) 
 
Now what he’s saying is, I’m not going to abandon the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. I won’t walk away. I’ll be 
there so that the vacancy is not emergent. It will be filled in due 
course. And he writes — the lawyer does — as follows: 
 

All that is required to overcome . . . 
 

Get these words, Mr. Speaker. This is an exact quote, and I say 
this to the Minister of Urban Affairs: 
 

All that is required to overcome the difficulties . . .  

(I repeat) All that is required to overcome the difficulties 
is a directive from the executive (that means the cabinet) 
to all concerned that they are required by law (which is the 
case) to furnish the information that the Provincial Auditor 
deems necessary to fulfil his duties and that his estimates 
be reviewed by the Board of Internal Economy. 
 

Full stop; period. That’s all that’s required. That’s what the 
Provincial Auditor said, and the Minister of Justice totally 
misrepresented what the Provincial Auditor said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And then the letter says . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’d just like to remind 
hon. members that I’m hearing some unparliamentary language 
being used from seats, and I’d once more remind hon. members 
to cease and desist. It adds provocation to the House, and it 
doesn’t add anything to it. It interrupts the member 
unnecessarily. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 
your assistance for me and to this House. I’m still with the letter 
from the lawyer of the Provincial Auditor. I’ve read — and I’ll 
just simply repeat this — all that is required to overcome the 
difficulties is a directive, which is what he said in his report. 
 
Then the letter continues, quote: 
 

I am enclosing: 
 

What? 
 

1)   A draft letter with respect to the former, and 
 

Namely, a directive for your consideration, he says, to the 
lawyers of the Executive Council. And what? 

 
2)   A draft of the statutory provision with respect to the 
latter, 

 
The statutory provision being to get his estimates considered by 
the Board of Internal Economy and not by the Premier and the 
Minister of Finance. That’s all he’s enclosing. 
 

for your consideration. 
 
I am advised that if speedy acceptance of both these 
proposals . . . 
 

Both, namely the Board of Internal Economy; secondly, the 
question of the issue of a directive saying that the information 
must be tabled. He says: 
 

. . . if speedy acceptance of both of these proposals in 
confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor will amend 
his report to reflect that satisfactory steps have been 
negotiated to answer his concerns. 
 

Period. And, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t he do that? If the 
executive said, in writing, in directive, if the Premier’s response 
to this damning, searing report was yes, I will  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1260 

 

undertake to do what you ask to correct the situation, then the 
auditor would have included that in the report. That would have 
been the issue, the end of the issue. But no, this government 
cannot give him that assurance. This government refused to 
give him the assurance. They will not give him full access to the 
facts. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because there is a mess that they are 
covering up and hiding, and they don’t want the Provincial 
Auditor to know about it! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m continuing now from the letter, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

He is also prepared to consider alternative wording . . . 
 

To show that he is a reasonable person, he says: 
 

He is also prepared to consider alternative wording of the 
enclosed drafts to accomplish the same objective. 
 

Give me a counter proposal, he says, on these objectives. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What objective? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What objective? The objective is to amend 
the Board of Internal Economy so that it controls its estimates. 
That’s objective, Mr. Minister from Melville. And secondly, to 
have you issue a directive that you comply with the law. Those 
are the only two objectives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I’ll tell you something else, Mr. 
Minister from Melville. If you say or insinuate any other 
objective, I ask you to get outside that House and say it outside 
the House. Say it outside the House, every one of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Every one of you, you get out there and 
show the guts of your convictions and make that accusation 
outside. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 
again protecting me in this debate. I must say parenthetically 
here, what really has agitated me, and I’m sorry to be losing my 
temper a bit, is in the light of this letter, this is the black and 
white of . . . it’s all over, to the journalists — in the light of this 
letter, how in the world these people, the minister of the Crown, 
has the gall from his seated position to insinuate that there is 
something more; I say if that minister has got evidence of 
something more, I want to know about it. If this Provincial 
Auditor has got something else on the agenda — I’m not out to 
protect the Provincial Auditor — I want to know about it. 
 
But you, by golly, are not going to have the right to malign  

this person, this civil servant, who has served this province 
honourably and loyally and competently and legally, without 
this opposition coming to his defence and coming to the 
defence of the people of Saskatchewan — none whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Then . . . and by the way, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to close off the letter. It says . . . after the alternative 
drafts, he writes, the lawyer for the Provincial Auditor writes: 
 

However, any changes in the Report will have to be made 
before the Audit Committee review on Tuesday, April 25, 
1989. 
 
I look forward to hearing from you. Yours truly, G.J.K. 
Neill 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what other possible interpretation of any 
person, fair-minded person, can be made except that the 
Provincial Auditor was involved in discussions with the 
executive to accomplish two objectives, both of which the 
Provincial Auditor wanted in his report, which are perfectly 
consistent with what he’s been saying: let me do my job; let me 
get the facts. We’ll work on a joint basis with the joint auditors, 
the privately appointed auditors, and give me more 
independence, please. Put me under the Board of Internal 
Economy. What other rational conclusion could be made of this 
letter? 
 
Now I just want to make one comment here, Mr. Speaker, 
which comes to my mind. We’re going to examine very 
carefully the questions and answers given in today’s question 
period by the Minister of Justice on this grave, grave allegation. 
But if my memory serves me correctly, since I didn’t have the 
letter, I got up and I asked the Premier, who refused to take any 
question on this issue today, when they got this letter and what 
steps they had taken with respect to this letter. And I think you 
will recall, sir, the Minister of Justice got up, because the 
Premier refused to take any answers today, and he said, well we 
just got this letter yesterday — May 18, last night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the date of the letter is April 20, 1989, directed to 
the lawyers for the government. One month later, the Minister 
of Justice would have us believe, one month later, on the eve of 
this debate, or two days after the Provincial Auditor’s report 
was tabled, one month later the government has been given 
notice of this letter. That’s what he would have us believe. 
 
I tell you, if that happened, then Mr. Larry Kyle should be fired 
as lawyer because he didn’t advise the executive of what this 
letter was. And if that is to be believed, there is impossible 
incompetence on the side of the government. Here you have a 
letter where there is a negotiation, and the Minister of Justice 
would have us believe that for one full month he knew nothing 
about it. See no evil; hear no evil; speak no evil. 
 
He raises it, however, in this House, with selected passages for 
the purpose of destroying the man’s reputation. He is not going 
to get away with it, and neither is the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1261 

 

not going to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I give fair notice to the 
government, pursuant to this letter, that I am going to, and my 
colleagues are going to demand that the letter of April 18 from 
Mr. Larry Kyle, not tabled today, be tabled forthwith. 
 
This letter of the Provincial Auditor’s is a letter which says that 
they initiated — Mr. Kyle, on behalf of the Executive Council. 
In order to complete this story, this letter will be tabled, I 
guarantee you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to know what the letter of April 18 from Mr. Kyle, on 
behalf of the Premier and the executive, was demanding of the 
Provincial Auditor. I want to know who on the front benches 
instructed Mr. Kyle to write that letter on April 18 to the 
auditor. Was it the Premier who initiated the enterprise? Was it 
the Minister of Finance; was it the Minister of Justice? I want to 
know what that letter said and I want to know what they 
demanded of the Provincial Auditor because, Mr. Speaker, if 
they were demanding his resignation in that letter of April 18, 
that will be yet another important piece of evidence to this sorry 
crisis that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the government 
opposite, and I say to the Acting House Leader right now, you 
will have that letter tabled by today, or Tuesday, I guarantee 
you that, plus every other related documentation. I make that 
warning, that promise to you, sir, and to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. I want to know what that says. 
We’re going to get to the bottom of this situation — whether 
Mr. Lutz is at fault, or the government’s at fault, we’re going to 
get to the bottom of it. That’s the beginner. 
 
Secondly, I want to know, and I’m going to be coming back on 
this on question period and in other avenues that I can obtain, I 
will want to know when the letter from Mr. Neill landed in the 
hands of the government. I will want to know whether they sat 
on their hands for four weeks and did nothing, or whether 
somebody kept it away from the government for four weeks. 
 
I tell the government House Leader, you will provide that 
information also on Tuesday, or sooner. The press will want to 
know that, and the public will want to know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve made my points about the balance of the 
letter, comments about which would result in the Provincial 
Auditor being able to fulfil his statutory duties. That’s the thrust 
of the letter. Why not? In the letter he said he would retire and 
that his successor would work in harmonious relationships. 
Why not? Working with this government clearly must have 
been a heartache for this auditor for a number of years. The 
auditor is saying, I won’t go unless I know my successor can do 
the job, that he can clean up this waste and mismanagement — 
exactly the opposite of what the Minister of Justice 
misrepresented this letter to be. 
 
In the letter, as well, he says that he wants independence. I’ve 
made that point on the Board of Internal Economy. In  

this letter, as well, he says he’ll amend the report to reflect the 
satisfactory steps been negotiated to achieve his objectives — 
nothing more, nothing wrong with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I’d had that letter in front of me, clearly the 
conclusion would be that Mr. Lutz was doing what he had to do 
— the proper and honourable thing. By the way, I wouldn’t 
have expected anything other from this gentleman. 
 
But this House was given answers which were far different 
from what this letter says. And I make one last, third notice to 
you, sir, and to the government opposite: on Tuesday the 
Premier — the Premier — will be here and he will answer for 
these discrepancies between the written word and the spoken 
answers by the Minister of Justice. He will be here; he will 
account to this. 
 
And I guarantee it, Mr, Speaker, we are going to be demanding, 
if there is a discrepancy in the absence of any written proof, that 
not only this Minister of Justice resign but the entire Premier 
and government resign. They have lost the confidence of this 
House and the people of Saskatchewan to govern . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They will be here — they will be here. 
 
There is another avenue open. If the Minister of Justice has 
evidence to back up his verbal answers today, he must table 
them — inside or outside the House — by Tuesday’s question 
period, Mr. Speaker, because if the allegations made there are 
as he says — and we’ll want to ask the Provincial Auditor about 
those. We’re not here to protect the Provincial Auditor per se. I 
think there isn’t a shred of evidence implied by innuendo or 
otherwise, as the Minister of Justice would say — but if there 
is, the Minister of Justice must come forward with that on 
Tuesday and no later, because we’ll want, the public will want 
that clearly aired. I give that promise too, as of Tuesday. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how did we get ourselves . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Those are a lot of promises. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, there are a lot of promises. And I’ll tell 
you something, Mr. Minister from Melville, unlike you people, 
we keep and fulfil our promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I tell you, Mr. Minister from Melville, 
and you from Maple Creek, on this issue with respect to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I tell the minister from Melville and 
the member from Maple Creek and all the front benches in this 
House, what you have done to the institution of the Provincial 
Auditor, what you have done to the institution of this Assembly 
by that kind of statements and that kind of action in the absence 
of proof — if there’s proof to the contrary, we want to see it — 
I think has destroyed, if there is any shred of credibility left,  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1262 

 

all credibility on behalf of this government. 
 
Yes, I make a lot of promises. And I promise you, sir, this you 
will not, not escape. You will answer and provide the evidence, 
I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I have to ask the question: why? Why have we come to 
this sorry state of affairs? I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by 
saying that I’ve been on the treasury benches for 11 years, and I 
don’t thing there’s been a Provincial Auditor’s report in that 
time that hasn’t been critical of the government that I was a 
party of — even critical of departments that I administered. It’s 
the nature of the system that the Provincial Auditor, who is the 
servant of all of us, and by the way, not us but the taxpayers out 
there — this is a taxpayer issue; this is not an individual MLA 
issue only. It’s the nature of the job that the Provincial Auditor 
will go and he will examine and he will ferret out things that an 
opposition can never do. And by God, it’s a great thing that we 
have this institution that he or she can do that. 
 
I didn’t like some of the Provincial Auditor’s reports that we 
had tabled — still don’t when I look back at it. But when a 
government gets an auditor’s report, it has one of two choices: 
either it has adequate explanation for what the Provincial 
Auditor points out — fair enough, in which case it’ll be tabled 
— or in the alternative, it takes corrective action. 
 
I would like to think that most governments would view the 
Provincial Auditor not as an adversary, not as a partisan, but as 
somebody who is strengthening the whole institution and, by 
the way, strengthening the way the government operates. 
 
If I was Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and if I 
received this kind of a report, Mr. Speaker, my first directive to 
my ministers and officials would be: I want to know, is it true 
— documented truth? If the answer is no, that it is true, I have 
no other information, then my next step, Mr. Speaker, would be 
very simple: I would direct the departments to immediately 
comply with the provisions of the law. And I would come to the 
legislature and the Assembly here and I would say, well this is a 
damning report; we’ve not done enough; we’ve clearly got to 
do more, and by golly, we’re going to do more. We’ll sit down 
with the auditor and work out whatever the system is on joint 
auditors. 
 
I think that’s been the response of all governments. The late 
premier, Ross Thatcher, had the same problem the seven years 
he was government. This is the first time that that response has 
not been forthcoming from this government, from any 
government. And it’s the first time that we’ve seen this kind of 
unprecedented attack on the person and on the individual — the 
first time that I can recollect. 
 
The question therefore has to be asked and answered: why? 
Why are they doing this? Why are they doing this? I think it’s 
politically stupid, to begin with, but let’s leave politics out of 
the picture. Why in the world are they doing this to try and 
destroy the man and the institution? And why is it that this 
report, which is in essence a litany of a breach of law, 
interference, a litany of waste and  

mismanagement and other aspects which my colleagues will 
address in the course of this debate — again you need to just 
take a look at the report and make your own judgement on this 
— unprecedented in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . Why are they doing what they’re doing in the 
way they’re doing it? 
 
I’ll answer that question in a moment. But I just want to give 
you an indication of how I think, to make my point about how 
unprecedented this report really is. Mr. Speaker, my colleague 
alluded to this, the member from Saskatoon South. I don’t know 
if the journalists have gotten around — the public surely will 
not have yet — has gotten around to reading this lengthy report. 
I’m now citing from page 98, and this has to do with the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation side of the 
report. 
 
Page 98, article 29.24, the auditor writes this. And this, Mr. 
Speaker, is by way of background. It has to deal with the 
privatization of dental equipment — you remember the 
government privatized the dental program and then put the 
dental equipment up for sale. Here’s what the auditor writes 
about this: 
 

The Department of Health sent dental equipment costing 
$2.2 million to SPMC to sell. 
 

SPMC of course is Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 

When the dental equipment is sold the revenue should be 
paid into the Consolidated Fund as these assets are not 
owned by SPMC. 
 

Sounds to reason, I think, Mr. Speaker. Auditor then writes, 
quote, and just understand these words carefully, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I am unable to determine from the files of the appointed 
auditor (from the files of the appointed auditor) the 
amount of dental equipment sold and whether the funds 
were sent to the Consolidated Fund. 
 
There also does not appear to be any revenue recorded in 
the Consolidated Fund for the sale of the dental 
equipment. 
 

And then he goes on to say: 
 

SPMC’s financial statements were not tabled in 
accordance with (the law) The Tabling of Documents Act. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what do we have here? Here is a privatized 
Act, $2.2 million, and the auditor of the province of 
Saskatchewan is saying he doesn’t know what was sold; he 
doesn’t know to whom it was sold; and, more importantly, he 
doesn’t know where the money is — and he doesn’t know 
where the money is. 
 
And the Minister of Education, you see, laughs at this thing. He 
sort of argues that this is something that the opposition ought 
not to be raising. In fact he is challenging the Provincial 
Auditor for raising it. Mr.  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1263 

 

Speaker, what kind of a government do we have here that has 
$2.2 million lost, a government which cannot account to the 
satisfaction of the Provincial Auditor where the $2.2 million has 
gone? 
 
I tell you, if this came out in Ottawa or in any other jurisdiction, 
as I’m sure will be the case in Saskatchewan, there will be such 
an outrage by the people of the province of Saskatchewan for 
this kind of waste and mismanagement that the Minister of 
Justice and the Minister of Finance and the Premier will have 
no other option but to resign and to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here on page 99, still dealing 
with the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, I’ll 
read you exactly the words of the auditor: 
 

SPMC has charged the Department of Parks and 
Renewable Resources (get this, Mr. Speaker) $1.4 million 
for the use of four Canadair CL 215 aircraft. 
 
When the assets managed by the Department of Supply 
and Services were transferred to SPMC, these four aircraft 
were specifically excluded from the transfer (the auditor 
writes). Therefore (the auditor says, if his facts are right), 
SPMC does not own these airplanes. 
 
There is insufficient information in the appointed auditor’s 
files to determine the reason for the $1.4 million charge. 
 

Here’s a situation where SPMC apparently is charging money 
for the use of aircraft, the aircraft it does not own. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not here to go into detail of all of these 
kinds of examples of waste and mismanagement. In every 
government there will be examples of waste and 
mismanagement, I’m sorry to say. We try to reduce it, but that 
will be the case. I acknowledge that. It was during the former 
administration and before former administrations. 
 
But I don’t think I’ve ever seen a report which says they got 
$2.2 million and nobody knows where it is, from the 
privatization. And he says, I can’t get the information from the 
appointed auditor. He says, I cannot do my job; I can’t tell the 
legislature what happened to the $2.2 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we oppose and will oppose, and we will 
reinstitute the dental care plan, but we opposed the privatization 
of it. We know that as a matter of principle. That’s issue 
number one. 
 
But here’s a concrete, small example of how privatization has 
worked. They’ve sold off the assets of this health care plan and 
we . . . at least the auditor doesn’t know where the money has 
gone. And then they say to us on privatization, they then say to 
us on privatization: trust us; we know where the money is going 
every time we privatize something; trust us; we’ll still have a 
control over privatization on this issue. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not true either, because there’s 
another damning aspect — I’m talking about a fundamental 
principle here, this Provincial Auditor’s report. That’s not true 
either. You know, sir, that we have a big debate in 
Saskatchewan on the future of this province, and it revolves 
around the PC-style privatization — $2.2 million that the 
auditor can’t account for on the dental privatization, as an 
example. 
 
You know that this is a competing vision. They’re trying to sell 
off everything: power, potash, Saskoil, they’ve done 
Weyerhaeuser. They’re trying to give everything away. And 
somehow they try to argue, Mr. Speaker, at the same time that 
there will be some controls put in place by the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan in a privatized operation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I invite you, sir, to take a look at chapter 34, 
page 112, 113, it deals with the audit on WESTBRIDGE 
Computer Corporation, a privatized, Crown-controlled, 
privatized from SaskTel — PC-style privatization. 
 
And here’s what the auditor writes. He writes: 
 

I wrote to the appointed auditor of Westbridge and asked 
him to give me these standard opinions. 
 

The standard opinions, Mr. Speaker, were the standard opinions 
of the accounting practice, the accounting profession. I read 
again from the report: 
 

The appointed auditor wrote to me (writes Mr. Lutz) and 
said he was unable to provide me with the opinions that I 
needed. He said he could not provide the reports . . . (Mr. 
Speaker, I want you to hear this) He said he could not 
provide the reports because the Government of 
Saskatchewan (Executive) had a different opinion about 
the Provincial Auditor’s responsibilities as applied to 
Westbridge (the privatized company). 
 

He says: 
 

Because the appointed auditor had not conducted a 
complete audit of public funds, I wrote to the President of 
Westbridge advising that my officials would conduct an 
audit. 
 

Then he says in his report that the officials of WESTBRIDGE 
say no, you can’t audit us. And he says: 
 

In my opinion, Westbridge has interfered with me in the 
discharge of my duties. 
 

And I’m going to read this last quote and make my point: 
 

Also, in my opinion, the Executive is not accountable to 
the Legislative Assembly for the administration of this 
public money if a complete audit is not conducted and if 
financial information is not given to the Assembly. 
 

Now I invite you, Mr. Speaker, to consider the proposed 
privatization of SaskEnergy. The proposed privatization  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1264 

 

of SaskEnergy on the legislation is tabled along the models of 
WESTBRIDGE, virtually identical except for the different 
share proportions. 
 
The government says, well there’ll be a provincial government 
portion in the privatized aspect of SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
But we find out now that, by cabinet directive, WESTBRIDGE, 
under that model, has no obligation and in fact, according to the 
Premier, the Provincial Auditor has no right to audit that portion 
in a privatized corporation which still belongs to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. The auditor concludes that the 
executive is not accountable, therefore, for this kind of a 
privatization. And if it’s not accountable for this kind of a 
privatization, this legislature and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan have no control over any PC-style privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental issue to the style of PC-style 
privatization. First they give away to the friends of the 
government, corporations and individuals, what they can by 
way of the privatization. What they retain, which by the way 
continually gets reduced, we can’t audit. The Provincial Auditor 
can’t check. We don’t know what’s being done with that money 
because they say that that is beyond the scope of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
And if it’s beyond the scope of the Provincial Auditor, every 
privatized corporation that this government has privatized and 
proposes to privatize is beyond the scrutiny of this House, 
beyond the scrutiny of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I say that is undemocratic. I say the people want 
none of it, and we’re not going to buy that for one moment. 
We’re supporting the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a third point, 
one about dental, which is waste and mismanagement as a small 
example. But I want to make another point as well, which I 
have done, on the element of privatization and this report. 
 
Just before I leave that second point on privatization, I also 
make another promise, Mr. Speaker, to you. We will be asking 
for that cabinet legal opinion, if there is an opinion, which says 
that a PC-style privatized corporation can’t be audited by the 
Provincial Auditor. We will want to know on what basis that 
decision is made. 
 
Again, the Deputy House Leader might as well make a note of 
it, because we will get that information. 
 
This debate on privatization is central to the future of our 
province. And this debate about public accountability is central 
to future of this House, and central to the rights and the 
privileges and the expectations of the taxpayers of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Make no mistake about it. These issues will 
not go away, and they’re linked now to privatization; they are 
linked. So we are going to be pursuing this with all the vigour 
that we can, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I know that your job has been very interesting in the last little 
while. I’m sorry to advise that it’s probably going to be even 
more interesting in the future, in order for us to get the full 
revelation of all the documents that take place here. I’m sure 
that you will be capable of handling the challenge. 
 
But there’s a third issue, Mr. Speaker, and that is this. In my 
years as a member of the Legislative Assembly, I think I can 
say without fear of contradiction that I have never seen, sir, a 
Provincial Auditor’s report ever, which is so uniformly 
condemnatory of the breaches of law by a government and its 
agencies. So much so that the Provincial Auditor says in the 
report, Mr. Speaker, page 4, quote: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. 
 

That’s unprecedented. This is national news. I don’t think 
there’s a provincial auditor in the legislatures of the other 
provinces of Canada who has said this. I’m sure that it has not 
happened in the Ottawa community, Mr. Speaker. I’m positive 
of that. 
 
Now just contemplate what’s being said. The auditor has in 
effect said to you, sir — and he’s your servant — he has said, 
simply put, Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly, and the public: I can no longer do my job, which 
means, Mr. Speaker, that there is no longer in reality a 
Provincial Auditor. We have a Provincial Auditor in name and 
in title — poor individual that he is, being maligned to the 
personal attacks that he has been in the last few days — but we 
do not have an auditor in reality. We do not have an auditor 
who is to fulfil the job. Is there a parliament anywhere in 
Canada that has had a provincial auditor conclude that, sir? 
 
This is not a back-bencher from the government opposite, or a 
back-bencher or a front-bencher from the opposition. It isn’t 
some irresponsible person making an allegation from off the 
street. This is a servant of this province and this legislature who 
has been working here for 28 years — for 28 years as 
Provincial Auditor — and during that period of 28 years he has 
served faithfully and loyally and honestly and with difficulty. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Justice, if the auditor is not an easy 
person to get along with, big deal. I don’t think any provincial 
auditor will ever be easy to get along with. That’s not the nature 
of the process, and hopefully not. We don’t want some 
puppy-dog on a short leash. The people in Saskatchewan want 
an auditor who’s got full freedom to do whatever he or she 
decides should be done in the interest of the taxpayers. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, I introduced today the motion that there 
be set up a process whereby the auditor would come to this 
Chamber to answer questions and defend himself. I didn’t know 
how serious the allegations were going to be and how important 
the defence would be when I started the proposal. 
 
I did so, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the Public Accounts 
Committee for this reason: because, Mr. Speaker, the  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1265 

 

Public Accounts Committee is mandated to study the 
line-by-line proposals of individual departments. What this 
report says, it’s got line-by-line proposals, like dental, but what 
this report says, sir, is this institution can no longer do the job. 
 
That’s not within the mandate of the Public Accounts 
Committee. That is within the mandate of this Legislative 
Assembly. We nominate, he tables a report, that’s what he’s 
concluded. That’s a different issue. If they want to meet and 
have the Public Accounts Committee deal, in dispatch and in 
priority, the specific issues of this report, we will co-operate. 
We will send our members and we’ll deal with the Public 
Accounts Committee specific problems here right away. 
 
But we want something else. We want to deal with the central 
issue, the central thesis of this report, which is we have no 
longer a Provincial Auditor because he’s been so impaired in 
his duties to act as an auditor. That, sir, can only be handled by 
you and by this Assembly. I don’t know what it is that prompts 
governments to do what they do with respect to issues like 
provincial audit and the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I have here in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a front page story from 
The Kindersley Clarion, Wednesday, June 15, 1988, front page 
story. This deals with: “New act will help farmers in financial 
trouble, Andrew,” is the way the newspaper article says — I 
don’t want to name the member but I’m reading from the article 
— and here’s the part as it pertains to the debate that we have 
before us today: 
 

Meanwhile the provincial government may have found 
itself in hot water with the Saskatchewan home program, 
but Andrew doesn’t think the Provincial Auditor’s report 
can even hold the wet stuff. The auditor, Willard Lutz, 
wasn’t sure the program had proper legislative authority 
since it was created under The Housing Corporation Act 
before the last provincial election. 
 

I’m reading from The Kindersley Clarion: 
 

Lutz said there was no mandate to improve the quality of 
housing generally, rather the Act was meant to help the 
housing needs of disadvantaged people. Andrew doubts 
the credibility of the auditor. 
 

Doubts the credibility of the auditor. 
 

Auditors are people who bump against reality once a year, 
the minister is quoted saying. They live in that jungle zoo 
and call themselves bureaucrats. They wear thick glasses 
because they are looking at the fine print to see if every 
“‘i” is dotted. 
 

Mr. Speaker, do these people have no shame? Do they have no 
self-respect? Any kind of a response could have been given: 
I’m sorry, I don’t agree with Mr. Lutz’s provisions with respect 
to the housing program, or; I’m sorry, the facts are not right; we 
have tabled the response, or; I’m sorry, we don’t agree with the 
criteria. 
 

No, the Minster of Justice of this province launches his 
response, as he did today in question period, which prompted 
this report in the gravity of the allegations of the auditor that 
he’s been interfered with, on a personal attack. Now if that isn’t 
an interference with the role of an auditor, the attack of those 
who fund the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not a back-bencher on the opposition or the government 
side, this is a senior member of the treasury benches, a former 
minister of Finance, who attacks the credibility of the auditor, 
and this same person funds the Provincial Auditor’s capacity to 
carry out the job. If that isn’t intimidation, I don’t know what 
intimidation is if it hit me in the face! 
 
What in the world possesses a government to adopt that kind of 
an approach when it involves people of good intention to trying 
to do their job as mandated by law to do the job? What in the 
world, Mr. Speaker — and I’m asking myself, I’m puzzled — 
what it is that prompts that kind of response, not only a year ago 
in The Kindersley Clarion, but a few days ago in the 
Leader-Post, and then again today, with that kind of 
misinterpretation. 
 
What is it that prompts this kind of pattern of breach of law, this 
pattern of interference, this pattern of refusal to table timely 
reports, this pattern of maligning the person on an individual 
basis, the refusal to allow him to defend himself — the 
stonewalling. 
 
Why, I ask the member from Pelly, why is this the position of 
your front bench? Why? Why? You don’t have to answer it 
now. You can when the debate assumes and resumes. I’m just 
asking you as a member of this Legislative Assembly and as a 
back-bencher of the government side, have you gone up to the 
Minister of Finance or the Minister of Justice and said, why are 
you responding this way? Why are we into . . . Why don’t you 
ask the Minister of Justice? Why are we into an argument about 
the allegations that you have made on this report when it could 
have been, should have been, handled in another way and in an 
appropriate way? Why are you doing this? Have you asked 
them that? 
 
Has the new member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, have you 
asked the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Finance and 
your Premier, what in the world is the purpose of what we’re 
doing here, Mr. Premier? This is an institution; this is a man 
who served for 30 years or more, what’s the objective behind 
this? Have you asked, sir? Where’s your conscience? Where’s 
your commitment to not only the party, but to the approach? 
 
I know that many of the members in the front bench have lost 
that kind of concern. Right now they’re struggling to figure out 
if there’s some way to hang on to power. I know what happens. 
I was there prior to 1982. Oh yes! And you think that by 
bombarding the public with millions of dollars of advertising 
you’re going to turn the Crown corporations issue around? We 
didn’t, and you couldn’t. And you think by simply riding out 
the storm, you know, you’ll solve the situation. You keep on 
bringing back the bells rules motion when we offered clearly to 
you, with time limits, to take bells and other issues and deal 
with  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1266 

 

them outside the atmosphere of this House in order to solve the 
problem. No, you are going to teach us who the bosses are. 
Well, you’ll never teach any opposition who the bosses are. 
 
Are you asking, the member from Pelly; are you asking, the 
member from Moosomin; have you asked the front benches . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about Wascana; what about the 
Regina Wascana member? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Who’s the member for Wascana? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Beattie. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, no, he won’t ask. 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg . . . I think this is a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I raise a point of order that’s been raised 
on many occasions with members of the opposition, that they 
are not speaking on the motion and are not relevant to the 
debate. It’s unfortunate that I have to raise this point of order 
with respect to the Leader of the Opposition who should know 
the rules and should be leading his members on this point, and 
he is now showing no example at all nor any respect for the 
rules of this House. I raise the point of order that the Leader of 
the Opposition stick to the motion that they have moved. 
 
The Speaker: — This is an issue that has been discussed 
before, and if in fact the member’s allegation is correct, we’ll 
bring that attention to the hon. member. If not, the debate 
proceeds. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell you, 
it is not my intention in this debate — I hope in any debate — 
but I can tell you for sure, in this debate it is not my intention to 
bring in irrelevant topic and off the topic. The topic is too 
important for me to be off the topic. 
 
The topic of the motion is the regret that the Provincial Auditor 
has been impeded in his job — that’s the essence — and also 
regret that the Assembly . . . and ask the Assembly to direct to 
the Government of Saskatchewan to make available full 
information to the Provincial Auditor. That’s the topic. 
 
And I was saying, in the point, what it is . . . I was asking what 
it is in the psyche of the government opposite that prevents the 
government to fully direct the Provincial Auditor to fulfil his 
legislative duties. Why is it that they cannot accept this 
resolution? Why is it that the Assembly cannot pass 
unanimously all that the auditor is asking to do both by way of 
legislative obligation and also by way of just personal integrity 
of doing his job. I don’t know what it is. That’s the reason that I 
asked the question, and that’s the reason that I direct myself to 
the propositions which have been advocated in The Kindersley 
Clarion of June 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was on the third point of my address, second 
part. The first part had to deal with the letter tabled  

by the Minister of Justice and my interpretation of it. The 
second part has to deal with the report, and I had three parts of 
that second part. First, the waste and mismanagement pursuant 
to the dental plan; second, privatization as tied into the dental 
plan, and I’m on the third point dealing with the issue of the 
breach of law, the interference, the obstruction. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the members opposite, some of 
them, have read this part of the report. This is on page 4. 
Provincial Auditor: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. I 
recommend the process be repaired to require that 
appointed auditors and the Provincial Auditor work 
together on crown corporation audits as joint auditors or 
with some similar arrangement. 
 

I’ll stop there. 
 
Now I need to highlight this point, Mr. Speaker, because 
outside of this legislature, last night on television and in the 
newspaper today, the government’s defence on this report is 
that this is merely a “turf war” between accounts, the Provincial 
Auditor and the private appointed auditors. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this statement made by the 
auditor shows the lack of truth to that proposition, because the 
auditor says he recommends a process be repaired to require 
that appointed auditors and provincial auditors work together. 
This is not a question of saying, get out, I don’t want you, the 
way the Minister of Justice and others represent or misrepresent 
the position. This is a request to say, let’s get together to do the 
job. 
 
This is not the Provincial Auditor who says no to any appointed 
auditor. Governments for years have used appointed auditors. 
That’s not the issue. It’s the issue of whether or not, in working 
with the appointed auditor, the Provincial Auditor has access to 
information. He says that now he can only audit about 50 per 
cent of the government because that information has been 
denied to him. He has made a positive solution which says that 
we must work together to work out an arrangement “so that my 
statutory obligations can be fulfilled.” Mr. Speaker, what more 
reasonable approach could be made by any one person, 
especially the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Then he goes on to say on page 4, the following: 
 

In my view, the Legislative Assembly requires more 
information about crown corporations, crown-controlled 
corporations and mixed corporations. 
 
The public accounts are not complete, correct or timely. 
 
There were a number of cases where the tabling of annual 
reports and financial statements did not comply with the 
law. 
 

  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1267 

 

Now I have two points to make there, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
there is a breach of law if the tabling of annual reports did not 
comply with the law. That’s the government, the Premier and 
the government opposite. That, I say, Mr. Speaker, is an issue 
which requires the urgent attention of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, the public accounts are not “complete, correct or 
timely.” That is damaging. What that says, Mr. Speaker, is 
when the public accounts are not complete or correct, it says 
that we do not have the information before us. It says that the 
information is being denied by the government opposite to the 
Provincial Auditor; thus the information is not correct and it’s 
not complete. And when it’s not timely, to boot, nobody can 
deal with the provincial accounts and the public accounts and 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Isn’t that an allegation, Mr. Speaker, of a wilful, purposeful, 
attempt by the members of the Executive Council on the front 
bench to delay the timing of the report, to give them incorrect 
information and incomplete information. And if that is the 
evidence, the question that I have to ask is: why is the 
government motivated to doing so? Why is the government so 
motivated? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education is again making his 
speech from the seated position, which is about the only place 
that he makes speeches these days, but I would advise him not 
to keep sitting too long because I also think that’s where his 
brain-power emanates from, and it might cause the quality of 
the debate to slip a little bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I honestly think that the Minister of 
Education has problems of his own. When they fired the deputy 
minister of Education because he had so alienated the entire 
educational community, I would say to the Minister of 
Education that he had better worry about whether or not the 
next person to be fired is going to be the Minister of Education, 
the member from Weyburn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And may I say, Mr. Speaker, not a day too 
soon for the people of Saskatchewan being concerned. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think we’ll just allow 
the member to get on with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to try to ignore the persistent heckling by 
the Minister of Education, notwithstanding your admonition 
that he cease and desist, because this is an important debate and 
I want to continue with my points. 
 
So I say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m trying 
hard to ignore it. I shall continue to do so. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think that we don’t want 
to get off the topic by getting into a debate between  

members from their seats and the Leader of the Opposition who 
is making his remarks. If we refrain from that, we will listen to 
his remarks on the topic under discussion. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that, 
and I’m going to continue with the remarks. The third point that 
I’m making is the damning nature of the central allegations, 
thrust, made by the Provincial Auditor here. I want to refer to 
one other example of how serious these allegations are, not in a 
privatization area, although goodness knows that that has been, 
I think, serious enough. We’re going to pursue that over the 
days and the weeks ahead as it comes to SaskEnergy and the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, but that’s not the point 
that I’m getting at here today. 
 
I’m now referring about the searing indictment of the Provincial 
Auditor on page 99. This deals with the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation section of 
this report is one which is mandatory reading for all concerned 
members of the House. I tell you, when estimates come up on 
property management corporation, we will be here for an 
extremely long time — it’s page 96 — because of the serious 
allegations which are made here by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I direct your attention, and members’ attention, to page 97. This 
is under Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and 
there’s a heading called, difference of opinion. And I’m now 
going to quote the Provincial Auditor’s words: 
 

In my opinion, SPMC’s (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) financial statements contain 
significant departures (I’ll repeat that — significant 
departures) from generally accepted accounting 
(procedures) . . . (G.A.A.P.) which I describe later. 
 

Just underline that, Mr. Speaker, for you — significant 
departures. Not minor departures, not occasional departures — 
significant departures from generally accepted accounting 
principles. I continue with the quotation: 
 

The appointed auditor has issued an audit opinion without 
reservation on these financial statements. Therefore, in my 
opinion (the Provincial Auditor writes), the appointed 
auditor has issued an inappropriate report. 
 
Accordingly (he says), I have reported this matter to the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan. I will 
report its ruling when . . . (it’s received). 
 

See what’s happened here, Mr. Speaker, how serious the 
situation is? The Provincial Auditor says that there are 
significant departures from the generally accepted accounting 
principles. The appointed auditor presumably takes a different 
opinion. The Provincial Auditor says, I cannot accept that 
opinion. There’s a difference of opinion. It’s so serious I’m 
going to refer it to  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1268 

 

the governing body of my profession to resolve this opinion. I 
don’t know if that’s happened in recent history, with that kind 
of a condemnation. He then goes on to talk about the necessity 
of accountability. 
 
Then there’s another section here dealing with rental of public 
property. Now this I’m going to explore in detail at the 
appropriate time in some future debate. The Provincial Auditor 
at page 99 sets out what the statutory obligations are of the 
property management corporation with respect to contracts with 
respect to rental arrangements. And we know, Mr. Speaker — 
you do too, sir — that there are many private rental 
arrangements which have been entered into between this 
government and private entrepreneurs, building and/or leasing 
buildings thereafter to government agencies. 
 
We have raised, in previous sessions, some of those rental 
arrangements. I recall one when I was not in the legislature 
pertaining to a home in Saskatoon dealing with level four care 
. . . Parkridge, is it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Parkside. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Parkside, and the rental arrangement there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Parkridge. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Parkridge, I’m sorry. I may have the name 
wrong, but I’m sure that you know, Mr. Speaker, what I’m 
referring to. 
 
There are others — rental contracts. Here’s what the Provincial 
Auditor says: 
 

Public agencies are making payments to SPMC for space 
rental without written agreements being in place. 
Payments are often in excess of the $10,000 limit. The 
public agencies have not obtained an Order-in-Council to 
authorize these rental payments. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is no contract for these rental arrangements. 
They’re over the $10,000 limit that the law says they cannot 
make. They do not have an order in council validating the 
excess over 10,000. And the accountant says, I cannot tell 
whether or not this is a proper expenditure of public funds. 
 
Now I invite you sir, and I invite all the members, to think of 
your home constituencies, of all the rental property which is 
around in the province of Saskatchewan, and how much of this 
rental property is under this arrangement in the province of 
Saskatchewan? I should tell the junior House, not the junior, the 
substitute House Leader . . . no, no, the substitute House 
Leader, the member from Melfort, please advise your minister 
that at the appropriate time we will be wanting to have . . . and 
we’re not going to adjourn on estimates until we get the details. 
We’re going to do the auditor’s job here for him on these rental 
arrangements. 
 
Whether they relate to Yorkton in the rental arrangements there, 
whether they relate to Rosetown, whether they relate to 
Saskatoon, whether they relate to Moose Jaw,  

with power corporations or otherwise — wherever they relate, 
we will be wanting to know where those written agreements 
are, and with whom they’ve been made. I think that’s only 
proper and fair for an opposition to do in the assist of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
As another example, another example, Mr. Speaker, of what 
this third point that I am making about the breech of law — 
10,000 and over, there’s no order in council validating it. 
Payments of 10,000 and over are made. They require a contract 
according to the law — no contract for rental equipment — and 
he can’t get the information, and they don’t give him the 
information. And I have to ask why. 
 
Why are they . . . Look, the simplest thing, Mr. Speaker, for any 
government to do is to say, here’s the information right here. I 
table it. What is there for them to hide? What’s the loss in them 
doing that? But they refuse to do it. 
 
He says, breach of the law. And he says another thing, Mr. 
Speaker. If you take a look at this report, which I have read, by 
the way, twice because I cannot believe it — I simply cannot 
believe it, its gravity and its allegations . . . the gravity of its 
allegations — if you look at this report, Mr. Speaker, you will 
see at the back various appendices. First of all The Provincial 
Auditor’s Act is appendixed. And then they have the 
contracted-out accountants’ reports which are appendixed, to 
which the auditor says, I can’t verify that public funds are being 
properly spent. Take a look at them. Affixed, appendixed, either 
way, there they are. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at these various reports, if you 
take a look at these reports, I think that the private auditors 
should have the opportunity to explain to the legislature their 
side of the story on this. That’s why this morning I requested 
the Premier to agree to the establishment of a committee of 
investigation in front of the bar of the House where we would 
invite, amongst others, the chief executive officer of the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants, or such other officers as 
they would request. Let these people come forward and explain 
their position. I’m sure there’s a good explanation. 
 
And it may very well be that the Provincial Auditor is wrong. If 
the Provincial Auditor is wrong, then that we should know too. 
And I think it’s important that the Provincial Auditor be given 
the opportunity, and we be given the opportunity, to hear 
exactly what it is that the private, hired-out accountants have to 
say with respect to the allegations made here by the Provincial 
Auditor, and if you take a look at their reports, whether or not 
they satisfy the requirements of the statute here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point on the question of the 
private auditors. I think we also must understand that, in 
addition to two different clients . . . The Provincial Auditor has 
as his client, us, the legislature, and through us the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan; and the auditors, privately, of 
course, of the clients being their boards of directors or the 
governments or the Premier. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1269 

 

There’s another issue here, too. The obligation of the Provincial 
Auditor is to get into the expenditure of funds in a different way 
— I would even suggest even in a more extensive way than 
private auditors would do in private audit for private 
corporations or business corporations. I don’t malign here any 
of the auditors, private auditors. They’re professional people 
and they do their job. But there are two different mandates that 
are involved here. 
 
The Provincial Auditor’s mandate is a far broader one. It’s a far 
more reaching one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And who’s the client? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And of course as my colleague, the member 
from Quill Lakes, asks again: who is the client? The client is us. 
We have hired him. And our agent, the Provincial Auditor, is 
saying to us, the clients, I’m sorry, clients, I cannot do my job, I 
can’t fulfil the mandate. So here we have the situation where the 
Crown corporations and the departments have audited 
information, some of which is tabled in these one-page 
attachments. The Provincial Auditor says it’s insufficient 
information, wants more, and he comes to the client and he 
says, look, will you defend me in this regard? 
 
I say, on this third point that I make about the breach of the 
laws and the interference, I say, Mr. Speaker, that the auditor 
himself is pleading with us to do something about this situation. 
The auditor points out, on page 10 of the report, that there are 
no penalties set out in The Provincial Auditor Act for failure to 
provide required information to the Provincial Auditor — no 
penalties. But he says this: 
 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
contains provisions to ensure that required information is 
provided. 
 

Then he says this, quote: 
 

Section 24(1)(d) of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act states . . . 
 

and I read this: 
 

“24.(1) The Assembly is a court and has all the rights, 
powers and privileges of a court for the purpose of 
summarily inquiring into and punishing: 
 
(d) assaults upon or interference with officers of the 
Assembly while in the execution of their duties;” 
 
In my opinion . . . 
 

He says, paragraph 2.31: 
 

. . . I have been interfered with in the execution of my8 
duties. 
 

I read those words to be a plea by the auditor for us, his 
employers, to implement section 24 of The Legislative 
Assembly Act to convene this Assembly as a court, with all the 
rights and powers and privileges of a court, to enquire into and 
punish, if necessary, 
 

. . . assaults upon or interference with officers of the 
Assembly while in the execution of their duties. 
 

Why else has the auditor put that section in the audit report? 
That’s a plea. Maybe some would say, an invitation, a 
suggestion; I say it’s a plea. It’s a plea for us to do something, 
because he feels so strongly about the breaches and about the 
issues which are raised here. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker — I stand to be corrected — that that 
plea is also unprecedented. Are we to ignore that plea? That’s 
why this motion is here. Are we to ignore that plea, or are we to 
back our servant? If we don’t back our servant, who will back 
him? If this Legislative Assembly doesn’t back our servant, 
who will back Willard Lutz? If the member from Pelly and the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg can’t say to his people in 
his own constituency, by gosh, this is a tough report and maybe 
our people made some mistakes, but Lutz is an honourable 
person; he is our citizen; he is our employee; we must back him 
— if they can’t say that, something is terribly wrong in the 
democratic process. But leaving democracy out of the picture, 
something is terribly wrong with accountability — the waste, 
the mismanagement, the funds which are going without 
accountability — something is very rotten in the state of 
Saskatchewan if the members opposite can’t say that. 
 
Who, Mr. Speaker, will back Mr. Lutz if we should turn down 
this resolution? If we turn down this resolution, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s tantamount to firing him. It’s tantamount to saying, we 
know what your report says — plea for more information. We 
know what your letter says — two things: Board of Internal 
Economy for more independence, and a plea for information. 
We know what you want; we move this motion. 
 
And if we turn him down, what can he do? Where does he go? 
That’s tantamount to firing him. Are we going to abandon this 
person of 30 years service? Are we going to destroy the man’s 
reputation or attempt to destroy the man’s reputation in his last 
months, in his last days or years of service to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan? Is that what we’re going to do? 
 
Do we agree that the Minister of Justice should be permitted . . . 
and the members opposite, in defence of the Minister of Justice, 
have so little independence and integrity that they will be part 
and parcel to a rejection of this resolution and an abandonment 
of this Provincial Auditor, who is not in this House to defend 
himself, who could not meet his accusers outside because they 
do not dare repeat the allegations outside. Is that where we’re 
at? Member from Pelly, is that where you’re at? Member from 
Canora, is that where you’re at? Member from Wakaw, 
Kinistino, is that where you’re at? 
 
Well, I mean, it’s hopeless. I didn’t . . . it’s hopeless. It’s 
hopeless, Mr. Speaker, because I’m asking the members and 
from their seats they say . . . when I’ve read the letter, they say, 
I didn’t write the letter. It’s hopeless. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a question of whether or not 
we’re going to abandon this person and we’re going  
  



 
May 19, 1989 

 
1270 

 

to abandon his family to the Minister of Justice’s accusation 
that nobody else can deal with him, that no one else can deal 
with him. Mr. Speaker, we abandon him. 
 
Members opposite are yelling, oh it’s an Oscar performance, 
you know, putting on a show. How callous they are; how 
callous they are. Can I not appeal to any of you? Is there not 
one of you there who’s got a decency of conscience and 
independence to stand up for this man? Is there not one of you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Melville, does he have . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I was just standing 
up. 
 
The Speaker: — Debate continues. 
 
Order, order. Order. Order, order. I know it’s Friday morning 
and it’s been, perhaps, an emotional morning in some respects, 
but we’re getting near 1 o’clock, and I just ask for your 
co-operation. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what more I 
can do before I adjourn the debate on this important matter. I’ve 
tried to make a personal plea. One of the sad facts of this 
legislature is, as we all know, that we cannot, apparently or 
seemingly, be able to negotiate House business or other matters 
of importance. 
 
I wish I could have made the plea on a personal basis; I can’t do 
that any more. And I’m sorry to feel that they feel the same way 
about us. I’m reduced to making my plea, on behalf of this 
person, on behalf of this institution, publicly. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the response that I have of the 
members opposite is tragic. It’s sad, it’s demeaning and, 
unfortunately, in addition to being demeaning, it is going to be 
politically extremely damaging and extremely sensitive to the 
government opposite. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll see. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, the member from Maple Creeks says, 
we’ll see. This is the attitude — we’ll see. If you feel, Madam 
Minister, if you feel that’s the case, then I would say to you, 
why don’t you get your Premier to call the election. You have 
two good issues right now to resolve. Call the election on 
privatization and on what you’re doing with respect to your 
accounts and the waste and mismanagement. Call the election; 
we’re ready to do it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have other matters which I’m going to raise 
in the course of this debate. And also, I’m going to adjourn 
because I’m going to ask one last time for the government 
opposite to take the weekend to reconsider its position. I think 
that it’s open to doing so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
that’s fine; you can dismiss it, but I think that when you take at 
look at what you’ve done here and what you’re doing, I do 
think many of you will have a change of heart. And we’re 
prepared to co-operate with  

you and the Provincial Auditor in getting the objectives 
achieved. 
 
For all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, because I have more to 
say, and because I want the government opposite to consider 
carefully the comments and what they’ve done here, I beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 
adjourning the House, I’d seek leave of the Assembly to move a 
motion respecting hours next week, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my 
seat mate, the member for Melville: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, that notwithstanding rule 3 
of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, when this Assembly adjourns on Friday, 
May 19, 1989, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, May 
23, 1989. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 


