





























































Hansard: August 16, 1989


August 16, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 10 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to introduce, beside me, the associate deputy 
minister and clerk of Executive Council, Mr. Ron Hewitt; the associate deputy minister in 
intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Andrew Dimitrijevic; and behind me or to my left, secretary of social 
policy, Mary Tkach; secretary, economic policy, Oswald Henry; and director of administration, Don 
Wincherauk. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Before we agree to item no. 1, I think we have 
a few questions to ask of the Premier and also a few comments to make in preparation, or setting the 
background, for the questions which we seek to ask of the Premier. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think that at the end of the day – I would hope that you would agree – 
at the end of the day a government is judged by several criteria, or several yardsticks. Essentially it’s 
translated at the end of the very bottom line to the question of how things have worked out for ordinary 
people in the province of Saskatchewan – what the indicators and what the measurements of progress, or 
lack of progress, amount to as a result of government policy and the overview of you as the leader of the 
government in the implementation of those policies. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, in my judgement, by the several tests or criteria that one 
can set out, this government has been an absolute failure. I would categorize it one of the worst 
governments in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, if not the worst in the history in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And the yardsticks that I would measure . . . by which I measure and by which I 
come to that conclusion, Mr. Chairman, are the following six. There are more but there are six. 
 
One: is this government a fair minded government? Does it act with fairness? Does it act with 
equanimity? Does it exhibit in its fairness the compassion which is the hallmark of fairness? 
 
Secondly: what’s its record of stewardship? Can it run the ship of state, manage taxpayers’ dollars, or is 
the government’s record one of waste? Is it one of imprudent mismanagement, is it one of financial lack 
of planning? Is it a record of serious financial problems for the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
Is it one where the future stability financially of the province has been ensured – stewardship? 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Chairman, the question of managing the provincial economy. All provincial governments, 
especially in this part of the world, face factors which are beyond its control. These range all the way 
from weather, as we know in the case of the current drought, to external economic decisions taken by a 



federal government or perhaps even other international governments. But this is nothing new to this 
government alone. Previous governments in the past have also faced those kinds of challenges, and at 
the end of the day, the ability of the government to develop policies which mitigate against those 
problems, in effect, make sure that the ship of state is on the right course and the right direction, its 
capacity to manage change, look to the future, is another important yardstick. By this yardstick too this 
government has failed. 
 
Trust, in my judgement, is a fourth yardstick. Can the government be trusted by the people of the 
legislature and the people of the province of Saskatchewan in its day-to-day dealings, in telling the truth 
and the whole truth when it comes to the key problems and the key issues which face the province of 
Saskatchewan? Can the people really believe what the government tells it? Or is it a government which 
in effect misrepresents, tells half-truths to get over the particular crisis and then moves on to the next 
crisis, and follows the same approach in the same situation? Is it a government which keeps its promises 
on this question of trust, or does it break those promises? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t intend, in the interests of time, to document the record of major broken promises 
by this government. Several come to mind; the promises by the Premier and the Deputy Premier that 
they would never privatize a public utility Crown corporation, and a year after the latest statement of 
that promise, in fact, the attempt to privatize SaskEnergy. Broken trust, a broken major promise. 
 
The other record here which I say is rather substantial and in itself would make an evening’s discussion 
is a litany of major breaches of promises made by this administration. Everyone of those people opposite 
who were elected made major promises, many of which are now broken. I have here the document of the 
Minister of Human Resources and Social Studies, the member for Melville, as one, but I could go 
through all of them. Promises to do what? Roll back the 20 per cent gasoline sales tax. Promises to 
reduce provincial income tax by 10 per cent. Promises to remove the 5 per cent sales tax. Promises that a 
public utilities review commission will be there to “protect the consumers.” Promises to protect 
taxpayers’ money by ensuring the independence of the Provincial Auditor. These are the exact words. 
Promises to open the books on government business. Promises to establish freedom of information. 
Promises “rewarding permanent jobs will be the major emphasis of the Progressive Conservative 
development strategy.” Promises funding for health and education will be increased. Promises that 
families can count on them by reduced taxes and holding the line on utilities and so forth. And down the 
line it goes. 
 
These are the members of the Premier’s cabinet, the Premier’s government. Freezing public utility and 
insurance rates – this is a promise made by the member from Kindersley, the minister in charge of Trade 
and Investment, the former minister of Finance for the province of Saskatchewan. My colleague reminds 
me of the promise to provide free telephones – you’ll remember that one, sir – for senior citizens, and 
that promise also . . . Just go down the list and there is in essence here a mass of evidence, a mountain of 
evidence, that this government cannot be trusted. 
 
And I think in this area, the area of trust – the yardstick by which I am judging this government -- where 
they crossed the Rubicon in the voters’ minds was with their attempt and their breach of promise to 
privatize SaskEnergy, an attempt which thankfully, for the moment in any event, has been stalled. I have 
no doubt it’s going to be coming back, however, by another attempt by this government, either now or 
after an election if they should be returned. And so I say, by that yardstick of trust, this government too 
has failed. 
 
(1915) 
 



Then there’s the question of the vision. Does a government have a positive vision of our future, a vision 
that has room for all? Or is it a vision which in effect tries to return the province of Saskatchewan to a 
yester-year, a vision which really has a narrow and partisan plan, the result of which is going to be for 
the benefit and the enrichment and the advancement of fewer of our Saskatchewan people? Is it a vision 
which builds bridges between urban and rural or is it one which divides? 
 
Is it a vision which seeks to build into the system the accommodation of the interests of Indian and 
native and aboriginal people, those who have traditionally been victimized over the years by all 
governments, or is it a vision which divides? Is it a vision which in fact tries to provide the equality of 
opportunity of which we seek, or is it a vision which in effect amounts for enhancing the opportunity of 
a few and a growing few in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Chairman, by those six, five yardsticks – fairness, stewardship, the capacity to run things in a proper 
way, management, trust, and vision – this government has been an abject failure, and in my judgement, 
the worst government, probably, in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I said it was the worst government. We’ve talked at 
length during the Minister of Finance’s interim supply Bills about the size of the deficit. I don’t intend to 
pursue that tonight at length; there’ll be an appropriate time to do that with the Minister of Finance. 
 
But I think there is another piece of stark evidence about the question of stewardship and management: a 
debt in excess of $11 billion; a situation where the province in 1982 had net assets of over a billion, and 
by the government’s own records now has a net deficit position of in excess of $3 billion in that short – 
or long – seven years, depending upon your interpretation of the length of time the government’s been in 
power. 
 
Housing starts, investment, employment, all of these are down; bankruptcies are up. The people are 
fleeing from the province of Saskatchewan in record numbers: 13,000 to the end of June of 1989, plus 
1,500, approximately, for the last month of July. That number alone in 1989, Mr. Chairman, is 
representative of more than all of those who fled the province of Saskatchewan – and these are not my 
figures, sir; these are the figures of the government of the province of Saskatchewan – more people who 
have fled in the year 1989 than for the entire year of 1988, and the year, as we know, is far from over. 
 
And it’s a government which has shown itself to lack compassion, in my judgement. It attacks the 
victims of misfortune by cutting back on social services. It makes it more difficult for them. Instead of 
tackling the causes of misfortune, it turns a blind eye to them. The net result is that this province has the 
unenviable record of having the second highest rate of poverty, according to national figures, of any 
province in Canada with the exception of Newfoundland, anywhere in this country. Now that’s a first 
that I never thought the province would ever have. But to have that kind of a record for the first time – I 
stand to be corrected; maybe during the Dirty Thirties we were in a worse position, but I don’t think so – 
is testament to the failure of every one of these single tests and others which I have described. 
 
Incompetent, uncaring, now arrogant this government is, now out of touch – all of these are the 
symptoms of a government that is ripe for defeat, and, Mr. Chairman, mark my words, will be defeated 
at the first opportunity that the public can get to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t suspect that the philosophy and the general policy of this 
government is going to be changed by any words that I say, that’s for sure, because we have two 
competing visions which are different visions of the province of Saskatchewan. Theirs, which is a return 
back to the 1930s, and we’re feeling it, there’s no doubt about that; theirs, where they want to turn the 
resource sector and the development of this province to the hands of a few, and basically out-of-
province, out-of-Canada few; theirs, where the few prosper and benefit essentially and the larger 
numbers see diminishing returns and less disposable income and less opportunity – those we know to be 
the case. 
 
I don’t ‘suspect that the philosophy, their vision, will change as a result of my words. It will only change 
if and when there’s an election and if and when there is a positive result by the voters on that question. I 
don’t suspect that my words to the minister will have him direct his cabinet tomorrow to take account of 
the lessons of history in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t suspect that he will learn or follow those lessons for the future. That I’m almost certain he will 
not do. He will ignore the fact that all governments, whether it’s the government of the late premier Ross 
Thatcher or Woodrow Lloyd or Tommy Douglas or the former premier Allan Blakeney, all governments 
in this province have struggled to build population and to build compassion, with varying philosophies, 
it’s true – Mr. Thatcher versus Mr. Douglas or Mr. Blakeney – but in essence building on the traditions 
and the history of the province of Saskatchewan, building on what I call the three-cylinder economy of 
private sector involvement and co-operative sector involvement and public sector involvement. 
 
What’s happening here is in effect a denial of that history and an attempt to re-write it, to ignore it, and 
what will prove to be, I’m sure – is proving to be, not will prove to be, but is proving to be – a vain 
attempt to redirect the direction of this province with the results of poverty and misery and hurt on 
farming people, on business people, and on the youth of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t expect, as I say, that the Premier opposite is going to, because of my few words, change his 
philosophy. He is committed to it. He is committed to free trade which hooks us to the free market 
system. He’s committed to deregulation which is another way of saying, let’s get government off our 
backs and part of the free market system tying us to the largest free market economy in the world. He is 
committed to privatization which is another way of putting again all your eggs in one basket – the free 
market system of the world. He is a blind devotee of this policy, or these policies. He is a passionate 
devotee of these policies. He is, in effect, the voice of the 1930s disguised in 1989, but none the less a 
voice of the 1930s with the same result of the 1930s. 
 
Little wonder that old cliché about Tory times being tough times is as true today s it was in the 1930s. 
Little wonder, Mr. Chair, that that in fact is the case. 
 
But as I say, I don’t suspect that there is going to be any change in the direction of the philosophy, in the 
overall approach. This now will only have to be decided by the voters of the province of Saskatchewan, 
which is the next logical step of where we’re at. 
 
But maybe the Premier will at least heed some of my next remarks about the performance of his cabinet. 
He is after all the person responsible for the nomination of those people who serve in the Executive 
Council with him and around him, who, although sharing the same philosophy leading us to this 
desperate situation that farming people and working people and young people are in, who, while sharing 
that same philosophy, have proven their inability to competently manage the government of the day. 
 



Mr. Chairman, I hold the view that the people of the province essentially can overlook policy directions 
which on occasion will fail. They’re prepared to be very charitable and overlook a lot of policy or 
political initiatives which fail. But what they’re not prepared to overlook is sheer, blind, repetitive, 
numbing incompetence, Mr. Chairman. And this government, I think, has let the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan down. 
 
Whether one’s a Conservative or a Liberal or a New Democrat or uncommitted, that voter has the right 
to expect, and this Premier has the duty to deliver, competent administration, competent government. 
And he has an obligation to discipline his ministers and his bureaucracy when that competence is not 
being met, when the standards of which the public expect are being ignored or are being breached, as I 
say has been the case over the last seven years. I’m not here to review the entire seven years, but 
certainly over the years in advance and in the year under which we are now reviewing of these 
estimates. 
 
So there’s been a string of major political disasters for the Premier and for the government, bad policies, 
badly implemented, badly explained to the public, in fact, not badly explained to the public, almost 
forced upon the public whether they want it or not. They’ll learn to love it, is the philosophy adopted by 
the Premier and the ministers opposite. They may not understand why we’re giving away SaskEnergy or 
the potash corporation to large investors, but they will learn to love it, and there will be a gimmick or 
some form of share sale or share offer which will get them to learn to love it. There is that arrogance and 
no doubt, therefore, a part of the explanation for the sheer incompetence which flows from this kind of 
an approach and this kind of an attitude. 
 
So while the minister may not redirect his philosophy because I say he should do so . . . Even I don’t 
expect that to be the case. I do think none the less that if one looks at it fairly, the minister does . . . the 
Premier does have to acknowledge the fact that he has a disaster on his hands with respect to his cabinet. 
 
And I would call on the Premier tonight . . . And I do this knowing full well that it might not even serve 
the political purposes of the opposition in this regard, but if it served to improve the position for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, there might be some hope if you did it. But I would call on the 
Premier tonight to acknowledge the fact that there has been a string of major political disasters – I’m 
speaking now in a non-ideological way – to the function of administration, of running an administration 
relatively competent, which demands a wholesale realignment and reshuffling of his cabinet, I would 
say, in effect, a dismissal of most of the cabinet ministers who have served the province so ill in the last 
several months with no game plan of getting out. 
 
This, I think, at least, is the very least that a Premier has to do in order to demonstrate that if his 
philosophies aren’t working, at last he has a vision. He’s got to fire those ministers, as difficult as it is, 
who have gotten him and his administration in this very, very deep jackpot not only politically, but the 
jackpot in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t want to get into the question of personalities at length, but I think the record is very clear. If you 
take a look at the question of the Deputy Premier, a person who I think is a very decent person on a 
personal basis . . . I view him to be one of the parliamentarians who contributes a lot to this legislature. 
But the Deputy Premier’s portfolio is littered with major problems: the Rafferty fiasco, the GigaText 
fiasco, the SaskPower sell-off – those three alone have caused major problems for this Premier and for 
this government. I think it’s time for the Premier to show the leadership and to move this minister on to 
another function or another area of activity, perhaps even out of the government. 
 



I take a look at the position of the Minister of Trade and Investment, who has served as Finance, but was 
moved from there to the current portfolio of Trade and Investment. In other areas I shall, and other 
occasions, discuss the quality of the trade and investment programs and the success of those programs. 
But I think surely the minister's reaction – I’m talking about the Minister of Trade and Investment – in 
response to the Provincial Auditor’s searing indictment, his unprecedented searing indictment that the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan has broken the law, has placed itself above the law on the 
question of the Provincial Auditor, and his documentation and his whole response, this minister, I think, 
warrants censure, not on a partisan sense – we’ve tried to do that in a partisan and non-partisan sense – 
but it warrants censure by a Premier who I think has got, if he is thinking for the best interests of not 
only his government and his cabinet and his party, but the best interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan, I think he has to make a major move in that regard, too. 
 
I think of the Minister of Health who has led the attack on medicare, the drug plan being dismantled, the 
dental plan being dismantled, the continued problems relating to hospital beds, the continued problems 
pertaining to the cancer clinic and other matters, the continued problems related to the rehabilitation 
centre in Regina – one could go on – hasn’t met the standards. 
 
Of course the Minister of Finance, I say this to the Premier, and I don’t know, I don’t know whether 
he’ll . . . I suspect that he may not agree with my concurrence, my observation in this regard. But I want 
to say to the Premier that when you have a minister of finance, be that person in the corporate area or in 
the private . . . or in the public area, I’m sorry – private or public areas – when there is an error, and I’m 
using that word very charitably, in 1986-87 in the budget estimates of $800 million, there is no 
corporation, private corporation in the world who would permit a minister or treasurer with that record 
to exist. The board of directors and the chairman, the chief executive office of the board of directors, 
would have taken remedial action. 
 
(1930) 
 
I won’t, of course, refer to the current problems that the Premier faces, the tax increases such as the sales 
tax, proposed sales tax increase federally and the provincial sales tax increase, the lotteries tax which is 
now the source of an ongoing major irritation within the province of Saskatchewan, the reimposition of 
the gas tax, notwithstanding the promises made. I think this has been a devastation area, the Department 
of Finance. 
 
I look at the question of privatization. And here the Premier may or may not take my words to heart at 
all. I will admit that there is an argument for privatization for those who believe in that vision. I don’t 
happen to believe in that vision, for the arguments and the reasons I’ve articulated on other occasions. 
But surely by any objective standard one has to conclude that the minister has failed to carry out the job 
of explaining the positive arguments for privatization – maybe there are none – to the advantage or to 
the test of even the Premier in this regard. 
 
And the failure of the policies of privatization, starting with SaskEnergy and SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), the fact that privatization has become a total negative for the government of the 
day – and thank goodness it has, not in a political sense but for the people of the Saskatchewan – I think 
warrants a very, very careful consideration by the Premier as to whether or not there needs to be here a 
major shuffle with respect to this person, who is a decent person and an experienced parliamentarian, but 
take a look at the portfolio and the record as I’ve described it. 
 
I would say, with the greatest of respect to the new Minister of Tourism, the record with respect to the 
Principal Trust collapse, the involvement of SEDCO in GigaText – this too warrants censure. In Alberta, 



Connie Osterman was dismissed from cabinet as a result of the involvement of the Principal Trust 
situation. I think a similar censure with the similar consequences, albeit the numbers are somewhat 
smaller, is something that the Premier also must look at. 
 
I won’t get into the details of what I think is the sad record pertaining to education, where we have 
scandals in the private vocational colleges areas, the uncertainty dealing with private schools generally, 
the drop-out rate, the enrolment quotas at the university. Education’s in the same situation. 
 
Environment: Rafferty, that’s been badly handled. We’ve talked about that, although the minister’s 
indicated that he’s leaving the government after the next election. 
 
And I think the Minister of Urban Affairs, the member from Regina South, must also receive honourable 
mention in what I am reviewing here of this cabinet. And that is that the Minister of Urban Affairs, I 
think it is correct to say, has alienated almost every urban municipality by his, one can only describe, 
arrogant insistence that such programs as the store hours issue, the ward system change in laws, will be 
implemented come heck or high water no matter what the individual municipalities might say. The 
question of capital grants, their elimination and reinstitution, the inadequate funding for the municipal 
government s—all of these are indeed serious condemnations of the situation facing that particular 
minister and that particular portfolio. 
 
And I would say to the Premier, with the greatest of respect, that the job of being Premier and Minister 
of Agriculture, in my opinion, is too great for one person. And I think that the evidence of the ministers’ 
efforts in the agricultural area and the current crisis of the cabinet falling away and apart all around him 
is testimony to that. We discussed that yesterday. There's no use me repeating it. 
 
But agriculture is in a crisis. The minister admits it himself. That requires a full-time person with 
dedicated staff to come up with the policies in order to ease the crisis. And this cabinet needs full-time 
attention. It’s falling apart and it too needs the kind of attention and direction. It needs a rethink of its 
policy and its directions. It needs a new clinic on how to administer and to run the administration of a 
government – always a very difficult challenge – cleanly, administratively, crisply, in a responsive way. 
 
That’s why the Premier knows of what I speak, why the popularity has plummeted of himself and the 
cabinet, because whatever they might think about the political direction – I think they happen to dismiss 
it – they also believe that this government and this administration simply cannot and does not have what 
it takes to run the government. It is incompetent. 
 
Now this is going to be a tough decision for a Premier to take, if he should follow my advice and make 
this kind of a wholesale change. I call on him to do it. It’s going to be not easy; it’s going to obey very 
difficult. It’s going to be all the more difficult because we’re talking about friendships and loyalties. I 
know how tough it must be for him to do this. It’s going to be all the more difficult because, as I look in 
the back benches, there’s nobody to replace the new cabinet. That, I think, is also a difficult problem. 
One can never know whether or not a member who’s elevated to the cabinet can fulfil the job or not. 
Time will only tell. But I think it’s a generally accepted view of the public at large that, as good as they 
might be individually, most of the back-benchers simply don’t have what it takes to be in the cabinet. 
But I think the Premier has no choice; he’s got to give it a try. He’s got to give it a try, otherwise the 
next period of government, for however long it is going to be or how short it’s going to be, is going to 
only compound the disastrous direction of policies. 
 
So here, Mr. Chairman, I am speaking to policies. I have identified the four or five yardsticks. I am 
speaking to personalities. I have not been too personal in the personalities; I hope not. I have related 



these personalities to individual program initiatives; I think, objectively, these have been failures. I think 
these are the people on whom the Premier must make some decisions, and immediately. I don’t think it’s 
going to turn the situation around for this government, unfortunately, but at least it might bring into 
perspective some element of competence to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and if that took 
place at least it would be a godsend. 
 
So I make that as one suggestion, and perhaps as one specific question to the Premier, as to whether or 
not the has in mind a major cabinet shuffle or a minor cabinet shuffle. He doesn’t have to tell me the 
details of it, but whether he has that in mind, and if so, what his timetable has to be in this context. 
 
Before I take my place, however, I want to move to another area in the interests of time, with respect to 
these estimates, which is related to the theme that I have tried to enunciate and set out here. I refer to the 
question of competence, or the flip side of that coin, mismanagement and waste. 
 
Again, Mr. Chairman, I will not take up the time of the committee to discuss the document which I have 
in front of me here detailing the facts: eight consecutive budget deficits; a cumulative operating deficit 
of $3.9 billion; yearly interest payments on that debt of about $380 million. I believe that this is the 
fastest-growing deficit in all of North America, a 600 per cent increase since 1982. We know what the 
situation is with respect to credit ratings, yet we have somehow, in the midst of this red ink and huge 
deficits, $9 million for a birthday celebration in 1990; millions of dollars for political advertising – 
we’re going to see much of that, I suspect, in the potash privatization; millions of dollars with respect to 
office spaces and this new gimmick of privatizing office spaces. The tax increases are well-known. All 
of the broken promises I alluded to. The health care program is in a shambles, people not being able to 
get into hospital beds and so forth. That also is well-known and well documented. And the crisis for 
tomorrow on education, I think, is one of the most tragic, that we have really no education policy of 
vision to train our young people – none. 
 
Where we have a young desperate for the kind of future oriented training which will allow that person to 
take his or her place of the world of tomorrow, what we have is quotas in access to post-secondary 
education at university level, and also at the post-secondary non-university level. Those are well 
established. All of that has been debated – whether it’s at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), or the U of R (University of Regina), or the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), young people being denied a basic and fundamental right of education, and, of course, 
employment and job loss and, of course, the population loss, all of which I have alluded. 
 
It gives me no pleasure to cite that record. It gives me no pleasure whatsoever, because I believe that the 
next government is going to have a monumental task on its hands in coming up with a set of programs 
and policies and vision which will try to turn this around, and to prevent the sinking further into the 
abyss of this province financial and from a spiritual point of view. 
 
I happen to believe that we in the opposition have that vision and have that spirit and optimism, because 
we build on the traditions of our pioneers for the future, and I won’t belabour the committee about my 
visions in that regard. But clearly there is a major issue here of waste and mismanagement and 
incompetence, documented by the Provincial Auditor. You don’t have to accept my words, Mr. 
Chairman. We won’t debate the Provincial Auditors’ report all over again unless I have to in order to 
support my point by fact, documented by the Provincial Auditor, documented by the statistics – the 
government’s own statistics – documented by the public opinion polls with respect to the position of the 
government and the people’s attitude toward it. This calls for a major revamping and overhaul of the 
administration of government. 
 



My question to the Premier, therefore, is: will you at least give us some indication that there will be a 
major cabinet shuffle soon? I don’t expect him to give me the names, obviously. Whether he is going to 
take the suggestion which I have made to him to heart and revamp in a wholesale way this tin Lizzie of a 
government which has come apart, and fallen apart, and stuck in the middle of the highway for him, 
whether he can put it together, will even try to put it together, and at least, while I think the tin Lizzie is 
going in the wrong direction, the voters will decide that we might get on with the business of at least 
competent administration. Will the Premier at least do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I rise in response to the hon. member’s observations with respect to 
his concerns about the cabinet. Let me say a couple or three things having to do with the legislature and 
this province and the vision that we hold for the great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve had a session this year, which has been, and I read from the quote, “dominated by Mr. 
Romanow’s radicals,” where we’ve looked at a strike in the legislature, where we’ve had 17 days of 
people walking out, where we’ve had admissions from members opposite that they were going to throw 
sand in the eyes of government, where their ambition has been to make the province ungovernable, and 
in the face of that, Mr. Chairman, we have endured and we have gone through one of the longest 
sessions in Saskatchewan’s history. And we followed our Speech from the Throne, and we followed the 
budget, and I want to briefly touch on those to outline to the hon. member the kinds of things the 
Saskatchewan people have asked us to do. 
 
Firstly, let me say that prior to 1982 and then during the ’82 election and 1986, people asked me and 
they asked a new Government of Saskatchewan to do two things, primarily two things. They said, we 
wanted you to protect people against things beyond their control. We wanted a safety net that was not 
available in Saskatchewan. And they were talking about the weather; they were talking about high 
interest rates; they were talking about health care, and they were talking about various forms of crop 
insurance; they were talking about several things in which they had seen the previous administrations 
fail, and they were looking to us for some measure of success. 
 
The second thing they said to us, Mr. Chairman, was, please build and diversify the economy. The 
previous administration seemed to have the ambition that they would either buy everything or else we 
would put all our eggs in one basket – which is essentially government – and keep people doing the 
same thing over and over again. So in fact we were caught in some of these international cycles that hurt 
us so much. 
 
I could say to the hon. member, it has not been easy putting together these programs, but on the safety 
net side and on the diversification side, I believe he’ll see that they will rank with any in Canada and 
perhaps any in North America. 
 
Let me just briefly touch on a few of these, and I know the hon. member will want to ask me specific 
questions about them. In health care we spend approximately $1,400 per man, woman, and child. Now 
that is a 90-some per cent increase over 1981-82. That’s a tremendous increase in health care 
expenditures, and we don’t charge for that, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman. That increase is the envy of all 
the jurisdictions in Canada; I would think there’s maybe only one that spends more per capita than we 
do. And we’ve seen dramatic changes in health care facilities, new centres, new rehabilitation centres, 
new hospitals, new cancer clinics, a combination of things that we are very proud of. 
 
(1945) 



 
And we’re overdue, frankly, particularly when it comes to nursing homes for senior citizens. Seniors in 
this province cried out when we campaigned in ‘81-82, and again in ’86, and said, would you please 
build us new accommodations. There had been a five-year moratorium, no building. They wanted new 
space, and it was the policy of the NDP opposite to say no, I don’t think we should do that. We’re going 
to do some other things. We’re going to buy potash mines; we’re going to buy pulp mills; or we’re going 
to buy farm land; but we will not build new facilities. 
 
In any event, the safety net that senior citizens wanted to see was brand-new nursing home facilities, 
because we have a fairly senior population here, and a lot of new expenditures in health care. And so 
now we’re spending in the neighbourhood of $1,400 per man, woman, and child, which has been a very 
phenomenal increase. 
 
We introduced, with the support of senior citizens and people, rural and urban, and a great deal of 
research by Co-op Data Services . . . And the hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, says that’s in 
favour of a mixed economy, where we have co-ops and the private sector and the public sector working 
together. I’ll say we have ample evidence of a significant involvement by the co-operative sector and the 
public sector in the province of Saskatchewan, and I’ll talk about that in a minute. 
 
But the co-operative sector, Co-op Data Services along with WESTBRIDGE, which is a combination of 
SaskCOMP and SaskTel and the private sector and others, have put together one of the finest new 
plastic, computer based health cards that you will find any place in the world. And we are now 
marketing that, not only across Canada but indeed internationally. And people are saying, what a fine 
idea – marketing health care out of the province of Saskatchewan, out of Canada, all over the world. 
And our people, led by Co-op Data Services, our health care officials – and they have done a fine job – 
have made sure Saskatchewan is number one in that. So when it comes to health care, as in 
expenditures, new facilities, new technology, new nursing homes, new hospitals, the new rehabilitation 
centre, new cancer clinics – all of that – we will rank, Mr. Chairman, with the very best in Canada. 
 
Now the hon. members say, well it’s not good enough – and fair enough. It’s a little bit like the 
discussion we had today on drought. I wish you fellows had given us more money, and I said, we’ve 
come up with several billion. But they said, well we’d even like more. Well I understand that. It’s 
reasonable in opposition to ask for more. But when you ask about the safety net, the first thing that 
comes to mind is health care, and we take a back seat to nobody when it comes to health care 
expenditures, new facilities, or technology in this province. 
 
If you look at protecting people against the things which they have no control over, we said, you know, 
there are lower income people and there are families and there are seniors who need protection against 
tax. And that has been very important in our administration. And you will see some significant tax 
reductions in the province of Saskatchewan since our administration took office. We don’t charge tax on 
clothes now, under $300. And that’s something very close to a lot of families here, and for senior 
citizens that don’t have a great deal of income. The NDP used to charge tax on clothes. Fair enough. We 
don’t charge tax on clothes, and we make sure that exemption is there so people with children and 
people that are seniors, people on low income, have a major break. 
 
We don’t charge tax on the major utilities now, and the opposition did. They not only had a 20 per cent 
sliding scale on gas tax that went to SGI, which was heavily subsidied from the taxpayer, but they taxed 
utilities so that they had a sales tax on top of the tax they charged in SaskPower and SaskTel and the 
major utilities. We don’t do that any more, and we don’t charge tax on gasoline if you live on the farm, 
and, very properly, you’re not charged in the cities if you keep your receipts. We’re the only province in 



the entire country that does that. We have the lowest priced gasoline in Canada for farmers and urban 
people, and all we ask them to do, so that we can tax truckers and we can tax people in the tourism 
industry, just save your receipts. 
 
If you look at that, that’s not a bad safety net to start with. We don’t charge for health care. We’ve got a 
brand-new health care card which is very up to date and very computerized, no tax on clothes, no tax on 
utilities, no tax on gasoline. 
 
And on top of that, we’ve said there’s one major thing that people have learned to fear in this province, 
and that is something beyond their control, and that’s high interest rates. They said, would you protect us 
against high interest rates because the NDP wouldn’t do that. There’s 21 per cent, 22 per cent. It didn’t 
matter whether you were in northern Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, rural or urban, you were 
stuck with 22 per cent interest rates. 
 
They said, you set up an administration, whether it’s in ’82 or ’86 or 1990, and you walk in there and 
you protect people against those international consequences. And you can’t really blame the local NDP 
or anybody else for 22 per cent interest rates. All we can ask is that they do something about it, even 
though it’s beyond their control. And we did. 
 
So every mortgage in the province of Saskatchewan on every home up to $50,000 is locked in at nine 
and three-quarters. No place else in Canada or the United States, maybe not the world, that I can think of 
that’s locked in. Free health care, your mortgage is locked in at nine and three-quarters, no tax on food, 
no tax on clothes, no tax on gasoline, no tax on utilities, as a safety net to protect people. 
 
Now the opposition say, but when you did that, you incurred some deficit, you incurred some debt. 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I say to the hon. member – we went through it today – net farm income in a 
province that has half the farm land in Canada went to practically zero. That’s when you want to reach 
out and protect people, and I haven’t even got to the protection in agriculture yet. But that safety net in 
rural and urban was there because we believed it was important to protect people against those 
international events and those climatic events and those cyclical events beyond their control. 
 
Now on top of that, at the request of, frankly, rural women when we were talking with them and others, 
we said, we believe that we could design a pension program for the province of Saskatchewan that 
would help low income people, that is students; people who are in and out of the work-force would like 
to have some independence when it comes to their retirement but couldn’t. they look forward to some 
insecurity but couldn’t. They look forward to some insecurity when they retire, perhaps even going on 
welfare, and they said, couldn’t you design a Saskatchewan pension program that would be just for us? 
 
And I remember, Mr. Chairman, talking to a farmer’s wife, and she said, I’m married to a fine fellow. 
He’s in agriculture, but you know it’s a cyclical business. If he goes broke, then I’m going to go broke, 
and what’ll I have for a pension? We don’t contribute that much to Canada pension; we’re in of it, we’re 
out of it. What about me? Isn’t there something you could design to help me as a woman that’s in 
agriculture that needs some protection? So we designed the Saskatchewan pension program. And you 
will find people are looking at that and copying that and talking about that pension plan all across 
Canada. Certainly ministers come into this province and ask about it and in Europe and in the United 
States. And very simply put, if you put $25 a month up, we’ll match it. And after you retire, 20-some 
years later you get $1,000 a month, no matter where you live in Canada. 
 
On top of that . . . And 80 per cent of that program has women involved in it, and it’s been very popular 
with small business because when you have four or five employees and you can’t afford a pension 



program, we will contribute to their pension program. So small business has enjoyed it, and women in 
business and women generally. 
 
On top of that, we designed the senior citizen’s heritage program. And that program said, for our 
seniors, because it’s very important, we will contribute up to 500 for single seniors and up to 750 for 
couples. Well, Mr. Chairman, that safety net is something that was not here before. Clearly it wasn’t 
here. People asked for it. They said, you live in a province that deals with resources and you’re on the 
cyclical market in international trade. Make sure you design mechanisms that will protect people. 
 
Now where it really matters is in agriculture. And I listed the programs all afternoon and I wont’ go 
through them again for the hon. member, but he’s aware of them. But we’ve designed one of the finest 
crop insurance mechanisms that you will find any place in the world. And we have put together low 
interest protection programs at zero per cent interest on cash advances, 6 per cent and nine and three-
quarters, and we’ve certainly put our back and our shoulder to the wall and to the wheel to protect 
people in agriculture. And that’s been very, very important. And they have said that they appreciate that. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, the first reason that our administration was elected in ’82 and elected again in 1986 
was that safety net to protect individuals against things that were beyond their control. Now to help 
shore them up in that safety net, we’ve continued with distance education, certainly increased 
expenditures in education generally. We’ve got individual line service. We’ve got the capacity to teach 
education and first-and second-year university in more and more facilities across the province. And 
certainly the New Careers Corporation, when it comes to welfare reform, has been extremely 
productive. 
 
If you look at the Canada Games that are in Saskatchewan, Saskatoon tonight and today, and you’ll see 
the work that they put together in the promenade and other facilities across this province – very, very 
proud of the New Careers Corporation. 
 
That safety net to protect people was significant in our election and our re-election. And I would briefly 
remind the hon. member that’s the reason, one of the reasons that they chose us over the NDP because it 
wasn’t there before. And the things that I’ve mentioned tonight are brand-new in this administration and 
were not there before. 
 
Now let me just briefly go on to the second reason that we were elected and re-elected, and that was to 
build and diversify. Mr. Chairman, we were asked to build this economy and to diversify this economy 
because it was not being diversified. We saw that the previous administration was buying potash mines, 
nationalizing companies, and had government involved in a great deal rather than see them diversify the 
economy. 
 
And I think that there was a clear difference, it was either today or yesterday, yesterday I believe, when 
the Leader of the Opposition stood in his place and he says, here we are . . . And I’m quoting the Leader 
of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale. He said, here we are in the province of Saskatchewan, 
in the middle of Canada, and we are trapped – we are trapped. And if you look it up in Hansard it’s a 
very interesting description of his view and his vision of Saskatchewan. He says, we are trapped here, as 
if there is no choice but to just do the things that we did and we tried to do in the 1920s and the 1930s 
and the 1940s. He said, we are a long ways from markets; we suffer from the distances we have to 
travel; it’s impossible for us to process, manufacture, and diversify because we’re trapped here, and 
we’re land-locked, and we have no choices – as if we must bend on our knees to Ottawa for ever, we 
must rely on government for ever to build and program and diversify and process here in the province of 



Saskatchewan. I don’t share that vision. I don’t feel trapped. And the people of Saskatchewan do not 
want to think that they are trapped. They don’t even like that word. We are not trapped. 
 
This is in the middle of North America. We have access to the East and the West and the North and the 
south, with excellent transportation facilities, with the capacity to do all kinds of things if we have as 
much vision – and I used it today in my Agriculture estimates – as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool when 
it comes to the future. 
 
And I went through it and I quoted them saying they don’t believe we’re trapped. They see all kinds of 
opportunities in trade and free trade and they quoted . . . and I looked it up; the free trade agreement is 
even mentioned in here. So they’re saying that there is much opportunity. And that’s why they elected 
our administration and they said no to the NDP in ’82 and they said no to them’ 84 federally and they 
said no to them in ’86 for us and they said not to them nationally. Now, Mr. Chairman, I will say to the 
hon. member that we have been building in some modest way, and I’ll just share a few of them with the 
Leader of the Opposition and the members opposite. 
 
In 1982, we didn’t make our own paper in this province. They said it couldn’t be done, they campaigned 
against it all over Prince Albert and said it would never happen. You cannot build a paper mill in the 
province of Saskatchewan because we’re locked in here and the transportation rates will just keep you 
from doing it. So we said, no, we believe that we can build a paper mill; we’ll stop the losses of $91,000 
a day, we’ll turn it into a profit, and we will make a paper mill – and we did. And now Saskatchewan 
makes its own paper for the first time in history, and it exports that paper into the United States and for 
all I know all over the world. And we do it profitably and it’s made 150 to 200 brand-new jobs. 
 
You look at the possibility for us to take our gasoline and our natural gas and to use it in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We had seven or eight natural gas wells in 1981-82; we have 700 drilled this year alone. 
And there was a refinery here in Saskatchewan, called the Co-op refinery in Regina. It was taking 
Alberta crude and it was making gasoline and diesel fuel and we were feeding the Alberta Heritage 
Fund. And we fed the Alberta Heritage Fund millions and millions and millions of dollars because we 
never used our own oil to make our own gasoline and our diesel fuel. 
 
And the NDP had talked about it and flirted about it but they could never put it together. They couldn’t 
do it with the Co-op, they couldn’t do it with the private sector. And I’m happy to say, Mr. Chairman, in 
a modest way, that we have one upgrader built in the city of Regina, the largest project in the history of 
this province, and we have another one on its way with Husky in Lloydminster. And we are going to 
make our own gasoline, our own diesel fuel with the potential for our own petrochemicals in this 
province, using our own oil for the very first time for that purpose, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now the hon. member says, what about the vision? Our vision says that we can build those things, and 
the same applies to fertilizer. We’ve got natural gas in this province and we’ve never made one pound of 
nitrogen fertilizer in our province. And farmers have said to me, I’m tired of importing it from Alberta, 
I’m tired of importing it from the United States or from Manitoba. Why don’t you build it here in 
Saskatchewan? And why not, Mr. Chairman? 
 
You are going to see that happen in the province of Saskatchewan with us building one of the finest 
fertilizer projects you’ll find any place in North America; 25 per cent of it will go offshore, 25 per cent 
to the United States, 25 per cent down East, and in the province of Saskatchewan we will have the 
lowest priced ammonia you will find any place in North America, and farmers in this province want to 
see that. 
 



(2000) 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, the members opposite laugh because they don’t believe. They didn’t believe we 
could build a paper mill, they didn’t believe that we can build an upgrader, they didn’t believe that we 
can build Husky, they didn’t believe that we will build a turbine plant, and I’ll just touch on a few more. 
 
We believe that, as the wheat pool does, and I went through its report on the processing and 
manufacturing and the things that we can do today, and I said we can do it; we can build and we can 
diversify and we can broaden the base in the province of Saskatchewan so we have, one, the better 
safety net; and two, more prosperity because we can build and diversify for the future of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Now the hon. member knows about him purchasing pulp mills. We’ve done privatization with native 
bands, with employees; Meadow Lake pulp mill we put together, that is one of the finest projects you’re 
going to find, and that involves people, local people, diversification, processing, manufacturing, export 
business, 10 Indian bands who are very much in favour, and the local employees have invested in a 
brand-new project – 3, $400 million and hundreds of new jobs – and the hon. member opposite says, 
well I don’t think we can do that because we are land-locked. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have provided individual line service to farmers all across this province, we’ve put in 
a natural gas rural distribution system to the people of this province to help protect their costs, and we 
stimulated water management and irrigation, and we’re in the fight of our life for the Rafferty program 
which is going to be an historic program in water management and water drought-proofing in the 
province of Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan. The members opposite . . . No, we couldn’t do it 
for 50 years; you’ll never get it done. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I believe that we’ll do it. I believe for the first time in our history we can save water in 
southern Saskatchewan like we’ve never saved it before, and we can have irrigation, and we have 
recreation, we have water development, we can have drought-proofing. We can have water for the future 
and half paid for by the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I just say to the hon. member, he wonders frankly why he was 
defeated in ’82 and why they were defeated in 1986 and he says, well now why would the people of 
Saskatchewan opt for this safety net, and why would they opt for this diversification and this building? 
And I say, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, they are going to look at the safety net and compare it to 
anybody else. They’re going to look at the diversification and process in the building, and then they’re 
going to look at the opposition and say, well what is there about this radical stuff, what is there about 
this reputation that these people would buy all this new diversification back for a dollar? What is there 
about these people who would say, we will make this province ungovernable because we are radical and 
we are proud to be radicals? 
 
You know what the opposition is painting a picture for the people of Saskatchewan? They’re saying, we 
are afraid to build; we think that we’re trapped; we don’t like the safety net; we never believed in 
interest rate protection; we never really believed in spending in health care, because all we did was talk 
about it. The medicare thing was supposed to work all the time. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. members they are going to have to prove that they have a vision 
about building, processing, manufacturing, and a protection safety net for the people of this province. 



 
Let me just say to the hon. member finally – and we’ve been through this in our Agriculture estimates – 
he believes, or he thinks, that it’s appropriate that I be blamed and this government be blamed for 
drought and $2 wheat and grasshopper problems and economic problems. We look at the prices of 
potash, we look at the prices of oil, we look at the prices of wheat, and I have figures that I am prepared 
to share with the member opposite that will show that just in terms of keeping up with the revenue 
coming into this province in 1981-82, we would have to have a 40 to 50 per cent increase in prices. Now 
that isn’t there. 
 
And to give you an example of that, in 1981-82 – I’ll just take neighbouring provinces to give the hon. 
member an example so that the public knows what we’re talking about here – the Alberta government 
had a surplus. They put 10, 11, $12 billion in the Heritage Fund. By ‘83-84, they had $50 million in 
deficit on their current account – a Tory government. And by 1989-90, they had 1.5 billion deficit on the 
current account. And this is a province that could draw out of its Heritage Fund because it had built up 
savings in the good times, but on their current account they were looking at the deficits at a billion, 
billion and a half, half a billion dollars. Now, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says, oh no, it’s only in 
Saskatchewan, it’s only in Saskatchewan that you’ve had these difficult . . . And the difficulties weren’t 
all that real, not really that real. It’s only our fault. 
 
I will just say to the hon. member, in the province of Alberta, where they in the good times socked away 
10, 11, $12 billion in a heritage fund and now can draw out of it so the people of Alberta have a benefit 
– that wasn’t the case in the province of Saskatchewan. All that money was put into buying farm land or 
buying mines or buying pulp mills or buying some other things. 
 
And in the province of Alberta they’ve run a deficit recently, like we have. Every jurisdiction in the 
country has a deficit – every one. Allan Blakeney sat right there and he said, yes, I’d have a deficit under 
these conditions. Not as big as yours though, Mr. Devine, but I’d have a deficit. He says, in difficult 
times it’s okay to have a deficit. Alberta’s okay to have a deficit; in Manitoba it’s okay to have a deficit. 
All across the country it’s all right in difficult times. 
 
And the opposition says, no, not in Saskatchewan. Well everybody knows that that’s reasonable. That 
safety net and that protection . . . And the things that the members opposite ask for today, like protecting 
farmers, putting more cash into farmers, spending more money on health care and so forth – we’ve done 
that and we’re prepared to do more. And we’re not ashamed of the fact that we backed up people in 
difficult times; certainly not ashamed of the fact that we walked in at 22 per cent interest rates and 
protected the public in this province when the NDP wouldn’t. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, nobody likes the deficit. We wish we had 6, $7 wheat and 25, $30 oil and high-
priced potash and uranium sales were very, very good at high prices – our marketings have been good 
but the prices have not; therefore the opportunity for revenue is not there. and it’s not there in Manitoba 
and it’s not there in Alberta and it’s not there in the United States and it’s not there in a good part of 
Canada. 
 
For us the objective is to provide that safety net in the difficult times. The good times are easier to 
manage, and the opposition has been through that. We haven’t had that opportunity or that luxury. And 
it’s also important that we have the vision to fight for freer international markets, that we do process, 
manufacture, and diversify, and we’re quite prepared to do that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I say to the hon. member: he asks me about vision, whether we will provide a safety net and whether 
we will build and diversify. Yes, sir. He asks me about whether we’re going to be locked in to this poor 



little place like Saskatchewan. I say, I don’t feel like we’re locked in, and people don’t even like to hear 
him say that. That’s very, very important. 
 
And then he asks me, he says, well what about cabinet? What about the Minister of Agriculture being 
the Premier? I can say to the hon. member, as I did earlier today, that every meeting that I go to with the 
first ministers or nationally and internationally, the Minister of Agriculture is right with me, and we 
haven’t had many differences of opinion when it comes to providing economic opportunity and safety 
nets for the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- So he might not like it, but I’ll tell you, there’s an awful lot of people who have 
appreciated the $2 billion in cash that has come out here as a result of things that we’ve done -- $600 
million cash that we have provided. And there are programs out there . . . And the last election that we 
had in this province was a by-election in Saskatchewan, the last one we had, the last litmus test. And 
what did it say? In a rural riding that we never held, that riding said, we appreciate what you’ve done in 
agriculture and the fact that you could represent us and have, and we needed some help, we were there. 
 
So I’ll say to the hon. member, our cabinet, our cabinet has delivered on a safety net, and it’s delivered 
on building and diversification and processing and manufacturing. Our cabinet has made mistakes. I 
make mistakes every day. We have been dealt some card that have been easier to play and some that 
have been pretty difficult, but we play them, and we have gone to the wall for rural people and urban 
people in health care, social services, education, and we’ve gone to the wall in processing and 
manufacturing. 
 
And we’ve certainly led this country in some of the more important debates, more important debates, 
whether we should be open or closed. I absolutely, fundamentally believe that we should be open. I 
believe the people of this province should be able to invest in government. I absolutely believe that. And 
you think it’s historic, and I agree with you, that people will not be able to invest in the potash 
corporation. It’s far overdue. We could have billions of dollars in the Heritage Fund if you hadn’t taken 
the borrowed money and your savings and invested in potash. I fundamentally believe that. You don’t. I 
do. 
 
Now that will be the test in 1990 or ’91, whether it will be an open, free society to invest in 
Saskatchewan, invest in government – we can diversify – whether we’re going to expand around the 
world or whether we’re going to close up because we believe that we are, in your words, trapped. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Trapped by you boys. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Oh no, no. You didn’t talk about us when you said trapped. You said this province 
is trapped. You read Hansard, and I’ll dig it out, and I’m sure we’ll have it all over the place, but your 
word of “trapped” is the ideology that people have refuted. They said, no, no. 
 
Now he asks . . . The member opposite, he says, well what about the last federal election where you 
campaigned and the NDP won more seats than the Tories in the province of Saskatchewan? And he 
says, how about that as a litmus test. Well how about that. What did you campaign on? You campaigned 
on fear. You said oh my gosh, if we have free trade across here, you’re going to lose your health care. 
You're going to lose your health care. Well do you know, Mr. Chairman, do you how fearful of that I 
am? We went right back into Assiniboia-Gravelbourg after that big campaign and we said, do you know 
what? The Leader of the Opposition is whistling Dixie. He’s saying if you trade you’re going to lose 



five hospitals; if you vote for Grant Devine you’re going to lose five hospitals and it’s all going to be 
going. Do you know what people said? I don’t believe that any more. Come on, free trade is here. The 
wheat board is fine. The hospitals are fine and we have a brand-new health care card. You can only 
frighten the people so many times. 
 
You walked out of this House for three weeks this spring and you said, boy, this is a big deal. How 
many times can you do that on nothing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. Well you’ll get your 
chance, you’ll get your chance. How many time are you going to be radical; how many times are you 
going to do this? Nothing to offer, just fear, fear, for partisan reasons, fear for partisan reasons. You 
know it could be popular. You know that potash sales are going to be popular and shares are going to be 
popular. You mark my words. And we will campaign on it, sir, we’ll campaign on it and you will be 
able to do it, and all those shareholders in potash are going to say, now what would we like, these guys 
taking them back for $1, or the opportunity to see our investment grow into the future? I’ll tell you what 
they’ll buy. They’ll buy the future; they won’t buy the saving of being trapped. They’ll buy investing in 
potash and Saskoil and WESTBRIDGE and the Meadow Lake saw mill and Weyerhaeuser and building 
new fertilizer plants and the opportunity for us to grow and expand, and say to the world once and for 
all, we are not trapped, we haven’t been trapped. The only trap in the province of Saskatchewan is the 
NDP if they ever get back in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I’ll just summarize my rebuttal to the hon. member. The 
Saskatchewan government’s policies on diversification, processing, and manufacturing, as reviewed by 
the Toronto Dominion Bank, as reviewed by the Economic Council of Canada, as reviewed by other 
major growth indicators, say that Saskatchewan, and I quote: 
 

. . . will post the best economic performance provincially of any province in Canada in 1989-90. 
 

Now if that’s the case, Mr. Chairman, despite the difficult times, despite some of the doom and gloom 
and the fear preached by the members opposite, if we lead all other provinces in our growth this year as 
a result of agriculture, diversification, and the safety net, I think that will speak for itself. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when it comes to the point for me deciding whether I will be the cabinet minister that is 
responsible for Agriculture, I’ll certainly let the opposition leader know if I decide to change that, and 
certainly from time to time I do make modifications to cabinet. I certainly have depth here to choose 
from, and I’m quite proud of all the members, and particularly that we could elect a brand-new member 
in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
And I’ll say to the hon. member, he’ll be among the first to know when I publicly announce if there’s 
any modifications to cabinet. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the minister for telling me that we’ll be the first to know. But, 
Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, that speech, that tired old speech, worn out speech, same 
old worn out speech from a worn out Premier and a worn out government, is why this government, Mr. 
Chairman, why this government is afraid of its shadow, why this government has gotten GigaText, why 
this government has attacked the Provincial Auditor, why this government’s record in health care is the 
worst in the record of the history of the province of Saskatchewan. That same old tired out speech by a 
tired out old Premier and government is proof positive this government’s got to be defeated – absolutely 
defeated. 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The member opposite talks about building the safety net. The member opposite and 
the member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley privatization, how many of you stood with the Keep Our 
Doctors committee when we tried to build medicare? And you tried to destroy it, sir – you did, you were 
there. You were there, you were there opposing medicare and hospitalization. The member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden was leading the attack, and they have the audacity to say that they built a social 
net. They’re not building a social net, they are destroying the finest medicare hospitalization scheme in 
Canada, the Minister of Health and the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan – they’re destroying 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That’s building! The only thing the minister opposite can build is the largest deficit in 
the history of the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the only thing he can build. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That’s all he can build. He can build the largest deficit. He can build the largest 
unemployment numbers. He can build the largest welfare list. He can build the largest bankruptcy list. 
He can build the largest number of young people leaving. He puts into a cabinet a government which is 
determined, hell bent for leather, to destroy every social policy, and the Minister of Health has led that 
charge, that this government and this province has ever known and the minister has got the audacity to 
say that he builds. Shame on him if he says he’s got he audacity to build; he doesn’t build anything. 
 
Build, how does he build? How does this big Premier and government build? How do they build? They 
say to Weyerhaeuser of Washington state, come on in I’ll give you $234 million of the taxpayers’ 
money, you build. That’s how he builds. He says to Peter Pocklington, come on I’m going to give you 
$20 million, you build. 
 
He says the NDP never built. How in the world is he getting about this program of selling off everything 
that he sells off? How do you get it? Do you sell it off by air? Yes, but where do you get that? Where do 
you get all of the assets that you’re selling off? 
 
He says there was no Heritage Fund. Where was the Heritage fund but invested in the future for jobs 
which this government now is tearing apart and there are no jobs, no young people, and no future. That’s 
why the young children are leaving, thanks to this Premier and this government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- This government’s policy, Mr. Chairman, is simple and clear-cut. It’s sell and tax, 
that’s what the policy is, sell and tax. It’s a scorched earth policy. It doesn’t matter what the NDP has set 
up, this Premier and this government is determined to tear it apart and the results are evident 
everywhere. The results are evident with respect to the taxation rates, the unemployment rates, all of the 
indicators that I’ve indicated, that is the net result of this Premier’s activities. And the Premier knows 
that that’s what the people of the province of Saskatchewan feel, because if he thinks that Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg is a litmus test, that they have bought his arguments on free trade – it is? Call an election 
right now. Call it right now. 



 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You get up and call the election. 
 
The Premier thinks that they’ve bought your arguments on free trade. Don’t run behind your officials 
and the ministers. Don’t ‘run behind all of that. You call the election right now. You get your courage 
screwed up and go right outside there and call an election, and we’ll see whether the people of free trade 
buy your view on that argument on free trade. We’ll see whether or not the people buy your arguments 
on privatization and on social services. Call an election, put it to the test. Don’t give me the speech, 
don’t give me the speech, call it right now. 
 
But he will not call it right now, Mr. Chairman, because this person is the most frightened political 
leader in Canada, and he should be because of what he’s done to the ordinary people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Longest session in the legislative history of the province of Saskatchewan. You’re 
doggone right it’s the longest session in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and 
so it should be. I have never in my years in this Legislative Assembly seen so much corruption and 
scandal in the history of this province as I’ve seen under this Premier and this administration – never! 
 
He hasn’t said a word about GigaText. How does he explain that mess? I’m going to ask him some 
questions about that and his involvement in it in detail. We’ll do that right away today or tomorrow; in 
the next few days we’re going to get at the bottom of GigaText. We’re going to get to the bottom of your 
other shenanigans with respect to your other privatizations of private leasing with corporations; we’re 
going to get you to explain that, those messes. 
 
I have never seen a situation where the Royal Canadian Mounted Police are brought in to investigate the 
government on this kind of an operation, and this Premier says, you just wait, they’ll learn to like it. The 
people of the province of Saskatchewan will learn to like it, he says. Don’t worry about it, they will 
learn to like it. 
 
I’ve got news for you, Mr. Premier, they have already made their decision about you and this 
government. They have determined that this government is incompetent, it is rotten, and it’s time to be 
defeated because it doesn’t build – it destroys, it sells, and it taxes. And we say, on behalf of the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, enough is enough. They must go and go they will, Mr. Chairman, go 
they will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The Premier says, you know, you let us know about a cabinet change when it comes 
in due course. Well I guess you’ll let us know. But that’s the attitude, you see, it doesn’t matter what the 
opposition says, you’ll be the first to know. I don’t care if he wants to decide to keep the Minister of 
Agriculture portfolio; that’s up to him. That’s just perfect where we want him because that’s exactly 
where the farmers see the main source of their problems now. 
 
I travelled this province for two and a half weeks just about a week ago, and the Premier laughs because 
he thinks that he’s got the tap into the rural Saskatchewan area. I can tell you he hasn’t. I can tell you he 



hasn’t because the farmers of this province know exactly that it’s impossible for one person, no matter 
how well motivated to do the job, it is simply impossible. He can carry it on if he wants; he can keep the 
entire cabinet the way they are, as far as I am concerned. That will just hasten the end result in the large 
numbers. 
 
But I’m pleading on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, sir. I’m pleading on behalf of all those 
people who have written to you and all the editorialists and what you know yourself the situation is. I’m 
pleading on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, get a hold of this thing, get a hold of this 
government, show some leadership and stand up for the ordinary people; that’s the position I’m taking 
with you, and you wont’ do it, you simply won’t do it. 
 
You think, you think that through manipulation or through the sell-off of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan you’re going to have a slush fund to buy your way back into the next election. I tell you, 
you snuck through the gate in 1986 with fewer votes than we did, with fewer votes – 45 per cent to 44 
per cent. And I guarantee you, Mr. Chairman, that the people of the province of Saskatchewan will 
never, ever again be bought with their own money, with the sell-off of the potash corporation or 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Now the minister says, the Premier says, you’ll have another chance to walk out. He said you walked 
out for 17 days. You’re doggone right we walked out for 17 days, and we stopped you from selling off 
our basic heritage, at least for the time being. And if it had taken 21 days, I would’ve stayed out 21 days 
to stop you from breaking a major promise. 
 
You, sir, if it wasn’t unparliamentary, you, sir, told the biggest untruth to the people of this province 
when you promised you wouldn’t privatize SaskEnergy, when you tried to do it, and we caught you red-
handed . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- We caught you red-handed and we stopped you, we caught you. And I tell you, I tell 
you, sir, I know you’re going to try it again. I know you’re going to . . . You nod your head in approval. 
He’s going to try it again. He will try it this fall. He will try it some time this session. It doesn’t matter 
what his promises are. He agrees, he tells me he confirms he’s going to try it again, and he challenges 
the opposition to do what’s necessary to protect the heritage of the province of Saskatchewan – says try 
us. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, when you bring back that SaskEnergy privatization, then I tell you, try us again, 
because we are going to stand up for the people of the province again. We’re not going to let you sell off 
the basic heritage of this province ever again. We’re not going to let you do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I know he’s going to do it. I know he’s going to do it, Mr. Chairman, he’s going to 
sell off SaskEnergy; he’s going to try to sell it off. He will try to do it either now, during this term of 
office . . . He’ll try to do it, I know he’ll do it, or if he should win the election, Mr. Chairman, he’ll come 
back to try to do it again. 
 
I know that if this government should get re-elected and SaskEnergy isn’t privatized this time around, I 
guarantee and I warn the people of the province of Saskatchewan, they will be there to affect and 



achieve their goal if they should win, Heaven forbid, the next election. That’s why the Premier says that 
they’re out there to do it. 
 
I tell you, if he’s gets the approval of the electorate to privatize SaskEnergy, I’m a democrat, I’ll accept 
that – I have no choice – I’ll accept that decision. But I’ll tell you one thing, he is not going to privatize 
it in the absence of a mandate. I tell you that your misrepresentations, your falsehoods in this area, your 
give-away to your big multinational corporation friends the heritage of our province, whether it’s 
SaskEnergy, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, there is only one group that will give you the 
approval to do that, Mr. Minister and Mr. Premier, and that’s the voter of the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s all. Not those back-benchers who sing the Hallelujah Chorus, and not your multinational 
corporations that are funding your campaign, nor your old, 1930s, ideologically driven philosophy. That 
isn’t going to do it. You’ll have to get by the election in order to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So the member opposite says it’s the longest session in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. You’re doggone right it’s the longest session, and it’s going to be a lot longer because 
we’ve got a lot of questions to ask, a lot of questions about the waste and the mismanagement and the 
sheer, utter incompetence of this government. It’s sheer, utter incompetence. It’s a laughing stock of the 
province of Saskatchewan because it can’t administer anything. 
 
They keep on talking about the plastic health card. We are trapped by this administration’s 1930 views. 
We are trapped by a philosophy of this government which says that we’re going to go back to the 1930s. 
All of the things that Douglas and Lloyd and Thatcher and Blakeney built to overcome, you, sir, you, sir, 
in your ideologically driven motivation are seeking to undo. That’s why you’re trying to do. 
 
You’re ignoring the realities of this province: the distance, the climate, the population, the lack of 
political clout. In fact you are catering to those difficulties; you’re catering to all of that. And your vision 
is a vision of the 1930s. What you want to do is put us back into the situation where we’re captive to 
those corporations and those economic interests outside. 
 
And is it no surprise – it should not be any surprise – that the net result is that what we’re having before 
us now, record population loss, record taxation, record unemployment, record number of people on 
unemployment, record bankruptcies – all of the negative indicators – a record deficit, a deficit which is 
unparalleled in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. This is a government of doom and gloom 
and destruction. I said at the beginning, and I repeat again, it is the worst government in the history of 
the province of Saskatchewan, make no mistake about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Safety net. This minister’s idea of building a safety net is by doing away with the 
drug plan. We’ll get to the Minister of Health’s estimates to discuss that particular plan. The health care 
plan, their safety net is a dismantling of hospitals by not funding the hospitals. You can’t get the bodies 
in there. That’s their way of building . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, what about Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg? What have you done for Gravelbourg hospital? Absolutely nothing, that’s what you’ve 
done. Your silent-Sam member there with less than 160 votes, promising on that basis, has delivered 
absolutely zero, absolutely zero in Gravelbourg. 
 



Because it’s a promise like everything that you make, a promise that you don’t intend to keep, Mr. 
Chairman, none whatsoever. This is not a building of a safety net, it’s a dismantling of the province’s 
history and tradition. And the minister and the members opposite know that to be the case as well. 
 
Now I want to ask the Premier this question. The Premier obviously is not going to change his course. 
He’s going to come back again at privatization. He’s going t come back at privatization of SaskEnergy 
and he’s going to come back with this 1930s big-business corporation philosophy. He’s going to do that. 
 
And obviously he’s not going to change the cabinet. I think he will by the way. I think he’ll be forced to 
do that because the survival of the government is at stake. But right now he’s got some questions to 
answer. 
 
And I want to have the minister tell me, if he will, just to tell us how good he’s been managing things 
like GigaText? Let’s get on to that for a moment. I’m going to ask the minister, when it is that his 
government is going to decide on the question of whether or not to continue to fund GigaText? Just tell 
us about that success story, Mr. Minister, GigaText, and how much longer you’re going to be funding at 
$50,000 a month that scandal and boondoggle. Tell us about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I will address that question and a couple of others for the hon. 
member and give him a moment to calm down a little bit. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, I’m very calm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- It didn’t sound like it to me. He mentioned the population base in Saskatchewan. In 
1972, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan lost 17,000 people; in 1973, Saskatchewan lost 13,000 people; in 
1974, it lost 4,575; 1978, it lost 3,569; 1979, it lost 2,000; 1980, it lost 1,857; 1981, it did gain 868. I 
point that out to the hon. member so that if in fact, if he gets carried away about the fact that if there’s a 
change . . . if there’s a change in population during the PCs and the NDP, that it was not just isolated to 
PC administration or the NDP administration. 
 
(2030) 
 
If you look . . . Well the hon. member doesn’t believe it. I’ll give him the stats. I’ll share them with him, 
or he can look them up. Saskatchewan migration statistics, and it shows under the NDP, you lost as 
many as 17,000 people in one year. Now I just make that point so that the people know, 1972, ’73, ’74, 
1978, 1979, 1980, this province had a net loss in population. And it seems to me, if I recall, that was all 
under the NDP. 
 
Now I just make that point so the hon. member knows as a fact that it isn’t just during difficult 
agricultural times; these were in good times when Alberta population was growing in leaps and bounds, 
lots of money coming into the Heritage Fund, and the young people left the province of Saskatchewan 
because of the philosophy of the government. That’s why they left. That’s why they left. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why are they leaving now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And, Mr. Speaker, he says, well why are they leaving now. Leaving now is pretty 
easy to figure out—there’s no income in rural Saskatchewan. There’s no income. And he laughs. All day 
today his members were telling me how bad it was in rural Saskatchewan and now he’s laughing about 



it. I’ll tell the farmers that you’re laughing about the fact there’s a drought out there. They won’t be 
laughing. Oh no. You say why is there difficulty in Saskatchewan? Rural people are leaving because of 
the drought. 
 
And they’re not going to provinces that have nationalized companies. There’s no socialism in Alberta, 
and there’s not any in Manitoba; there is not any in Ontario and B.C. They’re going to provinces where 
– what? – there’s an opportunity to invest and build in private enterprises there. They’re not going to 
socialist havens. The young people are going to provinces that offer opportunity, provinces that say, we 
don’t feel trapped. 
 
You know what they say, and the NDP? They look at them and they say, well they’re radicals, and they 
say that we’re trapped. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t feel trapped and we don’t feel that this province 
wants radicals. And the opposition offers that alternative. They had their chance in the good times and 
they blew it, Mr. Chairman. They blew it. 
 
They didn’t put money in the Heritage Fund, sock it away for a rainy day. They didn’t compare to 
Alberta. They lost population to Alberta and they lost money. They paid the Alberta Heritage Fund just 
to make gasoline here out of our refinery because they wouldn’t help build an upgrader. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve changed that, and we’re going to continue to change that. We’re going to go 
back and we’re going to remind the members opposite that what you’re looking at, a couple of things 
that we did that the hon. members failed to do and that people have asked for it. 
 
And they mentioned health care. I believe that it’s fair to say we’re of the administration that removed 
extra billing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ha! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And the hon. member laughs. Well we’ll record that, that he laughs. 
 
For years and years and years, low income people and low income people said, well why do you still 
allow extra billing? Why does the NDP say one thing – they’re going to build new nursing homes and 
don’t built them, and they have a five-year freeze, a moratorium, and they keep talking about that? Why 
do they say they’re going to protect the young people and the seniors and others about extra building, 
but they don’t do it? They just talk about it. They just talk, talk, talk. 
 
Well I will say that we removed it. There was no talk, we just – that’s it. And we’ve struck agreements, 
good agreements. The Minister of Health has designed very good agreements with doctors, and we’ve 
got very good performance. We’re putting in up to $1,400 per man, woman, and child in health care, and 
we removed extra billing. 
 
He talks about the fact that we’re looking at social and economic policy in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s just all gone to pieces, that we’ve got brand-new health care policies and brand-
new social policies. I think it was in your administration, there was a demand for rehabilitation services, 
a big demand for rehabilitation service. Wascana wanted improvements, and there’s requests on the 
books for that. 
 
What did you do? What did you do? It seems to me that you built this little Taj Mahal for public 
servants, just south of this building. You neglected health care. You could have built the Wascana Rehab 
Centre. You could have put that in there for the people of Saskatchewan generally, but you didn’t. What 



did you do? You put together this civil service building and the new building – what’s the name of it? – 
in Saskatoon. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sturdy Stone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The Sturdy Stone Building in Saskatoon. That was your claim to fame. That was 
your claim to fame. 
 
Well when it comes to health care, we have obviously made changes with respect to rehabilitation: the 
Whitespruce centre for youth, the only drug treatment centre in Canada designated for young people, the 
Wascana Rehab Centre. I think it’s important that we remember that. 
 
I want to remind the member opposite, and he mentions – and just before I get back into his big concern 
about GigaText, one of the reasons . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well one of the main concerns, yes, to 
be fair . . . not the big one, but one of the many big ones that he has. 
 
One of the things that was a problem in the previous administration was not only the level of tax but the 
level of rate increases in utilities. And that’s something that really bothered people, really bothered 
people. I just want to remind the members opposite . . . Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says, well that 
just can’t be the case because they had such nice rate increases. Well they had dandy rate increases, and 
I just want to go through them for the hon. member: 1975-82 – and you got to listen carefully to this, 
Mr. Chairman – the increases in natural gas rates in the province of Saskatchewan under the NDP 
administration from ’75 to ’82 was 188.5 per cent increase. Now no wonder people got upset. 
 
And they looked at the Alberta Energy Company. They looked at natural gas over there, regulated it like 
everybody else. They looked at them having shares in it, and I’m going to go into the share offerings 
that you planned to do to reduce the rate increases, which was a good idea; 188.5 per cent increases in 
natural gas rates you hit consumers in this province with, and you said, how do you like it so far? Do 
you know what ours has been from ’82 to ’89? – 8.8 per cent, 8.8 per cent. And on top of that, $350 
million providing natural gas to people all across this province, towns and villages and other people. 
 
Well you can have the statistics and they’re there. Your administration, 188.5 and ours, 8.8. Now that’s 
a significant difference, and the hon. member says, well what was it that bothered the people in ’82 and 
’86 about the NDP. That’s part of it. 
 
Electrical rate increases, the hon. member says, well didn’t matter much. One of the reasons that we 
want to offer shares and regulate a gas utility and electrical rates is to reduce them. Let me look at yours: 
99.9 per cent increase in electrical rates from 1975 to ’82 under the NDP; 100 per cent increase and you 
wonder why people turfed you out. They don’t like that, they don’t like that increase. 
 
What’s ours been? From 1982 to 1989, with all the new facilities and increase in demand and building 
the Nipawin power project and paying for that 46 per cent – half the rates in the PC government 
compared to the NDP administration. 
 
Telephone rates. We have them here and the people on television want to look at them. In 1975 to 1982 
the increase in telephone rates was 56.2 per cent, 56 per cent. What was it from 1982 to 1988? I don’t 
think, Mr. Chairman, they really want to hear these rate increases because it haunts them. We said that 
we would not tax people through utilities, and that’s been the case. Telephone rates under the NDP – 56 
per cent increases; 1982 to ’88, the increases under the PCs were less than half of that at 24.6 per cent, 
Mr. Chairman. 



 
Now the number of rural gas customers in the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 was 84; 1988, 19,610. 
Mr. Chairman, we campaigned in the province of Saskatchewan in ’82 and said that we’d have natural 
gas in the province of Saskatchewan and we will deliver to the people across this province. And the 
NDP said you can’t do it – it’s impossible. You can’t put individual line service underground, you can’t 
put power lines underground, and you can’t put natural gas underground. They’re doing it in other 
places, but they said no, we’re trapped. We’re trapped. We’re in the middle of the North American 
continent a long ways from markets, and we have a thin population and we suffer from the weather – 
we’re trapped. 
 
Well their attitude was trapped in my view, Mr. Chairman, with the greatest respect – 84 people had it in 
1982; 19,610 have got it in 1988, and we’re still putting it in, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, natural gas wells drilled, I’ll just briefly touch on it. We looked at something less than 
100 in 1975, and in 1988 we’re well over 750. And, Mr. Chairman, the gas industry is growing. We’re 
on the verge of seeing it as a major expansion. We’re moving in petrochemicals, we’re doing things with 
respect to natural gas and fertilizer, and we have half the farm land in Canada, and you make ammonia 
and nitrogen fertilizer from natural gas. We can draw it out of the ground because we’re surplus 
producers. We can put it together to manufacture nitrogen fertilizer and spread it across the province of 
Saskatchewan and have the lowest price natural gas fertilizer any place in Canada and probably one of 
the lowest prices in North America. 
 
Now the hon. member asked about rates, and he asked about health care, and he asked about population 
and he asks about diversification, he asked about attitude and vision. I believe we can do these things. I 
believe that we can take on those low interest rates, those low agriculture prices. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You haven’t done it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well I haven’t don’t it. We’ve got a paper mill here; we’ve got an upgrader here; 
we’ve got turbines manufactured here; we’ve got increase in packing plants. And the hon. member says 
well, you didn’t do it. Well I don’t know who built it if it wasn’t us. It’s there, and I asked him, did you 
build one potash mine? Not one did you. You didn’t build one mine; the private sector built it. You 
didn’t build one single potash mine. You borrowed money and used money to buy the mine that was 
already there; didn’t create a thing, it was already there. And that’s been your claim to fame that you 
bought what was already there. 
 
Did you build one paper mill? Did you build one . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. I would ask the members to allow the Premier to respond to the member’s 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I raised the point, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, he wasn’t of the attitude to 
build. He didn’t build nursing homes. He didn’t build rehab centres. He didn’t build potash mines. He 
didn’t build pulp mills. He didn’t build packing plants. He bought them, borrowed money and bought 
them, never paid it back, and he says he didn’t offer people a chance to invest in them. He didn’t sell 
them. But we look at Saskoil. What do you think of Saskoil? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I think it’s a lousy deal. 
 



Hon. Mr. Devine: -- He thinks Saskoil is a lousy deal. It’s gone from a $290 million company to a 1.1, 
$1.2 billion company. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- For who? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- For the people of Saskatchewan. For the people of Saskatchewan, yes, and the 
return to Saskatchewan. And he says well, that’s such a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan. I 
mean, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. The member from The Battlefords, we would be . . . The member from The 
Battlefords, we would be pleased if you would allow the Premier to respond. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He’s misleading the House. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- One more warning. I would ask the member to get up and apologize to the House for 
using the expression. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- There is no point of order on it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- There is a point of order and I want to state it. I’m going to state the point of order. 
My point of order is: on what basis is the world “misleading” to be unparliamentary? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The member is aware that anybody who would respond or would make any 
insinuation that any member is misleading the House, it’s been ruled on many occasions that that is not a 
point of order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I want a point of order. I want you to cite for me where “misleading” is 
unparliamentary. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. Under rule 325 in Beauchesne’s: 
 

When the Speaker takes notice of any expression as personal and disorderly . . . 
 

I took notice of the expression by the member as being personally directed, and I ask the member to 
apologize on that basis. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- On a point of order, Mr. Chairman, I say to you that that ruling is an aberration of the 
Speaker’s ruling and of the Chair’s ruling. I use “misleading” at least a half a dozen times in my address 
to the Premier opposite. 
 
I say again, this government is misleading. That has been the history of this House for 18 years. You’re 
not going to take that interpretation and thwart our freedom of speech on the Premier’s estimates. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. The term “misleading” has been used by many members, and it will be 
allowed to continue. But the term “misleading” and to direct it as a personal attack against an individual 
member by this Chair is taken as unparliamentary, and that’s what I’ve asked the member to rule on. 
Order. I have made my ruling and I will not allow any more challenges to the chair . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay, bring in the Speaker. 



 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, during estimates before the committee, I called the members to order because 
there was a lot of injecture when the Premier was trying to make his comments in response to a question. 
And I called to order the member from The Battlefords, and in the process of calling the member to 
order, the member made a reference which I felt was a personal expression against the Premier, saying 
the Premier was misleading this House. And on that basis, I have been challenged and the challenge has 
been brought to the Chair. 
 
The ruling I made was under Beauchesne’s 325, and I also find that since 1958, page 105 in 
Beauchesne’s, it has been ruled unparliamentary to use the following expressions, and mislead happens 
to be one of those – misleading or mislead, made in a personal conjecture against another member. 
 
The Speaker: -- Shall the chairman’s ruling be sustained? 
 
Ruling is sustained on division. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

 
Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 10 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. The committee under review is the Committee of Finance, Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I must say that I am going to find this difficult to continue a review of 
this estimates on the basis of the ruling that you make, because the conduct of this committee is a 
conduct . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry. May I make the point that the conduct of this 
committee by majority vote, I submit to you, sir . . . On a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. Please allow the member from Saskatoon Riversdale to state his point. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, my point of order is that for the first time in the history of this House 
a word called “misleading” from a seated position, by a member not speaking, in the course of a debate, 
has been in the face of all of the rulings of the parliaments previous, now by majority vote – not by 
ruling of the Speaker, but majority of this House – has been expunged from the record. 
 
And what I want to know from you, sir, is: do you say that I am out of order to say that the Premier’s 
policies and statements have been misleading of this legislature and the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. 
 



An Hon. Member: -- Speaking of the point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- What is the member’s . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: -- . . . to the point of order of the hon. member, I think that if the Chair would reflect 
back perhaps a week to 10 days ago in this House, the Speaker made precisely the same ruling in this 
House, that a member stating that someone is trying to mislead this House is unparliamentary. The 
record will in fact show that, and that’s clearly precedent upon which to base your judgement as you did 
today. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- On the point of order, Mr. Chairman, it is true that Beauchesne’s is authority for 
both propositions, that it is and it isn’t. On page 108, Beauchesne’s says it’s unparliamentary; on page 
112, it says it isn’t. What has been the practice in this House, and I suggest that’s what you follow, is 
that the word “misleading” has been allowed unless it’s said to be deliberately misleading or unless the 
context is unequivocally suggests that. 
 
We have noticed, noticed . . . The member from Meadow Lake can get into this if he likes, but this is, 
Mr. Chairman, this is no trifling matter. This goes to our ability to express our views about statements 
made in this House. The practice here has been that the word “misleading” is used unless it’s said to be 
deliberately misleading, or unless the context is unequivocally suggests that. 
 
That was not true of the comment made by the member from North Battleford. He simply used the word 
“misleading”. And I say, Mr. Chairman, that this is an important point and it goes to our own ability to 
express ourself in this Assembly to deal with these estimates. And if you’re making the ruling, if, Mr. 
Chairman, you thought you heard him say that it was deliberately misleading, that’s one thing . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. I’ve been listening to the point of order from the member from 
Riversdale and to the point made by the member from Kindersley. In response to the point made from 
the member from Riversdale, I did not say that the term “misleading” could not be used in the House. 
 
But what I did say is that, and I go back to powers of the Chair to enforce order, which parliamentary 
practice: 
 

Or any disorderly or unparliamentary words are used, whether by a Member who is addressing 
the House or by a Member who is present during the debate, the Speaker will intervene and call 
upon the offending member to withdraw the words. 
 

I also refer again to Rule 325 in Beauchesne’s: 
 

When the Speaker takes notice of any expression as personal and disorderly, and tending to 
introduce heat and confusion, and calls upon the offending Member to explain, it is the duty of 
the latter immediately to explain or retract the offensive expressions, and apologize to the House 
. . . 
 

And the ruling I made was not on the basis of the term simply “misleading” but the personal expression, 
the way it was given. It wasn’t expressly on that word, and the member has responded. We will continue 
on in committee. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, we have no choice, I guess, given the majority of this government 
bludgeoning the opposition again. We have no choice . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I don’t even 



drag the Chair into this particularly. The fact is, on the vote, it was a majority bludgeon in surely what is 
going to be an unprecedented ruling of the legislature because in effect what you are saying is that a 
person who speaks on a side comment, that you can bear your judgment as to whether or not it’s within 
the rules on an aside, on the word “misleading” when it’s been judged to be parliamentary. 
 
I always thought that was a kind of a judgement call you can make on the Speaker at the time of the 
speech. But you, sir, are making that judgment call from one of my colleagues who was not even 
directly participating in the debate. And I find, sir, that the majority in position, now the censorship by 
majority vote of the words “misleading” – apparently we can say it some ways – shows how ascared this 
government is. How do you like that, Mr. Premier? Talk about radicals. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ascared? 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, ascared, afraid. How do you like that? How do you like them potatoes? This 
government is so afraid of words and debate, Mr. Chairman, that it imposes closure, it censors . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. I call all members to order. I do not believe that this ruling that has 
been made by the Speaker and by this Chairman is a ruling that is debatable. We’re entering, I believe, 
into debate, and under section 119, I just remind members that the Chair’s ruling is undebatable. If the 
member is willing to go back into the committee, we will proceed with Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that this government is muzzling the Leader of the 
Opposition, muzzling this Leader of the Opposition because of the use of the word “misleading” – not 
even by me, but by somebody in the back bench. That’s a muzzle. That’s a majority vote of censorship. 
 
I say under the Premier’s estimates that that is an unprecedented act, it’s a shameful act. I say that it is 
not only a shameful act, it’s an act of a government which can only be described as a government which 
is a coward, it’s a coward, that’s what it is. That’s what I say. I say it’s a government which is arrogant, 
it’s coward, it’s dishonest, it misleads. And now I’m being censored . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, 
by a majority vote, by majority vote. That s all it is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The member from The Battlefords is being censored. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, I am being censored. His right to speak affects my right to speak. I am being 
censored. And it affects your right to speak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- How do you like that, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. The debate before this Assembly . . . Order, order. Would all members 
come to order. The debate before the Assembly is not whether a member can speak in the House or has 
the ability to speak, and I don’t find that the ruling made hinders anyone’s opportunity to speak. 
 
I would ask members to come back to order and to return to the debate that we were involved in 
regarding the estimates on Executive Council. 
 



Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I say that the Premier, under his direction, the members of the PC 
caucus opposite censored the opposition in their choice of words, by vote, majority vote. That’s what 
happened tonight. 
 
I say that that is an act of radicalism. I say it’s an act of fear. I say it’s an indication of exactly how poor 
the government is based with respect to its arguments that all it can do is vote by majority to cut-off the 
debate on the potash; vote by majority to censor words. It is so afraid of its own shadow, its own posture 
politically that it is, in fact, it’s viewed as closure in the usage of words. Usage of words, Mr. Chairman, 
that’s what it does by way of majority, that’s what it does. 
 
And they’re all yelling over there, I mean, they’re all yelling. The Premier simply allows them to yell at 
this absolutely disorderly operation; they’re simply allowing to yell. And then when the Leader of the 
Opposition and the government gets up and doesn’t like a word that is chosen in what will be surely, in 
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association records, an unprecedented ruling. I guarantee you, I 
guarantee you, by majority vote, this is what happens. 
 
That’s the state of affairs we’re in. Because what happens by that, Mr. Chairman, by that act tonight has 
made my point more dramatically than anything that I wish to make. This government is arrogant, and it 
is going to bully its way through on its policies, come hell or high water. It’s going to do what it wishes 
to do because if it’ll censor words, it’ll censor any kind of opposition or criticism. It’ll continue with its 
policy of tax and sell, tax and sell, and destroying the province of Saskatchewan and its families. That’s 
what its going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That’s what this incident tonight indicates. That’s where the Premier has led this 
legislature to. That’s the situation now by way of an absolute majority he has brought us down to. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to get back to a consideration of the estimates, but I must frankly say that 
I’m not sure what next word will be ruled by yourself, sir, and the opposition majority, supported by the 
majority, to stifle the opposition leader from speaking. I don’t know where this democracy in 
Saskatchewan . . . how it’s going to be limited now by these PC government members opposite . . . This 
is difficult to deal with these estimates lest you say something which the Premier and his majority finds 
offensive, and by majority vote, will expunge and deny the opposition from speaking. 
 
This is an incredible show today. The Premier; an absolutely incredible show. I’ve been in this 
legislature for 18 years and I’ve never, ever seen the word “mislead” ruled to be unparliamentary by 
majority vote of the legislature – never. But that’s water under the bridge, that’s water under the bridge. 
 
And now we’ll continue on with the consideration of the estimates. But let it be a reminder for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan how low democracy has sunk in this Legislative Assembly, and 
how the majority is stifling and arrogantly moving ahead with its objections and its policies as it decides 
to do so. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, perhaps . . . perhaps, Mr. Premier, you can . . . perhaps, Mr. Premier you can . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. I ask the members to allow the member from Saskatoon Riversdale to 
place his questions in the estimates. 
 



Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, actually at the time of the censorship applied by the majority 
government vote on the word “misleading” at the time of this application, it was the Premier who, I 
think, was in full flight giving his 1982 speech or 1981 speech, trying to make it relevant for 1989. 
 
I want to ask the Premier a specific question. Mr. Premier, will you confirm that it is the intention of 
your government to bring back the legislation to privatize SaskEnergy during the current term of your 
office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we arranged an agreement with the Leader of the Opposition 
and the House leaders that we would go through the hearings in the process of listening to the public 
through the Barber Commission on SaskEnergy and the implications of allowing people to invest in 
SaskEnergy and regulate it by government, and what impact that would have on the public. And I said 
we would go through that and listen to those hearings, and then we would take it from there. And I’m 
going to do that. I will listen to them and I will not . . . unless they want me to, if they want to bring it in 
and debate it and vote on it, I’ve said all along that I’d certainly be prepared to do that. But I agreed that 
we will go through the hearings and listen to it and then take it from there. So that’s exactly what we’ll 
do. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to be very specific on this from the Premier, because even 
when he gives a specific answer, the sorry record of this government is that it breaks its promise, as it 
did once before on SaskEnergy. 
 
The Premier knows that he is not bound by the Barber Commission findings. He acknowledges his head 
in agreement in that regard. In the light of that fact, I want the Premier to tell the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan whether it is his intention to bring back the privatization Bills during the term of office 
currently that the government holds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, if the members asks me if I believe in offering shares in 
SaskEnergy as we put together in the Speech from the Throne or privatizing potash, I do. And I haven’t 
changed my mind on that. As a result of the Barber hearings and commission that is out there, and we 
will decide if we should modify it, or if we should do anything else with it, with respect to offering 
opportunities for the people. 
 
I’ve had many people say to me, for example, they’ve really appreciated SaskPower bonds, and they 
said why don’t you offer an energy bond? Let the people participate in an energy bond; they said that 
seems perfectly normal. You’re going to regulate rates anyway; you regulate them across Canada. Every 
jurisdiction has natural gas regulated, but it allows people to invest in it. If they can do it in Ontario and 
do it Alberta, why can’t they do it in Saskatchewan? Why can’t we invest in energy? Just regulate it. 
 
I’ve said all along that a natural monopoly is either run by the government or it’s regulated, and that’s 
the way it should be. And there’s no hesitation at all in saying that you could allow people to invest in 
natural gas and regulate the rates by government. You can make it by law. They’ve done it in other 
places. The rate can rise no more than certain percentage below the rate of inflation, and it’s legislated 
by this legislature. 
 
People get lower rats. You get, in rural Saskatchewan, your rink rates, which are very high, like I’ve said 
at Willow Bunch would run $30,000 a year in electricity. You could cut that in half. 
 
Now I’d like to see that happen, and if people are comfortable enough, say for example, with energy 
bonds or energy bonds converted to something else, if they saw power bonds converted to Saskoil shares 



– perfectly comfortable with it; ask me the next . . . they said when’s the next one out, because rates can 
be lower – I said I’ll look at that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Throw out the white flag. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Throw it out? The hon. member wants to know if people would like to invest. I 
think the hearings are going well. The people are saying, well what was all this scary stuff they were 
talking about? So if in fact, they re’ going well, Mr. Speaker, we will access it at that time. 
 
So I agree with the hon. member. I’m not bound by the commission. I said, go out and listen to the 
people. I agreed I would not bring the legislation in until we’ve heard from the commission. The 
commission will make its recommendations, and then we’ll take it from there. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But you aren’t bound by it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- That’s right. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So we have the situation, Mr. Chairman, where the Premier views that he’s not bound 
by the commission hearings, the Barber Commission hearings. He has told the legislature this evening 
that the proposal of – at least the hearings as he sees it, as I heard him say it – the objective was to look 
at the proposal of privatization of SaskEnergy and to consider what modifications may be necessary. 
 
The policy as to whether or not privatization of SaskEnergy should or shouldn’t take place, the Premier 
very pointedly made no reference to that. In fact, I think it’s correct to say that the Barber Commission 
itself views this not to be within its jurisdiction on the fundamental policy; that the Barber commission 
views its job to look at what is on the table to see how it can improve it, but it isn’t its job to decide 
whether it goes ahead or not goes ahead. And the Premier obviously endorses that view. 
 
He uses the word, modifying the proposal of the privatization of SaskEnergy. I can only conclude from 
these answers the Premier is going to bring back the SaskEnergy Bills, modified perhaps by the Barber 
Commission, but nevertheless, none the less because of all the attributes that he’s ascribed, he’s going to 
come back to privatize the SaskEnergy proposal. 
 
Now if that’s exactly what the Premier is saying or if he thinks I’m putting words in his mouth, let him 
say so. I want him to clarify that. Is that the case? You’re going to come back with the privatization of 
SaskEnergy, maybe with modifications after Barber, but the policy remains unchanged. At this term of 
office you’re bringing it back. Isn’t that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I said that I will review it after the Barber Commission, and I will. 
And it may be appropriate to introduce the legislation at that time, it may be appropriate to modify it. I 
certainly find that people are much less fearful of the bogeyman that the opposition put up and said 
somebody from Chicago is going to own the power corporation. They don’t believe that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Go ahead and try it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The hon. member says, well go ahead and try it. I said certainly, if you would have 
stood in your place and voted, we would have had it done by now. And you’d have shares all over and 
rink rates would be in half and we’d have lower priced electricity. And they know that. I mean, you’re 
not going to fool me politically. Let me make the point. You’re not fooling anybody politically on this 



side of the House. You knew it would be popular. That’s why you walked out, and I’ve said that many 
times. Well I’ve said it. 
 
So they said, the only way we can beat that, the only way they can beat it is we’ve got to make a big 
scare tactic out of this so people can be frightened. And we’ll tell them half of the story; we’ll say that 
they’re going to sell SaskPower. And they know that’s nonsense. And now people are starting to get the 
truth, and they’re saying, well they made this big huff and puff about potash and it’s going to be fine. 
People will buy shares in it. 
 
If we offer Energy bonds and Power bonds . . . The NDP never did. They thought of it, mind you. I 
mean, and I can go through it here tonight with all the plans that the NDP had for doing that. So he 
asked me whether I would modify it or if I’m going to listen to the commission. Yes, I’ll listen to the 
commission and I may modify it, and at that time we’ll take appropriate action. And that’s what he 
asked me to do, so that’s what I’m doing. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t ask him to refer it to the Barber Commission. He did this 
as a matter of salvation of his own skin and his own government. That’s what he did. I didn’t ask him to 
do it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You said you’d come back in if we did that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, I said I’d come back in . . . We said we’d come back in if you didn’t proceed 
with the second reading of the Bill because you had no mandate. You had no mandate and you have no 
mandate. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You watch. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Ah, the Premier says, you watch. Now that’s exactly the question that I want to get 
at. The Premier says that we should watch and that’s exactly the questions that I want to get answered. 
I’m watching. I’m in your estimates. We’re going to be here. We’ve got lots of time, obviously, and the 
longest session; a few more days longer doesn’t much matter. 
 
We’re going to get to the bottom of this. I want you to tell us the truth, Mr. Premier, the truth on this 
issue. Just tell us point blank whether you are bringing it back after the Barber Commission is 
concerned, because of your entire defence of it right now, your defence of it that we’re scaring the 
people, that you think it’s a great idea to sell off this natural monopoly public utility, that you can simply 
mislead -–if I can use that word, Mr. Chairman – that you mislead the public in saying that you’re not 
going to privatize it, I want you to tell us what your plans are right now as to when those bills are going 
to come back. When are you going to bring them back? Tell us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I will listen to the Barber Commission and I will listen very, very 
closely to the public after the commission, how they feel about the opportunity to invest in SaskEnergy. 
The public has said to me, by all means, we want to buy shares in the potash corporation. And they’ve 
said that unequivocally to me, absolutely. And you just watch. 
 
And they’ve said to me, we want to buy shares in Saskoil. They said to me, build the paper mill. They 
said to me to build the turbine manufacturing plant. They said to me to build a fertilizer plant. They have 
said that. And that’s precisely what I’ve been listening to. 
 



And when they come back with the Barber Commission and make its recommendations, I will look at 
them very carefully. I will listen to the public and then I will make up my mind exactly what I’m doing 
with energy with respect to Energy bonds or Energy shares or anything else with respect to energy, just 
like we’ve done with SaskPower bonds, SaskTel bonds, Saskoil shares. All of those things were not 
done before and are now extremely popular. The public thinks very highly of them. 
 
If we can help lower energy rates by offering an Energy bond, I will certainly offer the bond, no 
question about that. If they say to me, we’re not afraid of having SaskPower bonds converted to some 
sort of shares . . . And they haven’t been. They’ve bought it and they’ve got 150 per cent return on their 
investment and they see lower electrical rates as I went through tonight, and lower power and gas rates. 
 
If they say the same thing on natural gas, you offer bonds to us so we can reduce the debt so we’re not 
paying it to international bankers, and we can have an opportunity to have lower electrical rates and 
lower gas rates and they’re regulated by law like they are in every other province . . . Why don’t you 
think Albertans are afraid to buy shares? Why are Ontario people not afraid to buy shares? Why are only 
the NDP afraid? What is it about you people? Why are you just so feeling of trapped – trapped – that’s 
what you say over, and over again. If anybody invests in this province is trapped. 
 
I want to quote for you, 1958, the Speech from the Throne, under Tommy Douglas in this legislature – 
1958: 
 

It has been the avowed policy of this government over the years to endeavour to build a more 
diversified and stable economy, not to lessen the importance of agriculture but rather to 
supplement our agriculture economy by developing our basic resources and by developing 
primary and ultimately secondary and tertiary industries in the province of Saskatchewan in 
1958. 
 

Well I give him credit. He tried to build, he tried to build, Tommy Douglas in the year 1958. I was 14 
years old and he was talking about diversification, processing, and manufacturing. And you people 
today are so paranoid about somebody investing in the province of Saskatchewan, somebody from 
outside coming in and sharing in this province. And you run around and frighten senior citizens to death. 
That’s your claim to fame. You’ve done it all your political life and you’ve offered nothing else but fear. 
 
You can laugh, yes you laugh, but you know that I’m right on the money – I’m right on the money. 
Tommy Douglas was not afraid to build. You are afraid to build. You will buy . . . Now, look it, this 
province needs equity investment, it needs to be opened, it needs the plan that you put together in 1982, 
Mr. Leader of the Opposition. You have this plan, and I can go through it with you. And what it says is 
you are going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, go through it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well I will go through one particular point. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, go through it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I will go through it. I’ll certainly rise to the challenge of going through it. I want to 
just . . . One particular point that is very important. The share offering under the NDP in the resource 
sector – gas, oil, and potash, and what not – would be listed on the Canadian stock exchanges to provide 
the required liquidity. 
 



Now what in the world does that mean? That means other Canadians would be allowed to invest in 
Saskatchewan as they are now in Saskoil or in WESTBRIDGE. What’s wrong with that? Nothing. And 
you stand up and you said you don’t like Saskoil because you say Canadians can trade on it in the 
Canadian stock exchange, and that was your plan. 
 
People around this province are going to know this was your plan. They’re beginning to figure it out 
already. You can run around and say, don’t let other Canadians come in here because, oh, they’ll take 
over. And you had a plan to provide equity and resource development that would be traded on the 
Canadian stock exchanges which means Vancouver, Alberta, and Toronto. You did, sir. 
 
And then you said, well by George. I don’t think our radicals would put up with it because we’ve got to 
scare them out. The only way that we can win in this province, you said, is to frighten people. 
Everybody else will take away medicare, and everybody else will say . . . I’ll tell you what we’ll say. If 
you let others invest, and we went into it today, and we talked about equity financing, you[‘d do it again 
on energy and you tried it on potash and you tried it on everything else. 
 
Well I’ll say to the hon. member, there is nothing wrong with people investing in Saskatchewan Energy 
or Saskatchewan Power. You regulate utilities like you do in any other jurisdiction. You either run them 
like a monopoly, which is mostly on borrowed money, or you regulate them. 
 
Let me make one final point with respect to SaskEnergy. I say to the hon. member – and maybe he’s got 
an answer for this, but he didn’t at least in his administration – if in fact you have a debt in a utility, how 
can you best fix that debt? You can’t borrow more money to fix that debt because it already has too 
much debt. Secondly, can you charge really high rates, can you charge really high rates to pay it off? 
You tried that and it didn’t work; they kicked you out of office. They don’t like 25 per cent rate 
increases. 
 
Third, you can replace the debt with cash, and people are happy to invest in a utility. They do it all over 
the world. And you regulate the rates here and you reduce the debt so your rates go down for people 
because they’re not paying interest on that borrowed money. They’re getting a return like they do on 
SaskPower, SaskEnergy, Saskoil, and you get lower rates, and the people of this province are stronger 
and more independent because they’re not paying international exchange rates and interest rates to 
bankers in New York. 
 
Now, you say, oh, you shouldn’t do that because it would be traded on the stock exchanges of the 
Canadian market. It was part of your plan. So you ask me about SaskEnergy. I’m comfortable with 
people investing in SaskEnergy, and in Saskoil, SaskPower, certainly. And I will assess the Barber 
Commission and its recommendations with respect to energy and I will make my position very, very 
clear at that time, and you will see the opportunities that are available. So you can run around and you 
can frighten people, say, oh for heaven’s sake, it was all right for the NDP to say we could put them on 
the Canadian stock exchanges – and you did – but not for Grant Devine, and not for the PCs because 
they’re more frightening and . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. Members are not to use their own names or any other names in the 
legislature. 
 
Order, order. All members will have ample opportunity to stand on their feet and be recognized and 
enter into this debate. So I’d ask them to stop talking across the floor when there'’ other members on 
their feet trying to make their point. 
 



Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, it’s amusing . . . Actually it’s pathetic to hear the minister, the 
Premier of this province, talk about Tommy Douglas in these terms. No, no, you don’t understand 
Tommy Douglas, you don’t understand the history, and it’s really a shameful thing to compare yourself 
to Tommy Douglas. And I want to tell you, Mr. Premier, you are no Tommy Douglas. You are no 
Tommy Douglas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You, sir, are no Tommy Douglas. Not only, sir, are you no Tommy Douglas, this idea 
of campaigning in ’86 pretending you’re Tommy Douglas, I fully suspect you’ll be campaigning in 1990 
as Allan Blakeney, next thing I know. Yes, well, I mean, that’s exactly what you’ll do. 
 
Of course Tommy Douglas was a builder. That’s exactly what you’re selling off. If it hadn’t been for 
Tommy Douglas and Al Blakeney building, you wouldn’t have had anything to sell off to your 
American friends, and the Chinese, and the Koreans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Of course he was a builder. Where do you think you got those assets to sell off? 
Where do you think you got that $800 million you’re going to get from an undervalued Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan in order to buy it into a slush fund -- $400 million below book value? 
Where do you think you got those assets from, out of the air? Of course there were builders. We were all 
builders. We were not sellers like you. We were not givers away to others. We believe that we can 
control our destiny here; that we’re not captives to the Chicago and New York exchange like you 
believe you are. That’s the way you are. That’s exactly your view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But I want to come back to the question that the Premier refuses to answer, he ducks 
all the time. That’s the question of SaskEnergy. The Premier again today articulate an argument as to 
why SaskEnergy should be privatized. That’s what he says. He says he believed in it in April. He 
believes, absolutely, he believes in it now. Tell me absolutely. Do you believe in it now? Tell me. He 
believes in it now. Then why don’t you proceed with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the opposition went out on strike for three weeks and agreed that if 
we wouldn’t proceed with it and have hearings, they’d come back in the House and behave themselves. 
And that’s exactly what I’m going to do. I said that I would go through and listen to the hearings and I 
would assess it and deal with it after that. And that’s what I’m going to do. 
 
So the agreement was, and the agreement was that we would go through the House and be reasonable 
and then we would deal with the rules in the fall session and subsequent to that, and not before that, 
would we ever deal with energy or anything more with respect to that Bill. And that’s what I agreed to 
do and that’s what I’ll do. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I don’t know what agreement the Premier is talking about. I’d make no agreement 
with him – none. You, sir, referred SaskEnergy to the Barber Commission in response to the walk-out. 
Are you telling the House that that’s the only value that you attach to the Barber Commission, in order 
to get the impasse completed, but that in reality, since you believed that privatization of SaskEnergy was 
good in April and you believe in it now, that that is the end result you’re bringing back SaskEnergy this 
term? Isn’t that what you’re saying? 



 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the opposition saw SaskEnergy as going to be 
something extremely attractive to the public and they knew if we passed it that it would be difficult for 
them to fight against it, so they walked out of the legislature. And they walked out, not in second reading 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- . . . not in debate – did you watch this, Mr. Chairman? – not in debate, not in 
second reading. They walked out when we introduced it in first reading so that it would not be tabled 
here and the public wouldn’t see what was in the Bill and to know that we can regulate the rates, and 
then they went around the province and said, well oh my gosh, they’re selling SaskPower to somebody 
else in Chicago or Toronto or something else, and frankly did a real good job of frightening people. 
Okay? 
 
Now, they did that. Under those circumstances I said I will not bring back the Bill. I’ll put together a 
commission, and they agreed and the House leaders agreed that we will get on with the work, we will do 
everything else that’s on the table, and the Bills that were there and were almost there, and we will go 
through, and in the fall we will deal with rules as the first order and then other business including 
energy. And I think we’ve got a copy of the letter around and the agreement that we talked about. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Yes, that’s there. Well we can go dig it up. We’ll dig it up, and I’ll read it in the 
record so that we know what’s going on. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Dig it up, dig it up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And so, Mr. Speaker . . . No, no. I know that you were frightened of that because 
you knew that it would be popular, so you decided to do something that was absolutely unique and 
radical and walk out of the legislature, and you did. And you’ve done it and people said, you know, I 
think they are radical. 
 
The Barber Commission is coming back with the truth, the facts, the truth about what it can do to lower 
energy rates, and to provide investment and diversification, and help rural people as well as urban, and a 
tax base to individuals. And if the public comes to the conclusion that maybe this isn’t all that bad, in 
fact, it’s a pretty good idea, then I’m going to have to respect that public review and that view – and I 
will, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell the minister precisely why we walked out – not because we 
knew this was going to be a popular deal, as the minister would have hopefully his back-benchers 
believe. We walked out because you – I can’t say deliberately misled – but you misled this House and 
this public by saying that you would never privatize SaskEnergy, SaskPower. That’s what you said. 
 
(2130) 
 
Did you bring me those clippings? Somebody get me those clippings and the Hansard report because 
I’m going to get . . . That’s what you said. This isn’t a Stray Animals Act amendment. This isn’t one of 
your little speeches that you can make off the topic; this is a commitment of trust that you made to the 
public and the province and this legislature. 



 
You talk about radicals. You told this House, you gave your solemn word – and you broke your word. 
You misled this House. And you talk about radicals. You’ve got the audacity to talk about radicals. You 
have no respect for this institution, and the fact that your majority used again censorship on us, confirms 
once again your absolute total lack of mandate in this key area. You didn’t run on the election; you 
didn’t run to say that you were going to privatize SaskEnergy, because if you had, you wouldn’t have 
made it in ’86 – if you had, you wouldn’t have made in 1986. 
 
And I want to make it abundantly clear about the so-called agreement. That document that your junior 
deputy minister or Deputy House Leader brings in there relates not to any agreement that I’ve made with 
you, sir, on SaskEnergy. None. 
 
You put Barber into place because the public insisted that you not go ahead with the sell-off of 
SaskEnergy to the wealthy investors in Canada and elsewhere, that’s what took place. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I’ll read it to you. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You read it to me; you absolutely read it to me. We came back not because of that 
letter. That letter you have in front of you, sir, was afterwards on the basis, as a result of the impasse by 
your House trying again an undemocratic view, the undemocratic policy of cutting off debate and 
changing the rules. That’s what happened in this regard. There’s no doubt about that. 
 
That’s not the reason, as you said, that we walked out because we were afraid it was going to be popular, 
sir. No, not because we were afraid, because you misled, because you had so little regard for this 
institution, because you had so little regard for the people. You couldn’t give a doggone for the farmers 
out there in Sturgis or Preeceville or otherwise. You told them that you wouldn’t privatize SaskEnergy, 
and you’ve gone ahead and you tried privatization and you got caught red-handed; you got caught by an 
opposition and the public. That’s the reason that we walked out. 
 
And the member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You watch. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- . . . You see, and he says you watch. You’re doggone right. We’re going to watch 
every step that you try in this area, every step that you try in privatization, because the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan have said: you’ve gone too far. They’ve said that they don’t want everything 
sold off. They’ve said your sell, sell, sell and tax, tax, tax policy is killing us and you’ve gone too far. 
And you doggone right, Mr. Premier, we are going to watch – absolutely, we’re going to watch. 
 
Now I want to come back to the second question. I want to come back to the question that the Premier 
has all but answered but somehow refuses to answer specifically. 
 
He says that the Barber Commission has been set up and that he will examine the Barber Commission’s 
reports because Barber will “tell the truth,” and then he elaborates the truth as he sees it – the truth of the 
privatization saga. And surely, Mr. Chairman, there must be a more articulate, more solid defence of 
privatization that the Premier can mount. No wonder the cabinet is in such disarray. 
 
Those words, sir, nevertheless, saying that Barber will come back with modifications and you will have 
the truth, as he tells us, based on Barber. This person who is a founding member of the Institute for 
Saskatchewan Enterprise, this commission which is made up of . . . the members that it is made up on 



the terms of reference that it is guided with, they are going to tell us the truth; they’re going to tell us the 
truth. 
 
What else can we say? What else can we say? What other things can we conclude, Mr. Chairman, except 
that the Premier has decided come hell or high water, Barber or no Barber, recommendations or no 
recommendations, he is going to come back to achieve the sell-off of a natural monopoly public utility 
like SaskEnergy. Isn’t that the truth, Mr. Premier? Why don’t ‘you have the fortitude to tell us the truth 
in this regard? You are hell bent for leather to privatize SaskEnergy regardless of what the public wants. 
Come on, stand on your feet, for once – the courage of your convictions – and tell us that’s what you 
want to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I will just confirm with the hon. member that I said I would listen 
to the Barber Commission. And I have the letter, the agreement between our House leaders here, and I’ll 
just read it for the public record. And it was agreed, and paragraph . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Date it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- June 12. Okay. Let me read this, okay, so that you have the opportunity: 
 

This is to confirm our agreement of June 12 respecting the orderly conclusion of the business of 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly for the 1989 spring session. I confirm our agreement to 
the following: 
 
1. The motion to amend rule 33 will be referred to the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures. (And it talks about that.) 
 
2. The committee will report to the Assembly at the opening of the fall sitting. (And it talks about 
that.) The opposition agrees not to walk out or allow the bells to ring for any extended period of 
time or at the time of such vote. 
 
3. The government will not proceed further with bill Number 21, The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act; 22, The Saskatchewan Energy Corporation Act; 23, The Distribution of Gas 
Rate Regulation Act; and 24, The Public Utility Companies Income Tax Rebates Act until the 
conclusion of the Barber Commission hearings, and in any event, not before the fall session. 
 

Now this was the agreement between the two leaders, the House leaders. And just as I have pointed out 
to the hon. member . . . and it goes on to talk about the amendments to rule 33 as resolved, and the 
opposition agrees to be bound by the spirit of the resolution, and so on and so forth. 
 
So all I’ve said to the hon. member is that you decided for your own reasons to walk out, and we said, 
look, obviously this place works better if you debate and vote, but you wouldn’t do that. So I said, all 
right, we’ll have hearings and we’ll agree that we cannot deal with 33 and Bill 22, Saskatchewan Energy 
Corporation Act, until after those hearings, and then we’ll deal with the rules and the bells. And you 
agreed not to walk out for any extended period of time. And then we’d listen to the hearings, and then in 
the fall session or obviously the next session, we’d come back in and we would deal with the rules. 
 



And then subsequent . . . our agreement runs out, that if I wanted to, I could deal with Energy again. 
And I wouldn’t bring it back until we fixed the rules. That was the agreement. And then you come back 
in and away we went. 
 
So I mean, we can go through the fact that it was an accommodation between the opposition and the 
government to go through this process so that in fact we could get on with the regular proceedings of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, this is hardly worth rebutting, but I have to because this . . . the 
misrepresentations which continue to cascade from the Premier of this province, I mean, somewhere 
there’s got to be a line to this. 
 
We came back on May 8, 1989. We sat in the legislature from May 8 to the date of the letter to which 
the Premier refers, June. That’s over a month in duration. The Premier knows full well that the reason 
we came back was because he unilaterally announced the appointment of the Barber Commission, and 
he knows full well that that so-called agreement was to break the impasse of his government’s attempt to 
muzzle us on speaking and the ringing of the bells in the future. They tried that and they didn’t succeed; 
thus the agreement going to an impartial or at least a bipartisan committee. That’s’ the agreement that 
he’s referring to. Don’t let him misrepresent that, Mr. Chairman, as somehow representing a position 
with respect to the question of the rules of this House or SaskPower. 
 
But I have a question specifically to the Premier. I want to know whether or not the Premier still 
subscribes to this commitment which he made to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, as 
reported in the Regina Leader-Post, January 25, 1988, when he said, quote: 
 

All Crown corporations, with the exception of such utility Crowns as SaskPower and 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications, could be for sale if the price is right and the interests of 
Saskatchewan people are protected. 
 

Does the Premier deny making that statement? And by the way, if you give me the song and dance that 
SaskEnergy is not SaskPower, we’ll go on that . . . we’ll get the truth of that because the people see 
through that little masquerade. 
 
Do you deny making that statement, sir? And if you deny making that statement, I’d be interested in 
knowing how you deny it. But since it is there on black and white – I’ll come back to the questions 
dealing with SaskEnergy in a moment in the House – how does the Premier explain his absolute and 
utter breach of trust and promise in the light of what he attempted to do a year and a half later in 
privatizing SaskPower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I went on to say, and he’s quoting from a newspaper article, and I’ve said it many 
times with a natural monopoly that you run it or you regulate it. And that’s what they do all over the 
world, all over the world. You either run it as a natural monopoly or you regulate the prices. And you 
can regulate it like they do in Ontario or do in Alberta, and they’ve been offering shares. 
 
We have taken part of SaskTel and we’ve offered it to the public. We’ve taken part of SaskPower and 
offered it to the public. We have privatized the coal mines because power utilities don’t run coal mines. 
And you regulate it, you regulate it. And if you look at the share offering that you were going to look at 
here in 1981-82, you will say the $35 million that’s expected can be realized by leasing rather than 
purchasing the drag-line and SaskPower Corporation. This is your suggestion. It’s a public utility, and 
you were going to privatize the mining of coal and the drag-line. 



 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I said and I’ve always said that public utilities should be run like public utilities; 
you either run them yourself or you regulate them or both. And we can regulate the gases by law . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That’s not what you said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I have said it . . . Well all right, I’ll read you what – and it quotes – Mr. Romanow 
says about this whole issue. He says: 
 

This is an issue that simply cannot be resolved by numbers, facts, or figures. 
 

So you didn’t care about numbers, facts, or figures, or about rates . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And in turn, about the people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Okay? Or about the people. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It speaks to vision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Speaks to vision? You talk about vision. Tommy Douglas wanted to see building 
and diversification. We want to see building and diversification. We know Tommy Douglas too. We 
know Tommy Douglas. Tommy Douglas was on the board of directors of Husky Oil. Talk about that. 
Talk about that. Tommy Douglas is on the board of directors of Husky Oil because he believed in 
natural gas. He believed in natural gas. He believed in it. 
 
You talk about utilities; you say you’re against Saskoil. What did Allan Blakeney think of Saskoil? 
What did he think about it? He argued in here. He said we shouldn’t offer shares. Come on, Allan 
Blakeney bought shares in Saskoil. It’s good enough for Allan Blakeney, it’s good enough for the 
people. And if Husky Oil’s good enough for Tommy Douglas, it’s good for the people – should be. You 
know, I mean, we got to get right down to whether you really fear it or whether you want to make 
something out of it politically. 
 
The point is, you see nothing wrong in theory or reality with the people having a chance to invest in 
SaskPower or SaskEnergy. There’s nothing wrong with that; they do it all over Canada. But you said, oh 
we can’t do it here because of some strange reason, you know, when you haven’t quite put your finger 
on it. 
 
I said we will regulate utilities and we’ll regulate them. We’ll regulate SaskPower and we’ll offer Power 
bonds, and Power bonds that are convertible to shares, and that’s a public utility. What didn’t you get all 
exercised over that? You just saw – okay? – here’s something that will be very attractive. I’d better not 
let them introduce it, or they’ll find out it’ll be very popular and then we’ll have a problem, so I’d better 
stop right at the front. Because you knew that I could regulate rates in a utility – and I have – and you 
knew that we could regulate natural gas and regulate telephone bills, regulate all of those. And people 
can still buy telephone bonds and Power bonds and energy bonds and shares. And you’ve’ seen it in 
power. They’re very, very popular. And you haven’t complained about me not regulating a utility. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I just make the point, utilities are run, are like a natural monopoly; you run it yourself 
for you regulate it. And you let somebody else manage or you make sure that you regulate it by law, and 
you can introduce legislation here that will regulate utility rates and gas rates and electrical rates that 
will be confined and very, very powerful. 



 
So I just say to the hon. member, we’d already done it between 1982 and ’86. Why didn’t you stand in 
your place and say, well it’s just absolutely incredible that they would offer power bonds? 
 
We’ve done the same thing. We regulate the rates and people can invest in it. Same principle. So you 
find a quote in a Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix that says, Grant Devine says he won’t do it in power 
or telephones. That’s what you . . . I’ve always said that you could regulate those rates, and that’s what 
we’ll do. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. I’ have to bring it to the attention that members aren’t to use their own 
names or other members’ names in debate. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister’s word is at issue here. The minister, who is the Premier 
and prime minister of the ministers here, his credibility of the entire government is at stake here. I have 
asked that minister a simple question, to which I want an answer. Did you or did you not state in clear, 
unequivocal terms, January 25, 1988 at least -–on other occasions as well – quote: 
 

All Crown corporations, with the exception of such utility Crowns as SaskPower and 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications (with the exception, I repeat, of such utility crowns as 
SaskPower and Saskatchewan Telecommunications), could be for sale if the price is right and the 
interests of Saskatchewan people are protected, Devine said. 
 

I want to know whether you said that, whether you meant that when you said it, after you had been re-
elected in 1986, and if you said it and if you meant it, how is it that you broke your word and your trust 
with the people in attempting to privatize SaskPower? How do you explain that? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the date that he is quoting is after the fact that we had already 
offered bonds, SaskPower bonds, to the people of Saskatchewan which is a utility, and bonds, I believe 
and we’ll check the time when the bonds can be converted to shares. And I’d said in public forums time 
and time again that the power corporations and utilities will be managed by the government or regulated. 
That doesn’t mean you can’t offer bonds in them or you can’t offer shares in them. But you run it and 
keep the control in the government. That’s because they’re natural monopolies. That’s what they do in 
Alberta and they do in Ontario and they do in B.C., they do in Quebec. Every place else . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- In the free world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- . . . in the free world, You were going to offer shares in natural gas. What company 
was it that you were going to offer shares in? Your 1982 proposal says that you will be initiating a 
prospectus outlining potential investments in natural gas. What company was that? What company 
would you have to do that in 1982? You proposed to do it and put it on the Canadian stock exchange. 
 
Now I say to the hon. members, as an economist I studied utilities. I know the theory, the reasons for 
natural monopolies. And we have them in natural gas as they’re distributed to people. You don’t want 
15 lines going into the same home so you regulate them. And if you want to reduce the debt in them, 
you allow people to invest in them. And that reduces the debt, it reduces the rates, and they’re regulated 
by law. All over the world public utilities are regulated by law. 
 



And you say, not in Saskatchewan, we can’t do that. We have to own it and the people can’t invest. 
We’ve already let them invest in SaskPower; we’ve already let them invest in SaskTel; and they had 
already done that since 1982, ’83, ’84, ’85 and ’86. 
 
So I say to the hon. member, I said that they will stay natural monopolies and they will be run by 
government. They are regulated or run, and we can have them invest in here and we can regulate them 
by law, and that’s quite appropriate for Albertans and Ontario and Manitoba and B.C. and Quebec and 
the Maritimes, and it can be quite appropriate for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the issue before this committee on SaskEnergy, first of all tonight I 
think it’s a clear message is that SaskEnergy is going to be privatized or attempted by this government. 
There’s no doubt about that, and the Premier shakes his head in agreement, doesn’t matter what Barber 
says. The issue here is the word of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m not talking about some back-bencher, I’m not talking about one of your colleagues in the cabinet 
there, I’m not talking about just some ordinary singer of the Hallelujah Chorus, I’m talking about the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, who ranges all the way from Tommy Douglas to Allan 
Blakeney. I am talking about the Premier having given the province and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan his word . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, his word. Those are the direct words. 
 
Now he’s weaselling his way out of those words. Now he wants to get out of those words. Now the 
question is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Energy says that’s true. Then I will come 
back to the Premier on another way. I will ask the Premier whether or not, on May 90, 1988, sir – this 
was just a few months after the statement that I allude to here -- Hansard on page 1160, in response to a 
question by the deputy leader of my party, which in part was directed to the Deputy Premier and the 
minister in charge of SaskPower. The question in part said: 
 

. . . will you confirm or deny that the natural gas portion of the power corporation is up for sale, 
or give-away, in the next short period of time? Confirm or deny. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: -- Mr. Speaker, is that rather lengthy straightforward question, the answer is 
no. 
 

My question is to the Premier is – since he refuses, since he breaches his word that he says to the people 
– now speaking in the legislature my question to the Premier is: do you deny those words were said by 
your deputy leader and Deputy Premier and minister in charge of the power corporation? 
 
If you do not deny that they were said, and I don’t know how you could because they’re on black and 
white, was he articulating government policy or was he deliberately misleading this legislature as you 
are misleading this – I’m sorry, I withdraw the word “deliberately misleading” – misleading this 
legislature and misleading the public? How in the world do you explain those clear words, black on 
white, that no matter how far your privatization mania would take you, you wouldn’t sell off this basic 
natural heritage monopoly? How do you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that I was in the House when that question was asked, and 
the hon. member was asked, did this split occur for privatization? And the hon. member said no. Now 



we’ll go back and we’ll check it so that we know that he said – because that was put together and said, 
did you split these companies to an energy company, and a gas company and a power corporation solely 
for privatization, or was it the objective for privatization, and the hon. member said no. So I mean, the 
question was with respect to the split, if I recall it right, and I’ll look at it. 
 
But in any event, I’ll say again, Mr. Chairman, I’ll say it again: the utility is monitored, run by the 
government or regulated by the government. And it is here, and we had offered Power bonds and we had 
offered telephone bonds and we had offered shares in oil and shares in Saskoil and in WESTBRIDGE, 
Mr. Chairman, to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And all of a sudden the member stands up and said, but you said you wouldn’t touch a utility. We’d 
already been involved in strengthening those utilities by offering bonds in them and by privatizing the 
coal companies and by allowing part of SaskTel to be privatized in the WESTBRIDGE Corporation and 
SaskCOMP, which is a utility. And we did that. And he’s now is looking around and saying, well there 
must be something sinister about this allowing people to invest in Saskoil or SaskEnergy, so he comes 
back to this point. 
 
Do you know why he does that? It’s because he can find no real reason, as he says in his news quotes. It 
has nothing to do with . . . 
 

This is an issue that simply cannot be resolved by numbers or the facts or figures. 
 

See? You don’t care about the facts or the figures. It might be good for the people, right? You don’t 
care. You don’t care. You don’t care whether it can reduce their rates. You don’t care about that. 
 
You want to say well you can’t touch a utility this way, because you say you have to keep it in 
government. And that’s quite true. It’s in government in Alberta, but it’s regulated, and people can still 
invest in it. And that’s precisely what was offered here before you walked out of the House. 
 
So I’ll say to the hon. member, I believe the Deputy Premier was asked: did you split these two for 
privatization? That was the question, I believe, and I’ll read it with you, and we can go back through it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this of course is why the government is in such, such deep 
political quicksand, and why the answers . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You wish. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, I . . . I mean, yes, I fervently wish it, because it is a bad, bad government. I 
fervently wish it for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But leaving that aside, why it is in such bad shape? It’s administratively incompetent. It is incompetent, 
and it does not tell the truth right from the Premier, right from the Premier. I repeat again, it isn’t the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster I’m asking questions about, or one of the other members singing 
the Hallelujah Chorus, I’m directing these questions, the credibility of the minister, of the prime minister 
of this operation, of this situation. 
 
And the issue is what you told the people of the province of Saskatchewan on SaskEnergy. And I say 
that you broke your word . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I know. You’ve said it enough times. 



 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, I’ve said it enough times, and I say the record shows that. I could read you the 
question and the answer; you can read it back to me. I could read the question and answer back. It can’t 
be any clearer. 
 
You promised that SaskEnergy would not be sold off, and it wasn’t reorganised for sell-off, and you 
broke your word. It was reorganized for sell-off because exactly that’s what you tried to do one year 
later almost to the date. What is that to mean? What does that mean about your word, sir? What does 
that mean about your credibility about what you’re going to do about SaskEnergy in the future? What 
does that mean, sir? 
 
That’s a public promise that you’ve made. It’s not an internal document for review. It’s not an internal 
document which may consider all the options which are positive or negative. This is a document which 
records the words of this Legislative Assembly about your intention in this area because the people of 
Saskatchewan saw this mania of sell, sell, sell, destroy, destroy, destroy – not building – sell, sell, sell. 
You made this province into almost a charity case based on what your policies are, and here is your 
word which you have broken, sir, broken. 
 
Now my question to you, Mr. Minister, is, one more last time as far as I’m concerned for this issue 
because I know what to conclude, I’m almost certain of this now once the transcript comes out, but I’m 
going to ask you, point blank, this again: if you believed SaskEnergy privatization was great in April – 
presumably that was either a new-found belief, or you believed it at the time you made these statements, 
but you weren’t levelling with the people of the province of Saskatchewan – if you believed it then, if 
you believe it now, if you’re committed to doing it, isn’t the truth that Barber really is a white wash, you 
are going to go ahead with it come hell or high water? 
 
I’m not saying the individuals. Leave them aside for the moment. If you’re determined to do it, if you’ve 
filed the prospectus, if you’re putting out those franchise fees proposals now for municipalities, and 
you’re doing that all the while that Barber is studying it, isn’t it a fact that it doesn’t matter what he 
recommends? 
 
Oh, he might recommend some changes here, a little bit of an idea there, but the policy, the central 
policy is such that you’re going to go ahead with it. Yes or no, Mr. Premier? Isn’t it a fact that you’ve 
committed yourself and your cabinet is committed to go ahead with the sell-off of SaskEnergy 
notwithstanding what Barber might report, notwithstanding what the majority of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan want? Tell us the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- SaskEnergy made a report to the Barber hearings, and they clearly went through all 
the reorganization of SaskPower and SaskEnergy. And as a result of deregulation in the gas business and 
so that they could take advantage of that and cope with that, that is the reasons for their administrative 
changes. And they made that very, very clear. 
 
And you ask the minister and the Deputy Premier here at one time, and I believe that’s the case, is that 
the reason that you’ve designed this as SaskEnergy and SaskPower, was it to privatize and he said, no. 
And deregulation was right in full bloom and you go back to look at the hearings . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- If he said no, why did he do it? 
 



Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well he didn’t say that you couldn’t. It’s organized so that to deal with 
deregulation . . . And the hon. member laughs. Now if he’s basing his entire argument on the fact that 
because there’s deregulation on the gas industry and we restructured SaskEnergy to accommodate that, 
he’s on pretty thin ice, Mr. Chairman, pretty thin ice. 
 
I’ll just say to the hon. member, all the opportunities that we can have with respect to SaskEnergy will 
be laid before the people. And I will assess them very carefully. I am getting more and more 
encouragement as I listen to the Barber commission that people would like to invest in SaskEnergy. 
Now we’ll see how that goes, if the public says, I think it would be a good idea to have SaskEnergy 
bonds, I’m going to listen very carefully to that. 
 
And the opposition says, oh, I hope he doesn’t do that. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess we’ll see. They 
didn’t want us to sell and provide bonds in SaskPower. They didn’t want to see them in Saskoil; they 
obviously didn’t want them in Sask Potash. I walked up and down the street today in Regina or in 
Saskatoon, people are saying, right on with potash, it’s about time. Editorials in the paper, I can read 
them to you, they’re saying right on, now you’re cooking. This is the things that we should be doing and 
the opposition knows that. 
 
If you offered the people of Saskatchewan right now an opportunity to invest in energy bonds in the 
province of Saskatchewan with a return like we’ve seen, 10, 11, 12 per cent in SaskPower, I venture to 
say, Mr. Chairman, they’d pick them up by the millions and tens of millions of dollars. 
 
Now we will see what the hearings do with respect to SaskEnergy, and I will assess them very carefully. 
And I will listen closely to the public and then we will make the appropriate decisions. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe that never before in the history of Saskatchewan 
have we ever seen a Premier that put any less value in the truth. During my comments I’d like you to 
take under consideration another item to do with the SaskEnergy issue in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and that has to do with a letter written by one of your members of the legislature from the Wilkie 
constituency. On August 4, this particular member wrote to all of his constituents who signed the 
petition opposing the sale of SaskEnergy. And I would draw your attention to the concluding paragraph, 
and I quote: 
 

Therefore, in conclusion, if like many others you have come to realize that the petition you 
signed was misleading, please contact me and I will ensure your name is not included with those 
the NDP is using to scare Saskatchewan. 
 

(2300) 
 
What I ask you, Mr. Premier is: what authority do your back-bench members have? Have you given 
them authority that they can remove a name of a Saskatchewan citizen from a petition after it’s been 
filed in this legislature and recognized by the Clerk’s Table as a valid petition in the province of 
Saskatchewan? What authority does a back-bench member have in fact to take names off of a valid 
petition in the province of Saskatchewan – some 100,000 people who signed that very petition? Just the 
gall of your members in trying to intimidate the public who choose to sing a petition of their own 
accord, placed within this legislature, and then they’re intimidated by your back-bench members to have 
their names removed from the petition. I think that’s shameful. 
 
While you’re considering that, Mr. Premier, I’d like to turn to the issue of GigaText, and I have some 
questions I’d like to ask you about GigaText. We had a situation in the province where a Catholic priest 



took the province to court over a ticket he had received. We all know that that case, even after Father 
Mercure passed away, went to the Supreme Court of Canada. And when that Supreme Court ruled, they 
ruled in favour of Father Mercure, and what they basically said was that Saskatchewan had to translate 
some of their statutes from English into French. 
 
We know that you and your government said initially about 45 statutes would be translated and 
eventually more of the statutes in the province of Saskatchewan will be translated. 
 
So at the time your government looked for a quick fix in how they were going to translate these statutes 
to comply with the ruling of the Supreme Court. And at that time your government found a company . . . 
or I should say, founded a company called GigaText. GigaText was created; 75 per cent of the shares 
went to a company called Norlus. Norlus was owned by one Guy Montpetit and Dr. Douglas Young, and 
they got 75 per cent of GigaText for putting in supposed technology that was going to translate the 
provincial statutes, a technology that even yet today we know does not work. 
 
The other 25 per cent of the company was held by the province of Saskatchewan under Crown 
investment corporation; wherein the Crown investment corporation put up $4 million of taxpayers’ 
dollars to acquire a 25 per cent share of the company GigaText. 
 
Then, Mr. Premier, as time went along, we found that Guy Montpetit, a business man from Montreal, 
who ended up in court in a civil suit by Mr. Tsuru who took him to court for misappropriating some $30 
million. And we find that with Guy Montpetit having sole signing authority over GigaText in 
Saskatchewan, he was doing a very good job of padding his own pocket, but not delivering translated 
statutes for the province of Saskatchewan. And in fact not making the technology progress which some 
experts says is at least 20 years away because what they’re talking about in order to do an adequate job 
of translating mechanically would be artificial intelligence, which does not exist today. 
 
Mr. Premier, we found that Guy Montpetit bought computers in the amount of $2.9 million, bought 
Lambda computers which were outdated, no longer in production. And those Lambda computers were 
purchased for $2.9 million. That Peat Marwick, accountant appointed by the court in Montreal, stated 
that the value of the computers was less than $40,000. Shrewd business deal, Mr. Premier. 
 
When you look even deeper into this shrewd business deal, we find that Guy Montpetit purchased the 
computers from a company called GigaMos services. Well who owned GigaMos services? Guy 
Montpetit owned GigaMos services. So, in fact, what happened? He wrote a cheque to a company that 
he owned for $2.9 million for merchandise valued at about $40,000. 
 
We also found that Guy Montpetit leased a jet from GigaMos Air Services at a rate of about $15,000 a 
month. Who owns GigaMos Air Services, Mr. Premier? GigaMos Air Services was owned by Guy 
Montpetit, again putting money into his own pocket out of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
As the situation progressed, Dr. Young apparently contacted the province of Saskatchewan, and the 
Minister of Justice launched an RCMP investigation because you suspected criminality in the case of 
GigaText and the province of Saskatchewan. And when this all hit the media and hit the provincial 
legislature, Mr. Premier, you tried to cover it up by saying that it was research and development. But it 
certainly was not research and development when you began. It was clearly stated that you were taking 
this company on to translate statutes from English into French. Very wasteful, very mismanaged affair, 
and that’s only one of many. 
 



The Deputy Premier himself, Mr. Premier, has said he would take full responsibility for GigaText but 
we still find him sitting here as Deputy Premier. Many of the questions asked in this legislature have not 
been answered. You first hid behind the RCMP investigation. You then in Crown corporations had your 
minister in charge of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), over three days of 
questioning in Crown corporations, not answer any questions because you wanted to protect the interests 
of the company GigaText. 
 
Mr. Premier, you found your cabinet ministers flying in the GigaText airplane. Pardon me, I should say 
the GigaText jet, because that’s what it was. You yourself were in Montreal, riding around in the back 
seat of Guy Montpetit’s limousine. We found Guy Montpetit and his assistant, Grace Sim, go on a 
weekend down to San Francisco, then to Minneapolis, and then back up to Montreal. 
 
Could you maybe tell us when you answer this question, Mr. Premier, what was the purpose of the 
business trip that Guy Montpetit and Grace Sim took to San Francisco, Minneapolis, and then back to 
Montreal on a weekend? 
 
And could you maybe tell us the nature of your business while you rode around in the back seat of his 
limousine in Montreal? Could you tell us the connections of business there? So that’s the second 
question after you address the one from Mr. Britton. 
 
What the taxpayers basically want . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. Order. Members are not to use other members’ names in the House, and I’d 
ask the member to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I appreciate that ruling, Mr. Speaker, I should have said the member from Wilkie. 
 
So when SEDCO finally took over GigaText in early November of 1988, when they took over the 
company, it was at the request of Crown investment corporation because they knew there was something 
wrong. Even with your representative, Mr. Leier on the board, and Mr. Waschuk, your pollster, even 
though he represented the interests of Norlus and Guy Montpetit, they didn’t seem to have control of it. 
So SEDCO came in and SEDCO took over the shares of the company. And today, as far as we know, 
Guy Montpetit through Norlus still owns 75 per cent of GigaText, even after you know he padded his 
own pocket with money put up by taxpayers in the province, because GigaText had no other source of 
revenue other than the $4 million given to them by Crown investment corporation in the province. 
 
So finally, Mr. Chairman, we want to know from the Premier how much longer you’re going to fund 
GigaText. Ever since November, SEDCO has had to put in $50,000 a month to fund GigaText to keep 
them continually operating. So the question to you, Mr. Premier, is that are you going to hold the Deputy 
Premier accountable as he said he was accountable; and when can we expect you to make a decision on 
the future of GigaText; and further, when are you going to stop supplying $50,000 a month to a 
company that’s not capable of translating the statutes of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, a couple of observations in response to the hon. member. I believe 
that if your people have signed a petition and it’s tabled in here, an individual publicly would like to 
have his name removed, he can advise the Clerk and do so. And I don’t see anything particularly wrong 
with that, particularly if he thought that he would want to disavow himself publicly from the petition. 
And a lot of people have called us and said that they didn’t know what the petition was talking about. 



 
We’ve had members here, the member from Arm River went through and he . . . I think he said here on 
August 7, I want to comment about some of these petitioners, and this is the reason that we went to the 
public, and that people from Wilkie did. And the member from Arm River says on August 7, ’89, page 
3515: 
 

. . . I want to comment on something she said. She got away talking about petitions and 100,000 
names on petitions. Well let me just tell you about the petition in Arm River – 239 names, 50 (of 
those names) didn’t exist at all, one family from age 12 to 2 on that petition. So how can we, 
how can we possibly, Mr. Speaker, how can we possibly debate such a petition? 
 

And other members have gone on and said that the petition has names of people from outside the 
province, people who obviously didn’t understand the petition. And when they come to find out that it 
wasn’t an accurate statement on the petition, then they felt very badly about it and they wanted to 
disavow themselves, and we’re finding that today. So if individuals want to disavow themselves from 
this petition, they can advise the Clerk, and they can say I don’t want to be part of this because it was 
part of the old scare tactics of the opposition. They’re running around say SaskPower’s for sale, and it 
isn’t. It isn’t. 
 
So you ask about the member from Wilkie. The member of Wilkie told his constituents, if you don’t 
want to be part of this petition thing that they put together because you think it’s wrong or misleading – 
misleading, not truthful – as we saw with the Leader of the Opposition when he said we’re going to 
close all five hospitals in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He said that and he shakes his head, yes, he said 
that’s right. And we know that that’s not the case and it’s not true. And he’s on record now, and he 
knows that and the public knows that, and every time he says, oh look, the sky’s going to fall in, they 
say, well gee, we’ve heard that before. Maybe he’s going to get a petition going and we can all sign that 
and then see how many kids can sign it. 
 
So there’s a lot of people on that petition that said, well what in the world were they put to, eh? What 
were the NDP trying to do. I don’t want my name on that petition. And then there’s a whole bunch of 
them you can’t even read because people just scribble in stuff like this. So either you’ve got children, 
you’ve got out-of-province people, you got people that you actually misled, and then you’ve got people 
that just signed it what a scratch and you wouldn’t know where they were from. So there’s an awful lot 
of folks in this province that are just a tad suspect when it comes to your petitions. 
 
With respect to my meeting with Mr. Guy Montpetit, I go to Montreal once a year and Toronto once a 
year, and I give a major address to the investment community, and that’s why I was there. And I met 
him there because he said it’s possible to translate, using computers . . . or help translate, French into 
English and English into French. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And you believed him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And the hon. member says . . . I believe him, okay? I believe him. 
 
Well I will use as an example so that the hon. members . . . because, you know, they’re hidebound here 
and they’re stuck in Saskatchewan and you can’t move. We’ll look here, July 24, Time magazine, 1989, 
and it talks about the Japanese translating machines make languages less foreign. And I’m going to just 
go through a couple of examples where in fact they’re using computers to translate and to help translate, 
and let me just make a couple of points. 
 



“Machine translation is only to reduce the work involved in human translation.” 
 
And that it does (it says, that it does). The present generation of machine-translation systems, 
which are priced between $30,000 and $70,000, can nearly double the output of translators of 
technical documents (technical documents, double the translation). The savings, especially for 
small firms unable to maintain a large staff of skilled translators, can be considerable. 
 

The Japanese go on to say the following, Time magazine: 
 

“Seven or eight years ago,” . . . a researcher at IBM Japan, “everyone was saying machine 
translation was a technology of the future. But now we have it.” 
 

This is the Japanese talking about us translating languages by the help of the computer to reduce the 
costs. 
 

Considering the complexity of the task, the progress in machine translation has been startling. 
Essentially, the translating machine analyzes the syntax of an English sentence, determining its 
grammatical structure and identifying, for example, the subject, verb, objects, and modifiers. 
These words are translated by an English-Japanese dictionary (via computer) . . . 
 
Now this is not as simple as it sounds. (It takes a great deal of effort). Each computer company 
has devised strikingly different sets of programs to deal with the fiendish complexities of two 
languages (at the same time) . . . 
 

(2215) 
 
Now the article goes on, and I’ll certainly pass it on to the hon. members, saying Japanese computers 
and English computers and British computers are being used to translate. 
 
And the hon. member says, well by law we were asked to translate French into English. Around the 
world, they’re using new technology to do it, and the hon. members say, oh but you shouldn’t try it here; 
you’d better do it by hand. You’d better hire a number of people and translate it, and certainly that’s 
possible and it will take time and it will take effort. The machines that are in evidence today in terms of 
technology, they say here, can double the output of translations on technical documents, not just normal 
writing but technical documents. 
 
So when we’re familiar and I’m familiar with this kind of technology, and the man says to me, I believe 
that it’s possible to do this, I think we should try to do that. And so I was familiar with the project and 
enough to say, well I think if the Japanese can do it and other people can do it, we have the potential for 
a very, very large market in translations. Now the hon. member laughs and says, well I guess there’s 
some risk in trying to translate using computers . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Some risk? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Some risk, all right. Look, you have cost us $2 million a month just holding up 
Rafferty -- $2 million every month just sitting there holding it up because you say you don’t like the 
project and you don’t like the way we went about it. You’ve cost the taxpayers of this province fortunes, 
not just on Rafferty but on Nabu, on potash miens, $91,000 a day in the pulp company – I mean, you 
could go on and on and on. I believe there’s potential for computer translations. I believe that’s the case. 



They’re doing it in United States, and they redoing it in Japan, and I believe that we can do it here . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: -- The hon. member says, he’s got one in his hand now, $279, that can translate 
French into English and help us translate. Now he shakes his head; we know that it doesn’t quite do that, 
but computers in this translation capacity can certainly translate and help as they are here, and I feel 
quite prepared to go for that technology. I hope the technology helps and I hope that it works. 
 
A Member: -- We do too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And he says, well I hope they do too, and so we’re certainly going to be prepared 
to give it every opportunity. We’re having people like IBM look at it, people like WESTBRIDGE look 
at it, other computer experts who say, if they can do it in other jurisdictions, I believe that it’s possible 
here. 
 
Now you ask me about the other details with respect to GigaText, and I can’t elaborate on the details 
because I’m not involved with the details. That is, who was involved in a plane trip between here and 
California, or here and Winnipeg or some other place. I met on one occasion with Guy Montpetit and he 
talked to me about the new translation technology in the world, and I though tit was a possibility and 
that’s why we proceeded with it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to pursue for a moment some of the Premier’s 
diversification that he’s referred to many, many times in these estimates and the Department of 
Agriculture estimates. In doing it, Mr. Chairman, I want to refer to a series of headlines in the 
newspaper. And I’ll ask members to keep track of the dates of these particular news releases, and it has 
to do with GigaText. This is some of the diversification of the Premier, GigaText. Previous members 
asked some questions about GigaText. 
 
The first article appeared – this wasn’t the first one but this is one of the series that I selected – appeared 
in the Leader-Post May 31, 89. And the headline reads, “Berntson defends decision to back translation 
firm,” May 31 ’89. In it, he says, the article says: 
 

GigaText Translation Systems Inc., has until June 17th (of this year) to demonstrate it can 
complete the translations or the government will withdraw the financial backing – worth an 
additional $50,000 dollars a month – that has kept the company operating since December. 
 

I want to just for a moment multiply that out. Right at this point it’s eight months since December, that’s 
eight times 50,000, that’s $400,000 poured into this company up to this point; over and above the $5 
million that we already know about. 
 
The article goes on to say, and this is the member for Saskatoon Fairview, says: 
 

Mitchell predicted that when June 17 arrives, the government will discover it has to hire 
interpreters that should have been hired in February 1988 at the time of the Supreme Court 
ruling. 
 

And I go on, Mr. Chairman, to the next news item. The next news item is dated June 14. The first one 
May 31; this one June 14, ’89. And it says as follows: “Saturday is testing day for GigaText’s 
technology.” Saturday is testing day. It reads . . . 
 



Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. It is difficult to hear the member for Saskatoon Westmount with 
members talking across the floor. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I want to be sure that the members grasp these significant articles in the paper as 
we chronologically move to the present time because I think it’s important that the government’s word is 
at stake here, the government’s word about GigaText, and how they’re going to make it perform. 
 
So the second article – the first one being May 1, the second one being June 14. It’s from the Star-
Phoenix. The first couple of paragraphs read as follows: 
 

GigaText Translation Systems Inc., faces the moment of truth this weekend when the provincial 
government passes judgement on its translation technology. The company has until Saturday to 
prove its technology can translate Saskatchewan laws. 
 

I’ll go on to the next item, Mr. Chairman. It’s June 16, about the same time as the previous one, June 14; 
this one’s June 16. The headline is: “Berntson waiting for confirmation.” 
 

GigaText confident of ability to meet Saturday deadline. 
 

An Hon. Member: -- Which Saturday was this? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Well this would be Saturday, June 17, 1989. Don’t the members lose track of that 
now. 
 

Even though GigaText Translation Systems Inc. say sit will meet Saturday’s government 
imposed performance deadline for its computerized French translation system, Deputy Premier 
Eric Berntson won’t be able to confirm that until 10 days after the deadline passes. 
 

So the Deputy Premier has already begun to retreat on the firm deadline which he announced in this 
Legislative Chamber of June 17. He says it will take another 10 days to determine whether in fact it can 
perform. And it goes on with another paragraph: 
 

Instead, the government is bringing in two independent translation experts to make sure the 
controversial system will actually translate English laws into French. 
 

Well this is part of the prediction made by the member from Fairview. We get to June 17, the day of 
enlightenment about whether the computer is doing the job for GigaText. And the headline in the Star-
Phoenix of June 17 reads, “Delayed verdict expected on GigaText.” Don’t call us, we’ll call you, is what 
the media’s being told about the results for the judgement of the GigaText Translation Systems Inc. 
 
Go on a couple of weeks later to June 28. The headline reads, “GigaText likely to survive – Berntson.” 
The first couple of paragraphs read as follows: 
 

Deputy Premier Eric Berntson says he is not ready to decide the fate of GigaText Translation 
Systems, but it’s unlikely he’ll pull the plug on the troubled computer company. 
 
Berntson had set the date of June 17 for the company to prove it could translate Saskatchewan 
statutes into French, but he’s now saying the government only wanted the company to meet 
certain goals by that date. 
 



Not an actual translation but just wanted them to meet certain goals. So the minister, the Deputy Premier 
is wavering again on the commitment that he made before this House that on June 17, they were going 
to prove their point or have their money cut off. 
 
It got so obvious that the Star-Phoenix wrote an editorial on the matter a little later, July 6, over a week 
later, “Set deadline for GigaText.” And I’ll read a couple of paragraphs into the record: 
 

It should insist (it’s talking about the provincial government) the company be able to deliver 
what it said it would by the end of summer. GigaText director of operations has said that by then 
the firm is supposed to have a computer system that can translate the province’s laws into 
French. 
 

The further paragraph: 
 

If the company doesn’t come through, the government should cut its losses and get out. If the 
system isn’t viable. Deputy premier Eric Berntson, who has insisted on sticking with the firm, 
should offer his resignation. 
 

This is the editorial from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on July 6. 
 
Later on, on July 12, another week later, article in The Globe and Mail, “Minister seeks clarification of 
GigaText assessment.” And it refers to the police investigation and that there was no word on the Justice 
department report. So July 12, we’ve got more waiting for the public to find out what in fact the Premier 
is doing with this diversification on GigaText. 
 
On August 3, we’ve now advanced to August 3, the government issues a news release saying that there 
was no criminal intent, that criminal charges will not be laid with regard to any translation transactions 
relating to GigaText in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well if in fact criminal charges cannot be laid, if in fact the government has poured over $5 million into 
this dubious technology, if in fact they’ve poured another $400,000 at the rate of $50,000 a month, and 
there’s no criminal intent or criminal charges to be laid, there must be some charges of some kind to be 
laid against the Government of Saskatchewan for what they’ve done here. 
 
It’s interesting to note that maybe Paul Jackson has put his finger on it. Maybe Paul Jackson has put his 
finger on it. And Paul Jackson should know because he’s been very close to the Premier in the past and 
understands how the situation is in the Premier’s hierarchy. And in his article, August 14, 1989, Paul 
Jackson has this to say in part: 
 

No provincial Premier in Canada can be surrounded by as many nits, twits, dimwits, and half-
wits as Donald Grant Devine. 
 

He goes on to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Read that again. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Well, you didn’t hear it. I’ll read it to you again. 
 

No provincial Premier in Canada can be surrounded by as many nits, twits, dimwits, and half-
wits as Donald Grant Devine. 



 
This is Paul Jackson, a person who should know who surrounds the Premier. 
 

Devine’s senior staff and advisers must be rehearsing for Death Wish 64. That’s the number of 
seats in the Saskatchewan Legislature they hope to lose. It’s the only scenario that explains why 
every new initiative infuriates the very voters Devine represents. 
 
Here are some of the individuals Devine should fire. 
 

And he doesn’t mention the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. You’re in the clear. You’re not on 
this list. 
 

(Number one is) the numbskull who persuaded him to impose a 10-per cent tax on lottery tickets. 
 

An Hon. Member: -- Now who is the numbskull there? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- He doesn’t mention names. We may have to follow this up, but we should find out 
who in fact suggested this. 
 

. . . the numbskull who persuaded him to impose 10-per cent tax on lottery tickets. Aside from 
being a tax on a tax (and he gives his legal opinion here; he says) – basically unconstitutional – 
every person who plays the lotteries in Saskatchewan is fuming over this scam. It’ll cost him 
50,000 votes and five seats minimum. 
 

That’s what Paul Jackson says. The next . . . I think this might be Lloydminster in there, although 
Lloydminster has protection because it’s a border city and it may not affect the member quite so much in 
Lloydminster. 
 

(The next one is) the lame-brain who convinced the cabinet to snarl every Saskatchewan driver 
in a bureaucratic mess in order to get back a gasoline tax supposedly abolished in 1982. Each 
time a voter buys a litre of gas he’s reminded why he shouldn’t vote Tory come the election. 
 

(2230) 
 
And then Paul Jackson says: 
 

(You should get at) the hare-brain who advocated the surtax on basic fines. When a 
Saskatchewan driver gets walloped with a $40 fine for a minor seatbelt infraction, why beat him 
over the head with a 10 per cent surcharge? Clue to the adviser’s identify is he earlier had a 
frontal lobotomy. 

 
So apparently this person has had some treatment already but it hasn’t taken. 
 

(The final person is a) scoundrel with the idea of hiring a second rate PR agency to swamp 
SaskEnergy hearings with third-rate phoney submissions. Any political back-room guru should 
have known this would explode in the government’s face (and it certainly did.) 
 

My question, Mr. Premier, is this: when I go out and talk to the public, they ask me about a couple of 
things. They ask me about the SPC privatization and why is the Premier doing it? And they also ask me 
about the GigaText thing. They ask about the GigaText. You’ll notice as I went through the headlines, 



always the Deputy Premier is mentioned. The Deputy Premier was the one that took the flak for this 
GigaText thing. 
 
The Premier will recall quite clearly, In November 1985, after the Regina North East by-election which 
he was soundly defeated in, he said to the people of Saskatchewan, I’m a take-charge Premier. I’m 
taking charge of things. Responsibility – everybody has to answer to me; the responsibility lies within 
me. The Premier said that and I listened to the Premier say that. 
 
Now I want to know, Mr. Premier, when are you going to relieve the Deputy Premier of this GigaText 
affair? When are you going to take charge? When are you going to demand the explanations? When are 
you going to cut off the $50,000 a month that you’re putting into GigaText? 
 
The Deputy Premier, he’s loaded up with Rafferty, he’s loaded up with SaskEnergy privatization – he’s 
got all kinds of problems. When are you going to take charge? When are you going to relieve the Deputy 
Premier of his responsibilities in GigaText and take responsibility yourself for them? 
 
I’m not going to ask you to dismiss the people that Paul Jackson says you should dismiss around you. It 
would be a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, but I know you won’t do it; you won’t take that 
suggestion from me. But when are you going to take charge of this GigaText affair? That’s what I want 
to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I would certainly recommend that the member opposite get all of 
Paul Jackson’s editorials and articles, and he can read them over and over and talk to his constituents 
about them, because he will find them very, very interesting. It’s one thing to cherry pick the editorials 
and I know we all do it, we pick them up on either side and say well this one is good for us and that one 
isn’t. 
 
With respect to the question of GigaText, I hope the technology is functional as I pointed out with Time 
magazine with the Japanese. It’s being used and it is complex and it is difficult. IBM perhaps is 
somebody that could be very helpful in this case. We have invested some money in it and I admit that. 
It’s certainly capable of investing money in research and education and translation. We’ve done that and 
the members opposite have been in all kinds of things – when it goes to the Saskatchewan SRC 
(Saskatchewan Research Council) when it goes to research councils, universities, SaskCOMP, when you 
go to the WESTBRIDGE Corporation, you look at telecommunications, all kinds, new cellular phones, 
computer technology – we’re using it all the time. 
 
And the best example, I think, and I have it in my pocket, at least I usually carry it around is the new 
health care card. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. Members aren’t . . . Order. Members aren’t to use exhibits in the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I was just tempted to show the people of Saskatchewan on television this brand-
new card that is computer-based, plastic and computer-based, that is extremely functional and efficient 
and I might say popular, popular in your riding, and popular in yours, and popular across the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. chairman, if . . . I’ll say to the hon. members, if the . . . The members opposite 
are somewhat afraid of new technology and they wouldn’t want to bring this in, but I’ll say a big thank 
you and a big bouquet to Co-op Data Services who helped develop it with us, and to the WESTBRIDGE 



Corporation who helped develop it. And it’s perfectly in line with us taking some risk to use a computer 
and bringing the best technology forward. 
 
And I can say to the hon. members that you would’ve walked out and frightened the people and said, oh 
my gosh, they’re going to rip up our little paper card and they’re going to turn it into plastic, you’re 
probably been very successful in frightening them about, you know, the health care is going down the 
tube, this is it. And now when you give them this card and they’ve got it in their hands – you can’t get it 
away from them. They think this is the best card in Canada. 
 
We now have opportunities to market it in Europe; we have opportunities to market it across the country 
and in the United States. The Japanese are interested in it because we were able and willing to look at 
new technology and bring it into the province of Saskatchewan. I am quite convinced that you will see 
in the province of Saskatchewan, across Canada, the technology we’re talking bout here with respect to 
computers translating languages. 
 
And the hon. member says, well I don’ think you can do it through the technology that you have in 
GigaText. Well then you tell me the technology, the specific kind. We’ve looked at all kinds and we’re 
prepared to look at others, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I just say with respect to this search on our part to find technology that will allow us to translate 
French into English, Mr. Chairman, I know that they spent about $8 million on some fancy company 
called Nabu and they never got it back. It’s a slight embarrassment. At least in this case we have the 
potential to be on the very edge of leading technology in translating, and we hope that that’s the case, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, there’s actually two issues here. There’s two issues: 
there’s one of technology, and there’s one of waste and mismanagement. 
 
On the issue of technology, technology in this case of GigaText is questionable to say the least. Early 
independent studies described the system when it was fed independently, aside from Guy Montpetit and 
Dr. Young; they described it as having coughed, sputtered, and died. What I want to ask you is about the 
waste and mismanagement that took place at GigaText. The question of both the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount asked you and I asked you earlier this evening was one of the continual funding 
to GigaText after they had gone through at rapid speed the $4 million invested by Crown investments 
corporation. 
 
After the $4 million was gone, wasted, and squandered, SEDCO loaned GigaText an additional $1.25 
million. SEDCO say they have not released all of that money, but they are releasing it from when 
SEDCO took over to the present day at a rate of $50,000 a month to keep GigaText in operation. I would 
ask you, Mr. Premier, about the way in which the mortgage was filed. The only security that SEDCO 
has for the $1.25 million loan is on a condominium worth $137,000 that was given to Dr. Paillet to live 
in while he worked for GigaText. I want to ask you: do you know any lending institution that would file 
a mortgage of $1.25 million against a $137,000 condominium? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I’ve already responded to the hon. member. With respect to the details of the 
internal operations of GigaText, I would have to refer to the minister in charge or the Deputy Premier 
that have the details because I don’t have them. 
 
So I will say to the hon. member, with respect to the technology, I would point out that again going back 
to what IBM and the Japanese say, and if I could quote: 



 
The market for such machines will be vast . . . “ Since we Japanese have so much trouble in the 
area of foreign languages, machine translation is the kind of tool all Japanese desire.” And since 
many people in other nations are not linguistic whizzes either, sales of the electronic translators 
should be brisk around the world. 
 

Now you’re making fun of the fact that we are trying to use high technology in translating, and there are 
two official languages in this country. When we have the technology being used and being designed, I 
grant you, and being improved as we speak, we want to make sure that we’re not left behind with 
respect to translation technology and the use of computers. We are using it in health. The new health 
card has many new applications as we design and go into the health care field, and you’re going to see 
them. 
 
Translation in computers has many, and as the Japanese and as Time magazine points out, vast 
opportunities in markets. And you say, oh, Mr. Premier, you shouldn’t explore those because you’ve got 
a company that you set up or that you went on a joint venture in that deals with translation, and it 
doesn’t work the way you said it was going to work to start with, okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well that’s right, you’re trying to scare them again. 
 
And you say, oh they shouldn’t use this technology, the Japanese can use it, the Americans can use it, 
Germans can use it. But not here in Saskatchewan because you’re trapped. You’re trapped, and it’s 
easier to scare them if you’re trapped. 
 
Now I’ll say, Mr. Chairman, we hope the technology works, and there’s as much potential here in 
Saskatchewan as there is in any place else in the world. And you could take some political satisfaction 
and say, well they’ve had trouble with it and it didn’t work as well as they should have. And oh my 
gosh, it’s going to be a big problem with them, it’s $5 million. 
 
Well look, you have taken $500 million and dumped it into a mine that’s already been in the ground – 
didn’t care at all. Any analysis by the media and others, if I could read it in here, says you lost $1 billion 
in potash -- $1 billion. And you’re on my case for $5 million in terms of translation. And this technology 
has the potential for hundreds of millions of dollars well into the future, and that’s what the Japanese 
and the Americans and other Canadians are talking about. 
 
So I know you’re afraid of technology. You’ve always been afraid of it. I mean, you feel trapped, and 
you don’t want to do it, and you admit it. The members opposite just sit there. Let’s go to the fear; let’s 
go to the fear, and we’re trapped in this poor place called Saskatchewan. And they keep saying that and 
saying that. I remind them, they laugh and chuckle a little bit, but they don’t look very confident when it 
comes to adopting new technology and using it. 
 
They couldn’t build upgraders, and they couldn’t build paper mills, and they couldn’t build new packing 
plants. They couldn’t build turbine manufacturers; they couldn’t build new fertilizer plants. They’re 
afraid of technology. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll point out to the hon. member, it’s clear there is risk when you’re going to be a 
builder – there is. And we have, and we’ve taken the risk and we’ve delivered and we’ve delivered and 
we delivered. 
 
I can’t bring my health care card out any more, but if I could bring it out, I would show it to you because 
it was one of the finest pieces of technology that you’ll find any place, not only in Saskatchewan but 



indeed across Canada. And if we are not afraid and Co-op Data Services isn’t afraid to do it, the Co-op 
refinery is not afraid to build an upgrader with us, other people are not afraid to build with us, but the 
members opposite, they tried and they tried but they felt so trapped in Saskatchewan that they just 
couldn’t deliver on it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are optimistic about the 1990s and the 21st century. We believe that the new 
technology can be used in health care, in distance education, in telecommunications, in cellular phones, 
all kinds of technology, Mr. Chairman. And we are not afraid to try to introduce that technology to the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Premier, you’re living proof that you should start pumping more money into 
Saskatchewan hearing aid program because your answer had nothing to do with the question I asked 
you. I asked you about the waste and mismanagement of the GigaText affair. And I submit to you, if you 
agree that a commercial lending institution would lend money at a rate of $1.25 million and hold it 
against the condominium worth $137,000 there’s going to be all kinds of investors from Florida coming 
up here not to invest but to sell you land in Florida – swamp land. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you’re unfamiliar with the details of GigaText, which I have a hard time believing – I 
think that you know a great deal about the details at GigaText – but I will ask you something that you’d 
have to be familiar with, and that’s of one Ken Waschuk, who is the subject of the RCMP investigation 
launched by your Minister of Justice. 
 
(2245) 
 
Ken Waschuk sat on the board of GigaText representing Norlus and Guy Montpetit, but he also 
represents you, Mr. Premier, because he does all your polling for you in the province of Saskatchewan, 
outside of the polling that Decima and the people in Toronto do. So I would ask you during the time that 
GigaText came into operation in Saskatchewan and up until the time that the RCMP investigation was 
launched and SEDCO took over the operations, did you, sir, ever have any conversations with one Mr. 
Ken Waschuk about GigaText or French translations or Guy Montpetit and Norlus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I did not have the conversation with Mr. Waschuk during that 
time. And your next questions will probably be well did you have any surveys done? I believe there 
were some surveys done. 
 
Certainly individuals are innocent until proven guilty unless you want to stand up and try to wring them 
through the public and say that they are guilty. They are innocent and there was no charges and 
everything was reasonable. 
 
So I just say to the hon. member that yes, Mr. Waschuk has done surveys for us, and certainly Decima 
does some surveys, and other people do. And as most administrations, we use them from time to time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- We’re not making any allegations of anyone. We’re asking questions of you to help 
you try and establish some credibility in your government in this wasteful, mismanaged affair. 
 
I’m asking you whether or not you had conversations with Ken Waschuk about GigaText. I asked your 
about the specific period of time. But even outside that period of time, did you have conversations with 
Ken Waschuk, a member of the board of directors of GigaText, also one of your main pollsters, about 
GigaText or Norlus or Guy Montpetit? 
 



Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I don’t believe that I did. If I had any conversation at all with them, it would be 
very casual, in no detail at all. We knew, and I know that they were looking at some new technology 
with respect to translations, and I talked to the Deputy Premier about it, and maybe one other staff 
member when they looked at the possibility of having this technology used when we found out we had 
to go from English to French translation, but no detailed conversations with them at all. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well casual conversations have a great deal to do with the GigaText affair because we 
do know that Ken Waschuk received $150,000 interest-free loan from Guy Montpetit on a golf course in 
Regina. So that’s a casual conversation. If you had casual conversations, we’d like to know about it 
because I think it’s very important as to the mismanagement and waste that’s very apparent at GigaText. 
 
Now we know that Mr. Waschuk’s money that he received came from Koyama, a Bermuda company 
held by Mr. Guy Montpetit, to another Bermuda company called Libra which is owned by Mr. Waschuk. 
So if you did have casual conversations with Mr. Waschuk, we’d like to know about it, because we 
know for sure that there’s a $150,000 in this transaction that happened in a very casual conversation. 
 
Can you tell us if the casual $4 million of taxpayers’ money that was put in also as a result of a casual 
conversation, maybe stimulated by one Michel Cogger to Waschuk to yourself, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- No, I didn’t have any conversations of that sort with Mr. Waschuk or anybody else 
with respect to GigaText. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well could you undertake to tell us your representative on the board, sir. Have you had 
any conversations with your representative? 
 
There was one Terry Leier, who I believe represented Crown investments corporation on the board of 
directors of GigaText. And there is still outstanding to this day, that you and your ministers have not 
answered in this legislature, of certain sums of money amounting to either 4 or $5,000 that can be 
documented for other directors but not for Mr. Leier. In fact, Mr. Leier, in the court documents in 
Montreal, the two amounts – I believe one amount was $3,000 and another amount was $1,000 even – 
the court documents in Montreal show it as “represents” Now I don’t know what that means. I’d like 
you to explain that to us because your minister, when your minister stood up and explained those two 
expenditures to Mr. Leier, the minister said that they were for expenses incurred by Mr. Leier. 
 
We still have not seen those receipts in this legislature, and we find it very strange that your minister can 
stand up and say it was for expenses, because I have yet to see anyone employed by the government or 
any company that submits a travel claim and it words out – not once, but twice – to equal thousands of 
dollars. Usually they work out to odd numbers of dollars and a few cents, because exact amounts don’t 
happen in claiming expense accounts. 
 
So would you care to explain to us this evening and give us your undertaking that you will table the 
documents that relate to the payments to Mr. Leier, your representative on the board of GigaText. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I’ve worked for the public service and universities in Ottawa and 
often we would get an advance on expenditures, and you’d ask for $1,000 or $1,500 or enough for plane 
fare and some other things, and then you’d go back and submit it after you’ve done your travelling and 
your work. That’s very common. 
 
So if he put together an advance with respect to expenditures, then that’s perfectly normal. And when 
you’re involved with . . . I’m sure, through Crown Management Board we have people involved in 



companies like Saferco and others that are working on the board of directors because we jointly operate 
them. And we have expenditures and the board pays the expenditures. And these people are working for 
the Government of Saskatchewan, but they are there in that position as on the board on various kinds of 
companies. Now that’s a standard practice and a normal practice, and when the minister has the details, I 
mean, I’m sure that he will table them here and table them. I don’t have anything with me here. 
 
And with respect to the details of the operation, I don’t. And that’s why I have ministers of Energy and 
ministers of Health, and ministers of everything else except Agriculture. And there I’m responsible for 
details and I will have all the details there. I am responsible for the ministers. 
 
I would certainly like to be able to take credit for this translation equipment working, working very 
efficiently and working fine and everybody being quite proud of it. It’s been difficult because it hasn’t 
worked as fluent as we’d like to see it. I’d like to see it work smoothly, and I’d like to think that we can 
compete with the Japanese and others. So . . . and I’m sure you would as well. I mean you can have 
some political fun with the fact that it hasn’t worked as well as it, okay, and fair ball, I understand that. I 
mean that’s . . . You can dig in that and we used to throw the same thing about Nabu back at you guys 
and all that other stuff, and we can understand that. 
 
But I give some credit to people who try to do some things, try to build, or try to translate, or try a new 
technology. That’s what we’re doing here and hopefully it will be successful, and I hope to be able to at 
least get some very good advice with people like IBM, WESTBRIDGE, Co-op Data Services, and others 
who are involved in computer technology that are handling it and looking at it world-wide. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Premier, we find it very difficult to understand why you, as president of the 
Executive Council, would not equip yourself with details of this GigaText affair. Your Minister of 
Justice was concerned enough that he called the RCMP in to investigate. We asked that documents be 
tabled in this legislature, they have not been. We don’t know what the RCMP investigated, was it just 
Mr. Waschuk. Were members of your cabinet investigated? Was Guy Montpetit investigated? Was Dr. 
Paillet investigated? Who was investigated? Was it just the loan from Guy Montpetit’s Koyama 
company to Libra, Ken Waschuk’s company? 
 
So we don’t know the details of this, and the question I ask you just very simply was it . . . Would you 
give us your undertaking to have the expense accounts of Mr. Leier tabled in this legislature so we can 
do a reconciliation as to the $1,000 payment, the $3,000 payment and maybe any money that he’s been 
paid since. That’s all I ask you, to give us your undertaking that you would at least instruct your 
ministers to do that, who has to this point not complied with the request. 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, we think you should be looking at some of the other things that happened 
in GigaText as well, just out of your supposed interest for the health and the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. In Crown Corporations Committee, we brought up under court documents that, even 
during the first week when SEDCO took over, SEDCO took over from Crown investments corporations 
to manage the company, there’s a payment made to a travel agency for a ticket to Fort Lauderdale. And 
do you know what name is beside that trip to Fort Lauderdale? The initials G.M. Now we suspect that 
that might mean Guy Montpetit, who went, still at taxpayers’ expense, on a trip to Fort Lauderdale. But 
your minister wouldn’t answer those questions, would not answer those questions. There are many, 
many expenditures like that that took place in GigaText for no apparent reason, no health of the 
company, nothing to do with translations. 
 
Will you give us your undertaking not only to bring the expense accounts of Mr. Leier before this 
legislature, but to instruct your ministers to give full disclosure on the other questions that we have about 



the affairs of GigaText, so that the people of Saskatchewan will be well aware of where their money 
went. Did it all go into Guy Montpetit’s pocket? Well the majority of it did, but let us know where the 
other money went as well, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I’ll respond. With respect to RCMP investigations, cabinet doesn’t 
even know the details on that nor should it. And the public doesn’t and that’s the way it should be. It’s at 
arm’s length. The Minister of Justice can deal with it and they do it and they make their reports and then 
it stays. I mean, if there’s charges, then they follow the normal course, and if there not, that’s the end of 
it. So you ask me the details about that, did they investigate slim, slam, or anybody else. I don’t know 
and I shouldn’t know. So that’s perfectly normal and that’s the way we should keep it. 
 
With respect to expenditures on the potash . . . or pardon me, billion dollar loss on the potash 
corporation, but on GigaText, they will spend money with respect to the technology and there will be 
some travel involved, and you know that as well as I do. With respect to expenditures that the minister 
might have regarding the cash advance or the expense advance incurred by individuals and where that 
money’s spent and the rest of it, I mean they’ll bring that forward when they want . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Squandered. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And the hon. member say, squandered. Well you can clearly put, you know, that 
billion dollar loss at the feet of the NDP administration. A billion dollars in potash corporation. If we’d 
just put the money in the bank, we’d have been $3 billion better off. So they talk about 5 million. It’s 8 
million in Nabu and they never got a dime for it. And fair enough; you know, I mean that’s the way it 
goes. We put 5 million into this and hopefully it will work. So you can go on, you know, we can go back 
and forth. 
 
I will say with respect to technology, we hope that it works. With respect to the details . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I hope it works too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well good, we agree that we hope the technology works, and sometimes you have 
to risk and invest that money to see that it works. Now you don’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the hon. member says that you can’t, you can get it with a very . . . $269 computer can do all this . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . $270 computer that can translate all these languages simultaneously. Then, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we should hear about it. But I hope that this technology works, as do the members 
opposite, and I appreciate you saying that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. It being near 11 o’clock, the committee will rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:58 p.m. 


