





























































Hansard: August 15, 1989


August 15, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 24 – Jeux Canada Games (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Prior to our break at 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I was 
commending the many volunteers in the city of Saskatoon who are involved with the Jeux Canada 
Games, and we’re very, very pleased with the fact that so many people are attending the games in the 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
But I wanted to spend a little bit more time just reviewing again the tremendous job that volunteers do, 
not only in the city of Saskatoon but also in the province of Saskatchewan. There can be no doubt that 
the Jeux Canada Games will show-case the city of Saskatoon and the province of Saskatchewan during 
the next two weeks, but none of this would really be possible without the fact that there are thousands of 
people who have given of their time and their efforts to serve as volunteers in hosting these games. And 
that work has been going on for not only months but some have been involved for as long as four years. 
I’m very proud of the energy and the vision that these people have shown Saskatoon in giving so freely 
of this valuable time. 
 
I singled out as well, Mr. Speaker, one Tony Dagnone, who is the president of the University Hospital 
but is also chairman of the Jeux Canada Games. And Tony, along with the other organizers and the 
many volunteers, have done a tremendous job at putting this particular event together. We’re very, very 
pleased about the fact that the city of Saskatoon has been able to host a number of national events, not 
only this year but also in the past. And I made mention of the fact that the city of Saskatoon has the 
dubious honour of being the only centre in Canada which has hosted both the Canadian winter games 
and now the Jeux Canada Games. We know as well that this year earlier we hosted the Memorial Cup 
play-offs and also the Labatts Brier, which were unqualified successes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one thing all of these events have in common is that they were made possible because 
of the volunteering spirit and vigour of the people of Saskatoon. The challenge of staging national 
events is enormous. It takes a dream and a vision and the courage to try, but above all it takes people; it 
takes the initiative and determination of people from all walks of life with a common goal and the will to 
succeed. 
 
This year’s games, Mr. Speaker, will be the best ever held in Canada. And the secret ingredient in this 
recipe for success is people, volunteers who make a commitment, not only to help out, but they make a 
commitment to excellence. 
 
Excellence is something people from across the country have come to expect from Saskatoon and from 
Saskatchewan. Our people displayed it at the Brier and again in the Memorial cup, and now they’re 
displaying it with the Jeux Canada Games. And excellence is the driving force behind the games 
themselves – young, talented, dedicated athletes striving to be the very best that they can be. At the end 
of the day, Mr. Speaker, who finishes first counts not quite so much as the fact that each contestant, each 
young person, has competed at the highest level and has met the challenges of the games. Excellence is 
their reward, Mr. Speaker. 
 



To the thousands of volunteers who made the 1989 Jeux Canada Games a reality, thank you and 
congratulations. You had the courage to dream and the will to succeed. And to all the athletes and 
coaches and everyone who participates in the games, we certainly bid you welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Although the games will be completed by the 26th of this month, Mr. Speaker, we know that the legacy 
that they leave will be long lasting. Not only will it be long lasting with regard to the friendships that are 
made among the many athletes and the people who are involved in the games, but also we have to 
consider the legacy and the facilities that are left behind in the city of Saskatoon. These are facilities that 
will be available to be used by our young people for many, many generations to come. 
 
And one other final thing, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be a tremendous benefit, not only to the city of 
Saskatoon but also to the province of Saskatchewan, is the millions of dollars that are going to be spent 
during the next two weeks. It’s been estimated that some 20 to 25 millions of dollars will be spent in the 
city during the next two weeks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, it is indeed a pleasure for me to again say how proud I am that the Jeux 
Canada Games are being held in the city of Saskatoon, and I take pleasure in seconding the motion 
moved by the member from Regina Wascana. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to also support this motion as a member of the New 
Democratic caucus and as the representative for Saskatoon Centre constituency, the heart of the city of 
Saskatoon, as described by the member from Regina Wascana, the beautiful city of Saskatoon. The 
motion before us says: 
 

That this Assembly commends the thousands of volunteers who are responsible for the Jeux 
Canada Summer Games to be hosted by the beautiful city of Saskatoon, and further, that the 
Assembly extends a warm welcome to all participants in the games. 
 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I’d like to give credit to all the volunteers who’ve made the games possible. 
They’re a very valuable part of our community life, especially in the city of Saskatoon which is known 
for its volunteer and community work, but they often receive very little recognition. Many hours of 
volunteer work have gone into preparing for the games themselves, and this kind of project would not be 
possible without people who are willing and able to give generously of their time and energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like particularly to mention the fact that the volunteers that have made the games 
possible range from elementary school children up to senior citizens. People of all ages have been 
involved in this and I want to give particular credit and acknowledgement to the young people who have 
been involved in making the games possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- There’s also years of past volunteer service that should be mentioned. There are countless 
community organizations – the Lions Club, the Kiwanis, the community associations – that have helped 
in funding sports facilities which have been used to train the young people who are now participating in 
these games. Volunteers and community service groups contribute a great deal to our quality of life, and 
if a monetary value were to be attached to their work the figure would be absolutely incredible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Jeux Canada Summer Games reflect the importance of sports in our community and 
hold up the goal that physical fitness is a worthy goal for any society. Both recreational and competitive 



amateur sports play an important role in increasing awareness and participation in physical activities by 
the general public. 
 
And we know that having these beautiful facilities in Saskatoon will encourage people of all ages to be 
more engaged in physical activities and sports, and so we’re very pleased to have this opportunity in 
Saskatoon to have these recreational facilities made available to us. The point I’m making, too, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there’s an important connection between the level of fitness of a population and its 
general level of health. 
 
Events like the Jeux Canada Summer Games are important ways to highlight sports with in the province. 
And it’s important that sports continue to be a priority within this province past this particular 
celebration of sporting events. Any cuts in funding would have far-reaching, negative effects that would 
outweigh any short-term apparent gain, so we urge the government to continue supporting the sports 
facilities and the sports events in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that the city of Saskatoon has tied in with the Jeux Canada Summer Games 
has been the importance of the arts. There’s been a number of festivals of the arts around the city of 
Saskatoon, and I congratulate the city and want to extend my warm thanks for the fact that they have 
incorporated sports and arts together in the festivals that are going on right now in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I’ve mentioned already my thanks to the volunteers who are young people and to the young people who 
are involved in the sporting events themselves and in the arts events that have taken place. The Jeux 
Canada Summer Games emphasize the importance of youth and that it’s important to provide 
opportunities for our young people to develop specific skills. Adequate training and facilities enable 
young people to determine where their strengths and special skills lie. And we want future stars to have 
opportunities to achieve their potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that youth are the foundation of the future, that this province should 
be doing everything in its power to enable our young people to stay in their home province and to 
participate fully in the life of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, on behalf of our caucus, want to wish good luck to our athletes, particularly to the 
athletes from Saskatchewan, but to all of them across Canada who are taking part in the Jeux Canada 
Summer Games. We extend a warm welcome to all our visitors who have come to Saskatoon from 
around the country and from other countries as well. And we extend a special thank you to all the 
families of participating athletes for all the time, commitment, and sacrifice that they have provided in 
order for their son or daughter, brother or sister, to be able to participate in this event. 
 
And it’s particularly . . . I would like to underline this thanks to the families who have nurtured these 
athletes, Mr. Speaker, because we have in our caucus a member from Moose Jaw North whose young 
daughter is now in Calgary training and hoping to be a gymnast in the Canada Olympics some time in 
the future. And we know from talking to this member what kinds of sacrifices are involved in training a 
young person to be a first-class athlete, and we extend our appreciation to the families that have made 
this all possible. 
 
So in closing then, Mr. Speaker, good luck to our athletes, a warm welcome to all our visitors to the city 
of Saskatoon, and a special thank you to everyone who’s been involved in making these summer games 
possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be too long with my deliberation 
here, but I want to join with the colleagues on this side of the House and especially really bring it to the 
people’s attention that it’s just a timely motion to be discussing this particular resolution here on the 
floor of the legislature. 
 
It indeed gives me great pride, sir, to be able to indicate to you that we have, as you probably already 
read in the Star-Phoenix about a young lady, Shannon Kekula. She’s from my constituency originally – 
Marsden, Saskatchewan, sir. And the headline reads, “Saskatchewan thrower grabs gold.” Shannon has 
won the first gold medal in the women’s throwing shotput contest here in the Jeux Canada Games, and it 
does me great pride to see that she has achieved the first gold for Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, sir, that I take my hat off to Shannon because I knew her from quite young and she 
definitely has contributed a life towards sports and her life towards sports. And also her parents, Rudy 
and Lynn, definitely travelled distances, long distances and spent many hours, not only with Shannon 
but the rest of the family. And I know that the dedication from the Kekulas have shown . . . And I can 
see Rudy and Lynn, their pride would be just . . . Well they would be just so proud, and as we are for 
Shannon. 
 
So I just wanted to put it on record and congratulate Shannon and wish her the best in the future. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s really quite a pleasure to join with other members of 
this Assembly in voting for this motion, Mr. Speaker, and using this as an opportunity to wish the best of 
luck to all of the 3,000 athletes that are gathered in Saskatoon today and all of this week. And I would 
add my congratulations to that of the member from Lloyd-Cut Knife to the first Saskatchewan gold 
medal winner, Shannon Kekula. 
 
We want to extend a warm welcome to all of the visitors from outside of Saskatchewan who have come 
to Saskatoon from all parts of Canada. We especially want to extend a warm welcome to the families 
whose athletes may be participating the first time, and who have contributed through a great deal of their 
own time and sacrifice so that their family members could attend here. 
 
(1915) 
 
A special congratulations to those people in Saskatoon who organized and spent many hours in planning 
and gave of their time for this event, and particularly that they’ve taken as their theme, or one of their 
subthemes, to make this a drug-free event. I think at this time in Canadian sports history that’s a very 
significant goal and I wish them the best in that. This is a national event, a national event that we’re 
pleased to host, a national event that we’re pleased to compete at. Hosting an event like this is one way 
of emphasizing to the youth of Saskatchewan some of our values. One of the values in this particular 
case, sports, is an aspect very worthwhile in itself of developing. 
 
There are other aspects and other things to gain from sports, but we know that we value it in itself. We 
have in our school system developed excellent programs and staffed our schools with personnel who are 
increasingly gaining in competence in the sports fields. We know that there’s an additional benefit to all 
of us, and that comes when we look at the connection between the level of fitness of our population and 
the general level of health of all the people in Saskatchewan and in the country. So sponsoring 



something like the Canada games, Jeux Canada Games, gives those youth who are in our schools and in 
our communities an opportunity to have something to strive for, to show us just how good they can be. 
 
I think it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that when we have an event like this that we assure that the 
programs that have been put in place are sustained. They’re only valuable to everybody if they are 
sustained over the years, from those that are in school now to those who will be in school five, 10 years 
from now. And I think it’s incumbent upon us as legislators to make sure that they are sustained. 
 
I was pleased to hear a quotation from the Minister of Culture who indicated to a young athletes’ group 
that the program specifically designed in preparation for this event will continue. It’s clear that the 
message is there from the minister. I want to indicate to the minister that I and the people on this side of 
the House support him in full measure on that. 
 
In particular at this time, we should be taking a very careful look at how we sustained the necessary 
coaching needed for this event. Looking at the funding that has been given out from Sask Sport over the 
last two years, which I have before me – and I will just quote from the one year – but the contribution to 
the coaching teams that are making our teams competitive . . . And it wasn’t until the last five or 10 
years that we were able to develop in Saskatchewan a cadre of coaches that would be competitive at a 
national and an international level. 
 
And to a large part, this came about as a result of the grants which came from Sask Sport, last year to the 
total of $19 million directly to sport, culture, and recreation – taken from the annual report of Sask Sport 
– and in addition to that, $589,000 which was given directly to the Saskatchewan and Canada Games. It 
came from Sask Sport. I mention this at this time because, and I do this as a . . . to this House, that at this 
stage we have to look very carefully to make sure that those funds are sustained, take a careful look at 
the government’s action in implementing the tax that is threatening that fund. I would think that the 
government would want to not jeopardize that fund in any manner, and if it’s found, as I believe it is, 
that there is a threat there, that we should be prepared to alter our policies forthwith. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by defining . . . by giving one definition of success, one 
definition of success. There are several ways of defining success. Some people define success by 
winning on a lottery; other people define success by having achieved great wealth or perhaps winning at 
some other aspect. One way of defining success is if you can think of it as a time when you enjoy your 
own peak performance, enjoying your own peak performance. 
 
We have 3,000 athletes in Saskatoon who are striving for their peak performances this week. They are 
the people who have worked hard, have trained over the weeks, over the years, have practised and have 
studied in their particular sport. I think what is most satisfying to us is that success that comes from 
enjoying their peak . . . their own peak performance. I close, Mr. Speaker, by wishing each one of the 
athletes in the Jeux Canada Games the satisfaction that comes from enjoying your own peak 
performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Resolution No. 48 – Increased Work-load for Health Professionals 
 

Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
moving the following resolution: 



 
That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for neglecting the provincial 
health care system, which has resulted in dramatic increases in work-loads for health 
professionals and a corresponding inability to attract and retain such personnel. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there couldn’t be a truer statement than what is just contained in the resolution that I have 
just read out to this Assembly. And if the member from Weyburn would just keep quiet, maybe he’d 
learn something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have seen over the last few years is a series of cut-backs and underfunding of the 
health care system by the PC government. We have seen so many cut-backs and such poor funding of 
the health care system that . . . 
 
The Speaker : -- Order, order. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- It has resulted in dramatic increases in the work-load of health care professionals and a 
corresponding inability on the part of the government to attract health care professionals to this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And I am just going to itemize some of the areas that I will go into in more detail later 
on this evening. We see a situation in Saskatchewan where nursing staff is greatly overworked, where 
our hospitals are understaffed, and a situation, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, where nurses are leaving the 
province because they have better working conditions in other places. 
 
We see a situation where it’s almost impossible to get doctors in rural Saskatchewan, almost impossible. 
And what is this government doing to attract doctors in rural Saskatchewan? Nothing at all, Mr. 
Speaker: in fact its policies are geared towards reducing services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We see a situation where this government engaged in twinning of health care regions and reduced the 
number of public health nurses out in rural Saskatchewan and in the cities; reduced the number of public 
health nurses, Mr. Speaker, which has resulted in cut-backs in services and overworked public health 
nurses, nurses who have far too heavy a work-load. 
 
For example, you look at some of the twinning; the miles that they have to travel is absolutely 
phenomenal. They spend most of their time driving in vehicles as opposed to doing the front-line 
community health work that they should be doing and that public health nurses were originally 
implemented in this province to fulfil. 
 
We see a situation where we are having a great deal of difficulty attracting specialists to the province. 
We only have to look at the Plains hospital situation where we lost a number of specialists that were 
crucial to the southern part of Saskatchewan, and these were lost as a result of cut-backs to the 
university, which resulted in the university cutting back on the Plains Health Centre program. And these 
specialists have been lost to this province and have not been replaced, Mr. Speaker, as a result of PC 
government cut-backs and underfunding to the health care system. 
 
We see a situation in this province where the children’s rehab centre in Regina has only . . . in Saskatoon 
rather, Mr. Speaker, has only one occupational therapist as opposed to the three that should be there. We 
see long waiting lists. The occupational therapists, so I have been advised, resigned as a result of heavy 



work-loads. One was convinced to return but is on holidays, as I understand, now. The minister was 
supposed to report back to this House over a month ago and hasn’t done so yet, obviously because he 
has no game plan to make sure that we get more occupational therapists in Saskatchewan and in the 
children’s rehab centre in Saskatoon. 
 
We see a situation where the number of public health inspections have dropped dramatically because of 
cut-backs to that area of health care. 
 
We see nursing vacancies throughout the province. It’s getting very difficult to hire nurses because of 
the fact that we are expecting them to do yeoman’s work and because of the fact that nurses feel they are 
unable to complete their work, Mr. Speaker, in a professional manner, because their work-load is just 
too heavy for them to deal with patients in the manner in which they would like to deal with them. And 
that problem exists. And those are just a few of the areas that I want to deal with in a little more detail 
tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1930) 
 
If we take a look at the brief from SUN, from the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, that I believe was 
tabled at the health care commission, the PC health care commission, in it, in appendix G, it shows quite 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the nursing paid hours per patient day in Canada for acute care hospitals in 
1986, that Saskatchewan was the third lowest, ranked third lowest in the entire country with 
Newfoundland ahead of us, Nova Scotia ahead of us. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is totally unacceptable. That leads to a situation where nurses are grossly 
overworked, where they are handling far too many patients, and I hear about it on a regular basis by 
people phoning and complaining about long waits, or IVs (intravenous) that have run dry and they were 
with their son in the hospital, and they had to run and find a nurse and what would have happened had 
the parent not been in the hospital and the IV had run dry. You know, like these things are happening in 
our hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are happening because this government has refused to properly fund the hospitals to staff them 
with adequate nursing staff. There were some 370 new nursing positions created by the government in 
the budget, but they have not been implemented. Only a portion of those have been implemented, and 
the government is giving us some excuse about studying the matter a little further to determine where 
these positions would go. 
 
Well I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they have been government since 1982 and this matter should 
have been studied a long time ago. Before the government said it was going to put in 370 positions in 
the budget, one would have thought the government would have analysed it and studied it adequately at 
that time. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they have studied it, and they do know where these nursing 
positions are required but they intend to save some money, save some money on the backs of the 
hospitals and the nursing staff in the province, and the patients. 
 
They want to save . . . I forget how much the deputy minister of Health indicated would be saved as a 
result of . . . $11 million. Here it is, Mr. Speaker, right in this Leader-Post article dated July 25, 1989. 
“Harried nursing staffs still waiting.” 
 

The delay in providing for the new positions – which have an estimated annual cost of about $11 
million – will save the government money, Babiuk conceded. 
 



So what we have is a situation where the government has said X number of dollars will be put into 
health care, but they’re going to try and save some of this money. In other words, they’re not going to 
spend as much as they said they were going to spend. That’s what it’s coming down to. 
 
And meanwhile, who’s paying the price? The public who use the hospitals are paying the price and the 
nurses are paying the price, Mr. Speaker, and that is an . . . So it’s no wonder that we find that it’s 
getting very difficult to fill the nursing vacancies in some areas in this province because this government 
does not appreciate health care professionals and provide them with the sort of support that they require, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we look at what’s happening with respect to the interns. Look at the situation with the interns 
in the province today. The professional association of interns found it necessary, a couple or three weeks 
ago, to take some drastic action. And what they did is they sent a letter, Mr. Speaker, to all organizations 
of interns and residents in the country stating, and I quote: 
 

While we are reluctant to speak so disparagingly about conditions in our province, we feel that 
we have no alternative other than to communicate the seriousness of the situation to other interns 
and residents across the country who may be considering making application for an internship or 
a residency program in Saskatchewan. 
 

That’s what they said in their letter. They also stated as follows: 
 

An onerous work-load, extended working hours, and the possible effects of these conditions on 
patient care and doctors’ health are of primary importance to our members. 
 

Well there you have it, Mr. Speaker. In a letter that was sent out to our intern organizations across this 
country, Saskatchewan blacklisted – this government and this province blacklisted because of that 
government’s policies with respect to health care, which is to continuously underfund health care to such 
a point that onerous work-loads and extended working hours have detrimental effects on patients, the 
health of doctors, the health of nurses, I would suggest, and on the quality of patient care in this 
province. And that’s due, it’s due to none other than the Minister of Health and the PC government and 
their lack of any firm commitment to medicare in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- So what is that going to mean for recruiting future doctors, Mr. Speaker? We have a 
crisis situation in rural Saskatchewan where it’s very, very difficult to get doctors to go out to the 
country. And what is something like this going to do? Because of the failure of the Minister of Health 
and the PC government to have any foresight, any long-term, strategic plan in health care, we have a 
situation where Saskatchewan is black-listed amongst up-and-coming future doctors across this country. 
 
And what is that going to do to our rural constituencies, Mr. Speaker, where doctors are in great demand 
and are very difficult to attract to those locations? What is that going to do, Mr. Speaker? Well I suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is only going to create more difficulties for our rural residents, more difficulties 
for our rural hospitals, and more difficulties for Saskatchewan in general. 
 
Let me give you another example of what I’m talking about, the fact that this government has been 
neglecting the provincial health care system, resulting in dramatic increases in work-loads for health 
professionals and an inability to attract and retain personnel. 
 



The Saskatchewan Lung Association has recently complained of specialist shortages as well, 
particularly respiratory therapists and physician specialists in respiratory medicine. And this is very 
significant, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that lung cancer has become the target killer of women in this 
country. And I have in front of me here an April 1, 1989 Star-Phoenix article where the “Lung 
association makes staff plea.” And when asked to explain the shortage in this field, Piper – that’s Dr. 
George Piper, the association vice-president – said: 
 

When he came to the province 20 years ago (get this, Mr. Speaker, when he came to the province 
20 years ago), there was a “feeling this province was a special place and it was something of a 
privilege to practise medicine . . . I don’t have that feeling now.” 
 

That’s what he said. That’s the vice-president of the association. Mr. Speaker, he does not have that 
feeling now. 
 
And I’ll just go on and maybe give you some explanation as to why he says that. 
 

The government has to pay respiratory specialists more than other provinces to entice them to 
Saskatchewan. It needs to foster “some sort of spirit, some esprit de corps” (he said). 
 

And so what, in effect, he was claiming is that this government has not made health care a priority, has 
not made the attraction of specialists to this province a priority; has not provided specialists and health 
care professionals with adequate incentives to come to this province; has not established the necessary 
training programs to encourage people to specialize here, such as occupational therapists. In short, in 
seven years, what they have done is cut, cut, cut, underfund, underfund, and we are facing a situation in 
Saskatchewan where health care is in crisis and we have an ever increasing demand for specialist and 
health care professionals, and this demand is simply not being met, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we take a look at radiology services, we see that there’s a shortage of radiologists in the province 
today, which will become much more acute in the next decade unless something is immediately done by 
the government to reverse this trend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason why is that Saskatchewan does not compete with the salaries offered trainees from 
individuals and institutions in some of the other provinces in Canada. So where they are being paid a 
little more, they will probably go, and it’s important for this government to face that fact, Mr. Speaker, 
and look at ways of enticing specialists such as radiologists to come to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In order for standards of radiological practice within the province to remain high, Mr. Speaker, because 
we want those standards to remain high because radiologists want to work in a situation where the work 
they perform is quality work, it will require a commitment on the part of the government to train and 
retrain skilled personnel, and a commitment, a further commitment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to obtain the 
required equipment that would replace obsolete equipment and that would compete with other places in 
Canada. And this government simply hasn’t been doing that. 
 
If we take a look at obstetrics and gynecology, Mr. Speaker, we see that the ideal ratio of obstetrics-
gynecologists per population is somewhere between one in 15,000 and one in 20,000. But the present 
ratio of specialists to population in southern Saskatchewan is one to 33,000. It should be one to 15, or 
one to 20, and it’s one to 33,000 in southern Saskatchewan, and this is considerably higher than the 
standard mentioned previously. So what happens as a result of that? Well we have specialists, 
obstetricians and gynecologists in particular, who are overworked, who have heavy, heavy work-loads. 
So we have long waiting periods for patients to get in to see them; we have a situation where they’re 



having to work much harder than what they may have to work in another part of the country, Mr. 
Speaker; and we see increased work-loads and long waiting lists as a result, as I said, as a result of the 
fact that we have fewer obstetricians and gynecologists than the recommended standard. 
 
So I think it’s imperative that the Minister of Health and the PC government start making this area a 
priority. And if we look at anesthetists we have a similar situation. We should have something like 83 
anesthetists in Saskatchewan and we have something like 37. So what does that mean? That means that 
we have long waiting lists for surgery. And when we have long waiting lists for surgery, we have 
patients like some of the ones we discussed in the last session who are waiting for ever for hip 
replacements. 
 
And as they wait for hip replacements, they degenerate, their health deteriorates. In one case that I 
recall, the woman could hardly even make it to the phone. She got to the point where she could hardly 
even walk to her telephone to answer it, because she had been waiting so long for her hip replacement. 
And we see long waiting lists in other areas of surgery as well. So we have a situation, because of the 
lack of anesthetists, that is simply jeopardizing patient care in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I spoke a little earlier about public health nurses, for example; the fact that this government has cut 
back on public health curses and has twinned public health regions and as a result has increased the 
work-load of public health nurses. And in spite of that, in spite of the fact that these public health nurses 
are doing more today than they were doing a few years ago, we see that the immunizations that they are 
required to do are actually greater. There’s something like a 10 per cent increase in the number of 
immunizations that public health nurses are doing, in spite of the fact that each nurse is doing more just 
because of the increase in work-load. 
 
We saw a brief that was presented by public health nursing supervisors in the province of Saskatchewan 
as a result of the twinning that the government went ahead with, indicating that they felt, because of the 
twinning arrangement that was being implemented by the PC government, that patient care would be 
jeopardized because of the fact that nursing supervisors could not give that sort of front-line help to the 
nurses working under the supervisor, simply because of the lack of time because more time would be 
taken in administration for public health nursing supervisors. 
 
The brief indicated that this would jeopardize patient care, that it would result in overworked staff and 
poor staff morale as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s what’s happening in Saskatchewan today 
as a result of the cut-backs to public health nurses. 
 
(1945) 
 
The public health inspections is another very interesting area, Mr. Speaker. We see that from 1982-83 to 
1987-88 that there was something like a 6.5 per cent decrease in the number of facilities that were 
inspected, and a 64.4 per cent decrease in the number of field visits, and a 31.1 per cent decrease in 
formal inspections by public health inspectors. And that is because, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1984 there 
were 45 public health inspectors in the province, and in 1987-88 there were only 33 positions, and three 
of those were vacant. Because there was a reduction from 45 to 33 and three of those positions were 
vacant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what happened from ’84 to ‘87-88. So we saw a substantial 
reduction in the number of health inspections of public facilities in this province. And what does that 
mean to the public of this province? Well that means increased risk – increased risk, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because these facilities are not being inspected as much as they were back in 1982-83. 
 



And why have these cut-backs been made? These cut-backs have been made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because this government has mismanaged, the government has mismanaged the economy. It has been 
totally incompetent in the way it has governed over the last seven years. It has created a $4 billion deficit 
because of its mismanagement and incompetence – a $4 billion deficit. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 
now attempting to pay that deficit off on the backs of the sick, the elderly, and on the backs of the 
people in Saskatchewan, jeopardizing their health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s obvious from the statistics with respect to public health inspections that I have just read to 
you. It’s obvious that that is what’s happening in this province today. 
 
With respect to speech and language pathology services, there are insufficient numbers of speech and 
language pathologists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and audiologists, in Saskatchewan. Let’s just make some 
comparisons. And I take these comparisons from Health and Welfare Canada’s publication. Health 
Personnel in Canada, 1986 provides a comparison among provinces of population per active speech 
pathologist audiologist, and in 1985 the ratios were as follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canada, one to every 9,587. Manitoba, one speech and language pathologist to every 6,894 people. 
Alberta, one to every 6,538. Saskatchewan, one to every 13,416. So you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that it’s a pitiful record and that such shortfalls will only increase as time goes by. 
 
And what makes this so tragic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that children need access to this service at a very 
early age if they have a speech problem or a hearing problem. They need access to this service 
immediately, as soon as you can possibly get them access to the service. But because of the long waiting 
list as a result of the lack of speech language pathologists in the province, children are not getting access 
to the service when they should. And this results in a lifelong impediment or it results in the need for a 
greater amount of service down the line when they finally do get access to the service. In other words, it 
costs the health care system more in the end than if this government had taken the preventative step of 
providing these services in the initial stage. 
 
When the Minister of Health and the PC government talk about health care prevention, they think in 
terms of a flashy advertising campaign with flashy slogans and lots of money being blown all over the 
province in little bits and drabs here to get themselves a little bit of publicity. They don’t think about the 
need for therapists for pre-school children at a very early age. That’s real prevention, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s real prevention. 
 
And what else is real prevention is public health nurses out there working with the people, immunizing 
people, teaching them about how to look after their children, their little infants, their babies. And in a 
society, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we don’t have an extended family like we used to have, these public 
health nurses have a very, very important role to play and are not being used to their potential. 
 
That is real prevention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s prevention, not some glossy brochure, not some 
glossy brochure or some purple heart invitation to a fancy celebration in Saskatoon where all the elite 
are served food and balloons and everything else. 
 
Real prevention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is getting therapists to our children and to our rural communities 
as soon as we possibly can. Real prevention is getting public health nurses out in rural communities and 
in urban Saskatchewan, doing the work that doctors don’t have to do, Mr. Speaker – it would free up our 
doctors to do other quality work – but doing work with families and with individuals to teach them 
proper health maintenance and proper primary health care. That’s real prevention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And I’m just going to take a look at the area of community health services out of the 
provincial budget, and I want to point to approved person-year distribution by year. And what we see is 
a drop from 1982-83 from 448 to 410 in ‘89-90 – a drop of some 38 approved person-year distribution. 
So you can see from these numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the present government has not displayed 
any commitment to community care, despite the talk, despite all their rhetoric about community care and 
wellness and the fact that they want community involvement and they believe in preventative health 
care. 
 
The figures simply don’t add up, Mr. Speaker. They have cut back the health care budget so badly, 
they’ve underfunded health care so badly that we find there are fewer workers there today that there 
were in 1982, in spite of the fact that work-loads have been increasing as people’s awareness of what a 
vital role community health workers can perform has also increased . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
the minister from . . . The member from Weyburn says this is just the NDP view of big government is 
better government. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that shows where he’s at. 
 
He’s prepared to jeopardize patient care by cutting back on therapists and specialists and public health 
nurses in Weyburn; he’s prepared to see them cut back; he’s prepared to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because philosophically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he feels it’s every man for himself and every woman for 
herself and that the government should not be involved in providing health care to the people of this 
province. That’s where he’s coming from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And it will be that same member, if he’s re-elected and this government is elected, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, who will stand in this House and vote for privatization of medicare, if, Heaven forbid, 
he should ever be re-elected again, Mr. Speaker. It’s that sort of mentality that leads to this sort of 
philosophical axing of the services in the province of Saskatchewan – philosophical gutting of our 
services that have been built up by the people of this province for years and years and years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The people of this province are proud of their health care system. They love our health care system. 
They want to improve on it and expand it, not cut, cut, cut, cut, as the member from Weyburn and other 
members sitting on that side of the House would have the government do. 
 
And I can go on with things like chiropody services and the increased demand of something like 160 per 
cent, and they just have not increased the specialists in this area to meet with the increasing demand. 
And the list just goes on and on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I could go on all night with respect to the 
issue of the lack of specialists in this province. 
 
Pediatric service at the children’s rehab centre, I had touched on lightly in my opening remarks. Well 
let’s just go into that in a little bit more detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The situation, as I understand, is that 
all the occupational therapists, as of late June, because of unrelenting demands and constantly increasing 
work-loads, resigned their positions. I understand that one of these occupational therapists was 
encouraged to come back and decided to come back. She came back for two weeks and then went on 
holidays until September. Meanwhile we still have two positions that are vacant; we have long waiting 
lists for occupational therapists. 
 



I am being contacted by parents on a regular basis who want their children to have the benefits of an 
occupational therapists and don’t have access to occupational therapists . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And the member from Regina South says we’re making it up. Well I’m not surprised, sir, that they’re 
not writing to you, because you would have no compassion or understanding about their situation. I’m 
not surprised they’re not writing to you and therefore you’re ignorant of the facts. 
 
But this again, this again, Mr. Speaker, is very hard on these children because the longer a child waits 
for therapy, the greater the impact. It’s crucial that these children receive their therapy as soon as 
possible. 
 
And I just want to quote from Toni Lindner’s book, Early Childhood Education. She points out, and I 
quote: 
 

The research supports the contention that the best time to attack a child’s mental, physical, or 
emotional handicaps is in the years from birth to early childhood. On the other hand, failure to 
provide remedial programs for disadvantaged and handicapped children at an early age can have 
negative results. Accumulative developmental deficits have been noted. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s happening today in Saskatchewan. We have a shortage of occupational 
therapists, and as a result we have children who should be receiving occupational therapy who are not 
receiving the service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An. Hon. Member: -- Names, gives us the names. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well the member from Regina South says, give us the names. Well he knows very well 
that there is a waiting list of some 2 to 300 people at the rehab centre in Saskatoon and the children are 
having trouble getting in. That is . . . 
 
The Speaker : -- Order, order. I’d like to ask the hon. members to allow the member to proceed without 
repeated interjections. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And so why do we have this shortage of 
occupational therapists? Well first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the benefits and salaries are simply not 
competitive with other provinces, Mr. Speaker, they’re not competitive. Another reason is, we don’t 
have a school of occupational therapy in Saskatchewan and as a result the attrition rate is much greater 
than what it would be had we had a school of occupational therapy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the school of physiotherapy was established we noticed a real increase in the 
number of physiotherapists that stayed in Saskatchewan. But what has happened today in Saskatchewan 
is this government, because of the fact that it has created an unprecedented deficit, it can’t afford these 
increases and improvements in the health care system. It can’t afford it and so it doesn’t do it. And so we 
have an increasing problem with respect to occupational therapists in this province, and unless this 
government pulls up its bootstraps and does something about it pretty soon it will be at crisis proportions 
in a very few years if it isn’t already there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just wish to say in conclusion, and I mean I literally could go on with all the specialties in 
the province and virtually prove the same point on every single one, Mr. Speaker, but the fact of the 
matter is, in conclusion, we have a situation where the nursing staff in the province is greatly 
overworked. We have a situation where nurses are not nursing as much as they would if the working 
situation was far better. 



 
We have a shortage of doctors in rural Saskatchewan, a serious shortage of doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan, and this government is doing nothing – nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker – to make sure that 
doctors are locate din rural Saskatchewan. In fact it’s engaging in polices that in effect discourage 
doctors in rural Saskatchewan because it is not improving rural hospitals and providing them with the 
sort of equipment that is necessary to attract professionals. 
 
(2000) 
 
We see a situation where this government has cut back on public health nurses, has cut back on public 
health inspectors, which has resulted in increased work loads for public health nurses, which has 
resulted in a decrease in the number of public health inspections done in the province, in both cases 
jeopardizing patient care and jeopardizing health care and the medicare system in Saskatchewan. 
 
We see a situation where the Plains hospital, I refer to for example, because of cut-backs to the 
university which cut back to the Plains hospital, we see specialists that left this province who have never 
been replaced, Mr. Speaker, never been replaced because of this government’s cut-backs and 
underfunding – because of the mentality that was demonstrated by the member from Weyburn that he 
has absolutely no commitment whatsoever to health care in the province – and because of the fact that 
this government has absolutely no long-term plan, but is simply engaged in ad hoc cuts, ad hoc cuts, 
underfunding to the health care system as well as other social programs, but I’m talking about health 
right now. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move the resolution, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for neglecting the provincial 
health care system which has resulted in dramatic increases in work-loads for health 
professionals and a corresponding inability to attract and retain such personnel. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart : -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to second this motion as the critic for 
seniors’ issues because of the concern that the seniors have about the health care system in this province, 
in particular about the situation in the nursing homes in this province and the nursing care in the 
hospitals . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Regina South was scoffing at the idea of the 
need for occupational therapists too, Mr. Speaker, and I want to remind him that the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Association, at their annual meeting just a few weeks ago, called on the government to establish 
a school of occupational therapy. 
 
The situation of the lack of occupational therapists in the province, as outlined by my colleague, the 
member from Regina Lakeview, is completely the truth. The seniors are concerned about it also. They’re 
concerned about it for themselves and they’re concerned about it for their grandchildren and young 
children that need that kind of care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association did a vacancy survey report concerning 
the actual and anticipated vacancies for the period of 1987 from May to August, and they found that 
there were a number of actual vacancies and also anticipated vacancies of nursing. And in 1987, there 
was 112 per cent increase in actual vacancies of nursing positions in the province compared to 49 in 
1986. From 49 in 1986 to 112 in 1987 – vacancies. Nurses are leaving the province and positions are not 



being filled. And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because the people need that kind of health care. They 
particularly need the nursing care. 
 
And I just want to very quickly report on what’s happening with the nursing and the long-term care. And 
I can’t do better than read a letter that was in the paper in May of this year, in the Star-Phoenix, from a 
nurse who says this: 
 

I would like to dispel the popular misconception that nurses employed in special care homes do 
not work as hard as nurses employed in the hospital sector. 
 

And it’s in the nursing homes in particular, Mr. Speaker, that the nurses are having a problem with 
needing to have additional staff. The letter goes on to say: 
 

I am currently employed as an evening registered nurse in a special care home. I provide 
professional care to 49 Alzheimer patients and supervise six resident attendants. During the night 
shift this number increases to one registered nurse per 149 nursing home residents and 
approximately 220 residents in the attached apartment complex, as well as five resident 
attendants. 
 
The immediate nursing home residents account for about four to 37 times the patient load of a 
hospital nurse. This staffing level is considered better than some nursing homes, and you can see 
that it’s very, very low. I provide all emergency treatments to patients and decide if and when to 
notify a doctor or to send a patient to hospital. Decisions are based solely on my judgement as I 
am usually the only medically trained staff member on the unit or in the building. 
 
The public must be informed that nurses employed in special care homes are educated, caring 
professionals who play an essential role in the delivery of health care. We deserve respect and 
credit for the service we provide when families cannot or will not provide care for their elderly 
relatives. 
 
Don’t kid yourself, the nursing shortage is coming to Saskatchewan and will hit the nursing 
homes the hardest, especially when the baby-boomers reach maturity. Without the dedication and 
abilities of long-term care nurses, who will care for your grandparents, your parents, or you? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s very well put. It certainly demonstrates the concern that I would like to be 
able to speak at further length on, because the concern about the nursing staffs in the nursing homes 
reflects the pressure from this government or the move of the government towards privatization. 
 
There are many people in the nursing homes who’ve had to hire private nurses to get the care that they 
need. And that’s another development of privatization, where nurses are able to get hired on privately by 
the people who can afford it and the other people in the nursing homes have to go without care. And 
that’s happening in the nursing homes in this province now, Mr. Speaker. And I want to speak further on 
that, sir, but I realize that there’s other items on the agenda so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker : -- Order, order. Could we have order. 
 



Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I would move that we go to government 
business and immediately Committee of Finance . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will 
confirm that with the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tonight with me I have Jack Drew, deputy minister of 
Agriculture; Les Bowd, assistant deputy minister. Behind me, Wes Mazer, director of administration; 
and farther back, seated closer to the rail, we have Doug Lisle, director of economics branch; Ross 
Johnson, budget officer; and Mr. Norm Ballagh, the president of ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 
of Saskatchewan). 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I would like to begin these Agriculture 
estimates for this year by going back a few years and just taking a look at the vision of the government, 
and more particularly about the vision as stated by the Minister of Agriculture and how that has 
developed over a number of years. And just so the member from Weyburn doesn’t have heart failure. I’ll 
forewarn him I’m going to start talking about the transportation rates and specifically the Crow rate. 
 
Now when this Premier, this current Premier was aspiring to be a premier, he left the impression that he 
was in full support of the Crow rate. The transportation rate has been in place for many years and I 
would . . . a quote of his, he says, “Of course I will defend the Crow rate.” He left the impression that he 
was going to be in support of it. 
 
Then in other statements he had made he starts to waffle a little bit. In the same article where he says, of 
course the Crow rate must be defended, he also said at the same time that he would cut personal income 
tax by 10 per cent. I think we all remember that, and I think that promise was in the same vein as when 
he was talking about the Crow rate. 
 
In the Leader-Post of June 7, 1980, they reported a quote, and I will quote from that. It says: 
 

Devine said the party’s policy is to have the largest portion, when talking about transportation 
rates, about 75 per cent of the difference between the Crow rate and the actual cost to haul grain, 
paid by the provincial and federal governments, and farmers would pay the remaining 25 per 
cent. 
 

Now you have to ask yourself how this formula would apply. Under the transportation rate at that time, 
farmers were charged 20 cents per hundred, and that was about $4.40 per tonne. And the present cost of 
shipping from the point was calculated to be about $27.27, which the producer paid about $6.55 and the 
government paid the other portion. But if you calculate it the way the Premier, what he stated at that 
time, under his formula, you would have one-quarter of the difference between 4.40 and 27.27 or one-



quarter of 22.87, which is $5.72, added on to the $4.40. That would total $10.12 a tonne. I’m sure you 
recall the statement, Mr. Premier. 
 
If he would’ve had his way at that time, Mr. Chairman, farmers would’ve been paying $10.12 a tonne. 
This is the friend of the farmer who was going to defend the transportation rates. Well as we see 
currently, the rate is now up to $9 a tonne, so I would say, Mr. Premier, you’ve almost reached your 
objective. Mind you, it’s take you a little bit longer than you anticipated because some seven or eight 
years ago you would have seen the rate being much higher then than it was now. 
 
Some other statements that the Premier has made, Mr. Speaker – he said in the Financial Post that, and I 
will quote Financial Post of 1983: 
 

Changes to federal transportation policies are much feared here. Devine figures Crow reform 
could mean an additional $10,000 a year on a thousand-acre farm. It can quickly approach $1 
billion a year for Saskatchewan, he said. 
 

Now this is the Premier of the province who identified in 1983 that the transportation rate increases 
could quickly approach a billion dollars a year for Saskatchewan. But was he concerned? Was he 
concerned, and did he stand up for the farmers of Saskatchewan and say that no, the transportation rate 
had to be defended? No way. 
 
(2015) 
 
And writing in the Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics in July 1976, he stated, and I will quote 
again, Mr. Chairman: 
 

While the original purpose of the Crow’s Nest Agreement included development of the prairie 
region, the primary objective of the Government of Canada and the CPR (Canadian pacific 
Railway) was to gain access to the Kootenay region of B.C., and thus prevent its exploitation by 
the U.S. . . . the primary benefit derived by prairie farmers form control over monopoly power. 
The vehicle for control was the Parliament of Canada. However, (he states) there was and 
continues to be concern whether or not the Parliament of Canada should be in the business of rail 
rate regulation on a continual basis. 
 

Now this is the Premier who was saying that transportation rates were going to cost farmers an 
exorbitant fee in the years to come, didn’t do anything about it, and then goes on to say that he doesn’t 
think that the Parliament of Canada should be in the business of regulating rates anyway. 
 
Now that kind of a statement, Mr. Chairman, and this little bit of history, just is leading us to believe 
today that this Premier that we currently have in Saskatchewan had in the back of his mind, right from 
day one, a little plan of his own – the economist, the university professor, the academic had a little plan 
and he was going to implement. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, statements such as these have helped to undermine the protection for farmers, and I 
would like to go on and quote from the Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics in 1978, by the 
Premier of this province, who was then an economist. And he says: 
 

Based on the conceptual analysis of the grain transportation rates, it is plausible to find that these 
rates may not be in the public interest. 
 



So he says the grain transportation rate structure, as we knew it then, was no in the public interest. He 
also goes on to say: 
 

. . . that these rates may have decreased farm income stability on the Prairies. 
 

Well decreased farm income stability on the Prairies if the rates were that low. Well we’ve seen a 
significant number of increases in the transportation rate; in fact, we’ve seen the structure change and 
the formula change. Now we have the Crow benefit. And I don’t think that we have seen much more 
stability of income on the Prairies since that time. In fact it’s become worse because that’s become an 
added cost on to the backs of farmers who could not afford, and cannot afford any increases in the 
transportation rate or in many of the other areas that they have to incur in their operation of their farm. 
And he goes on . . . That was in 1978, Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics. 
 
Another article in the Agricultural Science in 1978 by the present Premier of Saskatchewan, who was 
then an economist, and he says: 
 

As the Prairies continue to develop, the discriminating characteristics of the transportation rate 
continues to antagonize participants and limit full comparative growth potential. 
 

So we can see that he had in his mind, he’s repeated many, many times, that he didn’t believe the 
transportation rate was going to be beneficial to Saskatchewan and that farmers should pay more. 
 
He repeats it – agricultural science extension division, University of Saskatchewan, by the same person, 
the present Premier of this province, and he says: 
 

Thus, efforts by provincial governments to foster diversification in agriculture and increase or 
maintain the number of farmers is thwarted by the rates. 
 

So he was telling us then that the transportation rate was thwarting the increasing . . . or maintaining the 
current number of farmers in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Chairman, we have seen in the province of 
Saskatchewan the freight rates increase again, and did we see a maintenance or an increasing number of 
farmers? No, we did not. We saw the number of farmers in this province absolutely decrease. He 
continues to play out the role that he set out in 1976, ’77, ’78 through his years in the university. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, that is one aspect, one portion of what this Premier has in the back of his mind, and I 
will go on to expand in many . . . on these areas later on. 
 
And now I want to look briefly at another topic that this Premier of this province, how he was thinking 
before he became Premier and how it is played out to the present. And that is in the area of orderly 
marketing. Some of his writings show quite a lack of enthusiasm for orderly marketing and marketing 
boards. And he described marketing boards as manipulative and he questions it. 
 
And I want to go back to the Business Review in the winter of 1977 where there is a nice picture of . . . 
very much resembles the current Premier of this province; in fact it is him. And the title is, “Marketing 
boards: economic or social policy.” And I want to give some quotes out of this article from the Business 
Review in the winter of 1977, from the professor of agricultural economics at the University of 
Saskatchewan who is now the Premier of this province. And he is identifying some of the problems, and 
he says: 
 



The manipulative power inherent in marketing board legislation enables agricultural producers to 
limit supplies and to control individual and aggregate commodity marketing in efforts to increase 
price and incomes. 
 

Well isn’t that terrible for a farmer to try to control the price and his income. And this is the Minister of 
Agriculture, the current Premier, who, when an academic – and he tries to continue to be that – was 
saying that the marketing boards were manipulative and farmers should be making efforts to increase the 
price of their commodities. Well isn’t that terrible. 
 
And this is the same Premier who today stands up in this House time after time and says that he’s the 
guy supporting agriculture, he’s the person who is supporting farmers in this province. But it’s a steamy 
little plan that we see unfolding, first with transportation and now with marketing boards. 
 
And he goes on to say: 
 

This administrative characteristic may run into opposition from at least six points. 
 

And he goes on to state those points: 
 

First and most obvious is the producer control. 
 

Well isn’t that a nasty thing, for a producer to have control of his commodity, to market it, to be able to 
set a price. That’s terrible, but every other thing that he buys, the price is set when he buys it and there’s 
no negotiating. But this Premier wrote in 1977 that: 
 

The produce should not have the right of control over his product. 
 

And that is reflected today in the free trade agreement. He didn’t have to go outright and outlaw 
marketing boards in this province. He has gone through the back door by supporting the free trade 
agreement wholeheartedly, spouting it off around this province, because he says that farmers shouldn’t 
be able to control the price of their product. And he can’t dispute that. If he wants to dispute it, he just 
should go back and research some of his writings in 1977: 
 

Secondly is the compulsory characteristic (he says). 
 

Farmers shouldn’t have to be able to belong to a plan. They should have the freedom to go broke. As we 
know, the marketing boards and the supply and management commodities are those commodities that 
are the most stable in the province of Saskatchewan, and this Premier says that that characteristic is not a 
good one, even though, when we look south of the border or before we had marketing boards in Canada, 
we saw and we continue to see in the United States many farmers in the market with the boom and bust 
cycle getting involved in the industry and leaving the industry, providing instability, providing high 
costs to consumers at one point in time and low prices to the farmers at another point in time. And he 
says that’s not right. 
 
And the third reservation, I’m quoting again, voiced about marketing control systems from a welfare 
consideration: 
 

With our continual concern about inflation, productivity levels and declining standard of living, 
it may be questionable for agricultural legislation to be employed as a vehicle for social reform. 
 



Now what he’s trying to do here, Mr. Chairman, is separate the social life and infrastructure in 
Saskatchewan, that as we know it today, from the economics. And I don’t dispute that because that was 
his training – he’s an economist. On paper no doubt what he is saying sounds pretty good, but he can’t 
relate it to the farm families of Saskatchewan because it’s totally a different scenario. 
 
I mean when you’re sitting in the university writing these little schemes up, it may sound good. And he 
goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 per cent of the farmers, who tend to 
be good business men as well as producers, society may not wish to support higher food prices or 
producer security so that the non-productive 80 per cent of the farm population can live in the 
country at a profit. 
 

Well isn’t that quite a statement. Then he goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

But perhaps all rural people don’t have to be farmers. 
 

So what he is saying is that, first of all, producer security is not an issue. And this is the guy that’s 
saying he’s standing up for marketing boards in the free trade agreement, and marketing boards won’t be 
affected. And we have seen already, through the agreement, that there is a great amount of pressure 
being put on marketing boards. We see, for example, in the chicken industry, a list of items that are not 
chicken because they’re processed. Because they’re not processed they’re not chicken – chicken Kiev, 
chicken cordon bleu, all that kind of stuff – because it’s processed. 
 
An Hon. Member : -- Chicken in a mud hole. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Chicken in a mud hole, yes. 
 
And he goes on to say: 
 

In other words, possibly we should separate agricultural economics from social policy. 
 

So he comes out and directly says it. He wants to separate agricultural economics from social policy. 
 
Now we have in this province of Saskatchewan a long standing tradition that society has revolved 
around the agricultural community. It initially revolved around the agricultural community, then was 
built into a series of small towns that provided services for those agricultural communities, and 
eventually into a system of middle-sized towns and large cities. And that’s the system we have. 
 
But he says that pure economics should reign, and we want to separate that from anything else that’s 
going on in this province. And it’s better documented as I go along. And he says again: 
 

Notwithstanding the need for agricultural co-ordination, the imposition of farm marketing 
controls may have a very small probability of being the answer to either our social or economic 
woes. 
 

So he was directly saying that farm marketing boards shouldn’t be around, shouldn’t be here. Is it any 
wonder that we were questioning this minister during the free trade debate about marketing boards and 
supply and management? Because we knew what his motive was. 
 



Back in 1977, he made it very clear. He was quite quiet about it after he changed roles from the 
economist to the Leader of the Conservative Party to the Premier of this province, very quiet about that. 
But we know and we knew – and that’s why we kept questioning him – that his motives were well 
described in his writings and teachings before he became the Premier of this province. 
 
In other words, he says: 
 

Supply continuity may not necessarily depend upon increasing or maintaining the number of 
farmers. 
 

Now isn’t that quite a statement from a Premier of the province now? 
 

Supply continuity may not necessarily depend upon increasing or maintaining the number of 
farmers. 
 

So what he’s saying in that little statement, Mr. Chairman, is that it doesn’t matter how many farmers 
you have that we can maintain supply because the agricultural land is there and we can have 
corporations or large farm operations producing enough that we could maintain a continuity of supply. 
But inherent in that is that he is saying it doesn’t matter if there’s family farms around this province in 
order to have a continuous supply. 
 

Another concern arises (he says) from the direction of power. Marketing boards have 
traditionally been characterized by horizontal relationships across farmers as opposed to vertical 
linkages between them and marketing opportunities. 
 
The well-known success of the vertically integrated food industry and multinationals depends 
largely on the dynamic character of their contracts, links, and relationships between producers 
and consumers, both domestically and abroad. 
 

So he was using the example, in this paragraph, of the success of the multinational corporation through 
vertical integration linking producers and consumers. So what he is saying here is that you don’t 
necessarily need – and that follows up the statement before – he says you don’t need the number of 
farmers, but what we could have is the vertically integrated society where multinationals could control 
the food base, vertically control the production, and therefore control the price to the consumer. 
 
(2030) 
 
And that’s possible in this province. It’s done in many other areas of the world. We can let the 
multinational take over. But that’s not what we need in Saskatchewan, that’s not what we want, and 
that’s not what people expect from a Premier of this province who is supposedly trying to maintain the 
rural population. 
 
And we’ve seen that population drop dramatically over the number of years. And you have to ask 
yourself, well when you read the statements like this, has that always been the objective of this Premier. 
And I think it absolutely has. 
 
And he goes on to say: 
 

However, for those still bent on altering market behaviour, there would seem to be considerable 
room to design a more effective competition policy in Canada. 



 
What he is saying then, this Premier of this province when writing as an economist, he’s saying that 
there is more room for an effective competition policy in agriculture. So we don’t want to have the 
stability so that we can have the infrastructure that we have in Saskatchewan maintained. He’s saying 
that you put the competition in there and let the market prevail and everything will work out. You don’t 
need as many farmers as we have around, as he’s saying. In fact, only 20 per cent are good farmers, he 
says; the other 80 per cent just living in the country at a profit. 
 
An Hon. Member : -- Who says that? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- The Premier of this province said that in 1977, in writing. He goes on to say: 
 

Economic theories support the contention that under various circumstances, consumers may 
benefit much more or more from price variability as producers may lose. Thus to impose price 
rigidity, particularly at higher than equilibrium levels, may generate a net loss to society. 
 

So he was far more concerned about having this whole scheme of agriculture work on the free market 
basis for the benefit of the consumer groups around Canada and around the world, because we export a 
lot of our product, more concerned about that than he was concerned about making sure that we have an 
infrastructure in Saskatchewan that we know. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, he has carried that out to a T because we have seen the number of farmers 
decreasing. In fact he, through agricultural credit corporation, is taking action on thousands of farmers, 
driving them off the land; not doing anything to ensure that there is a long-term mechanism of income 
support; not doing anything to try to restructure the debt that we have in this province, the $6 billion 
debt in agriculture. 
 
But he is saying, let the market prevail. And I will get to that in a little while, Mr. Chairman, in the 
statements that was made out of the ministers’ conference in Prince Albert not too long ago. And that 
was their theme – let the market prevail and everything will work out fine. Well it simply doesn’t work 
in Saskatchewan because we are subject to so many forces, not only in Canada, not only in our province, 
but around the world. So there we have some more of the writings of the Premier of this province. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, in The Western Producer of May 27, 1982, when asked if he favoured a dual 
marketing system – now we’re talking about the Canadian Wheat Board, which is a marketing tool of 
the Canadian Saskatchewan farmer – if he favoured a dual marketing system which would allow the 
private grain companies to compete in the export of wheat . . . or compete with the board, rather, in the 
export of wheat, and this Premier said: 
 

Having competition between the public and private sectors is important. (And he says) Having 
two systems work side by side, you kind of keep each other honest. 
 

Well we’ve seen the two systems work in Canada now for a number of years, and we have seen, ever 
since the grain trade came back into Canada, the private grain trade, we have seen the deterioration of 
the Canadian Wheat Board year after year after year. This last year it was oats; next year I predict that 
it’ll be export barley. And it will go on and on, because you don’t have the two systems working side by 
side when you’re favouring one system. And that’s the problem that we’re having. 
 
This Premier and this Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, the Prime Minister Brian Mulroney 
and the Conservative government in Ottawa, favour that open market, private grain trading system. 



Unfortunately they are opposing 90 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan who, through a poll not too 
long ago, said that they endorsed the Canadian Wheat Board as their marketing tool. But not this 
Premier and not the Prime Minister of Canada. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, let’s just take a look now again at what this man, this Premier of this province, 
thinks of farmers in general. Again, writing in the Business Review of 1977, he’s again talking about 
marketing boards, talking directly to farmers. 
 
And I’m going to repeat this because it’s so very important, because this is the frame of mind that this 
man was in then, and when you see the steps that have taken place in Saskatchewan since he took office, 
you can see that this is exactly the plan he’s carrying out. At one time I wouldn’t give him credit for 
having a plan, but I think he does have a plan in the back of his mind, an evil plan to destroy a number 
of farmers in this province. 
 
And he says again: 
 

Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 per cent of the farmers who tend to 
be good business men as well as producers, society may not wish to support higher food prices or 
producer security so the non-productive 80 per cent of farm population can live in the country at 
a profit. But perhaps all rural people don’t have to be farmers. 
 

And then again in the Leader-Post of January 1978, it says the Premier – I will not use his name – the 
current Premier said: 
 

Farm size has not yet reached its optimum efficiency so there is still room for expansion. 
 

So what he’s saying, that the farms weren’t big enough; that we should eliminate more farmers so that 
we can get larger farms, which is what’s happening, get larger farms so that we can reach the maximum 
efficiency point. Well this from an economist I can understand, because he was sitting then, 1977 at his 
desk writing out, getting paid good money to write out these wild and wonderful . . . creating these wild 
and wonderful programs. but when you relate it to agriculture, when you relate it to the family farm, it 
simply doesn’t make sense. 
 
And for a number of years, for a few years, that’s what all the economists were saying and that was the 
mood in Saskatchewan – buy up as much land as you could get. But they were wrong when they put 
forward that theory. They were wrong because the number of farmers in Saskatchewan has dwindled 
and the debt has increased. Rather than trying to maintain the infrastructure, rather than trying to 
maintain the infrastructure, rather than trying to maintain the family farm unit so that we can keep our 
population up – and that’s the bottom line here, keep the population of Saskatchewan up – he says no, 
that doesn’t work. We’ll let the market prevail and only go with those 20 per cent that are what he says 
are good producers. And he says also that they should . . . The farm sizes weren’t big enough. 
 
And in 1977, Mr. Chairman, he told the Senate committee on agriculture that grain growing . . . I’ll just 
quote from it here. He says: 
 

Grain growing has the advantages of a relatively easy five or six days a week for approximately 
seven months of the year. 
 



Well that was the attitude of the man who’s now the Premier of the province. He says it has its 
advantages because you only have to work five or six days a week for seven months a year and the rest 
of the time is free time. But, Mr. Chairman, that is totally unacceptable. 
 
And he goes on to say: 
 

As long as there is no increase in revenue from hauling grains, the railways are not likely to 
spend money on already-losing propositions and the revenue shortfall to railways can be 
reduced, but not likely removed entirely, through the rationalization of the system. 
 

So again he’s talking about the rationalization in 1977 with the transportation system again. And that’s 
exactly what’s been carried out, because he has the attitude that everything that can be done on paper 
can be done in the farm community. And he calls himself a farmer. Well that is absolutely ludicrous, Mr. 
Chairman. And how far out of touch can you be? And the economists of the world were part of the 
problem that we were in, the debt that we’re in today. 
 
There were several factors and I have identified the four factors. First of all, it’s partially the farmer’s 
fault; he was making the decision. Mind you, he was influenced by a number of other things – the 
banker who was telling him come on in, get some money, and that’s what the bankers were told. They 
were told, put out as much money as you can get because they were looking for bottom line for the 
people who held shares in that bank. And that was fine; that’s legal, that’s the way things operated. So 
the farmers and the bankers and the government was involved as part of the problem; part of the 
problem was the economists, the Premier of this province who once was an economist. 
 
The only problem is that now when it’s come . . . When the chickens come home to roost and the 
problem is so severe that we have to do something about it, we have only three who we can take to task: 
the farmer, the banker, and the government, because economists were left off the hook because there’s 
absolutely no accountability to anybody. And it’s unfortunate, but that’s the truth of the matter, and this 
Premier who claims to be an economist didn’t have to be accountable to anybody. 
 
And I think he’s brought that forward to his premiership of this province, thinking that just because it 
sounds good to him, that he can just put forward his opinion and doesn’t have to be accountable to the 
taxpayers and the people of the province. But he’s wrong, because those people are the people who are 
going to defeat this Premier if he ever gets the courage to call another election. 
 
He goes on to say, and this is in 1977: 
 

To a large extent, the farming sector is unable to adequately adjust to new economic and social 
conditions brought about by reorganization of factors used in production. 
 

So what he is saying is the farmers were too dumb to adjust to the system. It didn’t matter if the 
chemical companies’ prices were exorbitant; it didn’t matter if fertilizer prices were going through the 
roof, or farm machinery or farm parts or fuel. He says farmers couldn’t adjust. 
 
Well as an economist, I can see how he could say that because he’s sitting there behind his desk figuring 
everything out on paper – well it should work. But as a farmer, you can’t do that. And that’s part of the 
reason that he is so far behind the farmers in this province, because he can’t relate to the way he 
operation of the farm is carried on. It’s totally foreign to him, and he says he’s a farmer and he says he 
has a permit book, he brags about having a permit book. 
 



But he’s an economist, a trained professional economist, and that is part of the problem that he has, that 
he can’t relate to the people of this province. It may sound good on paper, and he’s moving towards the 
free market system. Let the chips fall where they may; open everything up; let farmers adjust. Maybe 
there’s too many farmers. Some of them are non-productive. That’s his theory, and that’s what we’ve 
come through in the last number of years in this province. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member : -- Have you got a question? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I will get to the question in a minute, sir, so just be patient. Mr. Speaker, then he goes 
on to make some statements about the transportation system again and the elevator system. In the 
Canadian Journal of Economics, he says: 
 

Centralization of the system would reallocate costs from the elevator and rail to farm storage, 
trucking, and road components. (He concluded) Indications are that a highly centralized system 
would increase the total cost of grain handling and transportation. Branch line abandonment 
results in major cost-sharing alterations. 
 

So he identified in 1978 that transportation alterations would greatly increase, a rationalization of 
transportation system, rather, would greatly increase the costs to farmers. More on-farm storage, more 
trucking of grain, more stress on roads, therefore more money out of the farmers’ pockets. 
 
He concluded that, but he didn’t do anything about it. Now I can see when he’s sitting behind his desk as 
an economist, figuring things out, that he wouldn’t understand why that wouldn’t work. But when he is 
right on something, and if he believed it was right, why wouldn’t he carry through with it? 
 
In the face of the above conclusions, he says, what has his government been doing? What has his 
government been doing? It has been dong the total opposite. He is not protecting. In fact he has made 
statements in the contrary, saying that their rationalization of the system, even though it’ll cost money, 
should go ahead. 
 
And does he stand up and defend an increase in costs to the farmers? Does he defend farmers, rather, 
against an increase in costs? No, he just goes on with the federal government, lets costs increase, and as 
a result, again fulfilling his theory, fulfilling his vision, fewer farmers, free market orientation, 
rationalization of the system, all the advantages of rationalization. That is not what we need, but that’s 
what his philosophy was, that’s what his vision was, and that’s what he’s carrying out in this province. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out a couple of other things. He went on in 1982 . . . I’m talking 
about the gas tax. I’m just trying to paint a little picture, paint a little picture of how this Premier of this 
province operates. He has, as I stated before, the economic training. In 1982, in The Financial Post of 
May 1982, said, and I quote: 
 

When his gasoline tax numbers proved to be wrong, the Tories simply played the incorrect 40 
cent figure even more prominently. 
 

And this is the little strategy that he had worked out. I mean, he had to figure out how he’s going to win 
the province, because he had this economic plan in mind – the theory he had, the vision he had. 
 



And so he even went as far as making false statements to try to win the election. And after the election, 
he got himself into a mess. But he didn’t tell anybody and before 1986 he didn’t say anything about the 
mess that he was in; in fact, he was saying that everything’s okay in Saskatchewan; we’re going to give 
her snoose, Bruce – you remember all those things? 
 
But things weren’t so good after the election. A Leader-Post columnist in 1986 was talking about the 
problems that were happening in Saskatchewan after the 1986 election. And he says: 
 

As the litany of cuts of spending (you’ll remember the great onslaught of spending cuts) unfolds 
each day, the apparent ineptitude of this government becomes undeniable. There comes a time 
when a person’s intelligence is insulted, when believability has evaporated. Surely by now we 
have long since passed that point. 
 

And he goes on. And I will not quote the whole thing but I’ll read the last paragraph: 
 

They (meaning the Tory government) are showing unparalleled contempt for the public and the 
political process. 
 

Slashing and cutting – that was because this Premier had a vision of this province. And he wasn’t 
concerned about what the results were. He didn’t have to tell the truth. He’d led people to believe that he 
was going to be the saviour of the industry. But he has carried out his vision, and that vision is to let the 
market prevail, let the chips fall where they may, let everything go, let rationalize this system all in the 
name of efficiency, let the producers go because there’s only 20 per cent that are efficient and producing 
anyway; the other 80 per cent are going along for the ride. 
 
I’ll give you an example of the double-talk that this Premier has gone on to talk about. In 1986 when the 
Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute in Humboldt was this close to being closed, this Premier, we 
talked and asked questions, and asked him time and time again why he wasn’t standing up for the 
institute, provide funding because it was necessary and it was providing a service for Saskatchewan 
farmers to keep their costs down through the testing that they’ve done. They had thousands of farmers 
going through the institute. It was recognized around the world. We had to put pressure, the people in 
Humboldt had to put pressure on. The institute itself was begging him to keep funding them. 
 
And then, believe this or not, I was up in Humboldt not too long ago, and the Premier seems to be 
spending a bit of time up there talking to the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute at one of the open 
houses they had, and he was going on about the money he was putting into PAMI (Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute) and how great it was, and all the benefits it was going to produce, and how he was 
full support right behind the institute. Well how hypocritical. 
 
And that’s another example of how this man operates. When it’s time to say something he takes full 
credit for it and forgets about the past. Just about takes PAMI, Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, 
out of the scene and then two years later, he’s saying how great it is and how great he is by supporting it. 
Well that just simply doesn’t work, Mr. Chairman. The people of the province being to understand, 
being to understand how this man works. 
 
So he has all his degrees in economics. He sat behind a desk as an economic professor. He’s figured 
everything out on paper. And it sounds great. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, that man does not know 
what it is like to have to make a living farming, and that is the problem that he has. He does not know 
what . . . he’s never known what it’s been like to have to make a living off of the farm. So all he cal 
relate to is his economic theories, and he thinks those theories should work. 



 
But I asked the question to every farmer in Saskatchewan, has it worked? Has the transportation rate 
increases worked? Has it worked to let the market prevail and have his parallel system of marketing our 
grain work? No. Has it worked to try to lure people into thinking that he was the man who was going to 
be the salvation of the industry, and then let his vision envelope the province of Saskatchewan? Has it 
sustained the number of farmers? Has it decreased the debt? Has it provided financial stability? No, 
because this man has never known what it is like to have to make a living off the farm. He can’t relate to 
it, and that’s why farmers in Saskatchewan now have seen through the words that he has spoken. And he 
continues to speak them. He’ll talk about interest rates in 1982, and he’ll talk about the NFU (National 
Farmers Union), and he’ll talk about everything else that he thinks is great stuff for him. But the farmers 
of Saskatchewan know now the ad hoc programming, the failure to provide a restructuring of 
agricultural debt, the failure to provide income stability other than on an ad hoc basis which is politically 
timed, has not led to stability in the agriculture sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re losing more farmers every year. We’re seeing farm machinery dealers going broke. We’re seeing 
rural population, like the rest of the population in this province, declining. And that is from a man, this 
economist, well trained, the academic who has never had to make a living off a farm in his life. That’s 
his vision. He is fulfilling his vision. 
 
But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, along with him fulfilling his vision, we see the carrion that’s sloughed 
off as he ploughs through his vision. We see the farm families destroyed. We see the debt increasing. 
We see the foreclosures, we see the bankruptcies. We see the small business in this province on its 
knees. And why does he continue? Why does he continue? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to just go back to one of the points that I have made, and I want to talk to the 
Premier about transportation. Mr. Premier, I will now ask you a few questions, and you will know that 
the transportation rates have increased as of the new crop year. 
 
Could you explain to me, Mr. Minister, the process that you went through to tell the federal government 
that farmers could not afford an increase in transportation, should not have to pay an increase in 
transportation rates. Can you tell me what representation you made to the federal government, and if you 
have any documents, if you would table them to tell the federal government the farmers in 
Saskatchewan simply at this time, after coming through a drought when their incomes were low, the 
cash flow is almost non-existent, could simply not afford an increase of 24 per cent on the transportation 
rates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The hon. member touched on several issues related to 
farm costs, including freight rates and interest rates and diversification and the Crow and income tax and 
orderly marketing and free trade and rural non-farm people and changes in farm families and 
diversification and the U of S and the College of Agriculture and PAMI, and then come back again to 
freight rates. 
 
I can say to the hon. member that I am very aware of the cost increases facing farmers in western 
Canada and particularly in Saskatchewan. That representation has been made several times to the Prime 
Minister and to the federal cabinet; certainly just recently made to all the ministers of Agriculture and 
the federal Minister of Agriculture in Prince Albert when they were here. We made very strong 
representation in writing and personally, in telephone, and lobbying in Ottawa for the deficiency 
payment and for the drought payment to help farmers reduce the burden of the cost. 
 



And the federal government at that time asked, well what were we doing with respect to helping the 
farmers? And we had put together a package of material for the federal government to look at as a result 
of our concerns about transportation costs and other cost increases that were taking place in agriculture 
across Canada. 
 
And so I provided them with a list, and very, very briefly for the hon. member, the list was $84 million 
in our expenditures on the farm purchase program for farmers; counselling and assistance program for 
farmers, the guarantee is 21.5 million; farmers’ oil royalty rebate, 45.2 million; the livestock investment 
tax credit was 34 million; the agricultural credit capital loans interest subsidy, 16.6 million. 
 
The production loan interest subsidy, and that’s over a billion dollars alone, Mr. Chairman, that we 
advised the federal government was 71.1 million. The livestock cash advance, which is at zero per cent 
interest rates, cash advance out to farmers was $61.7 million. The irrigation assistance and small group 
grants is 14.7 million. The provincial stabilization program, SHARP (Saskatchewan hog assured returns 
program) and beef stabilization, $137.3 million; the livestock facilities tax credit is 8.2 million. 
 
The Saskatchewan water supply programs, 8.5; the green feed program is 10 million. The livestock 
drought program, where we split it 50-50 with the federal government, was 19.5 million; the prairie 
livestock drought assistance was 14.3; the Saskatchewan livestock drought assistance was 15 million; 
the north-east flood compensation program of ’84 was 7 million. 
 
The south-west cattle compensation was 100,000; the lamb assistance program, 200,000; the crop 
drought special assistance program that we initiated was $51.7 million; livestock transportation was 1.1 
million; and the crop insurance administration would be 63.6 million. 
 
Now the hon. member asks what representation we made to the federal government when we were 
asking for help because of drought programs and the drought here and the grasshoppers and the two-
priced wheat and $2 wheat. From ’82 to 1988, Mr. Chairman, we advised the federal government that 
the provincial government in Saskatchewan spent 685.8 million new dollars helping farmers cope with 
difficult times associated with rising costs and problems with production and international subsidies. 
 
Now that runs about $10,490 per farmer. Now that’s almost three-quarters of a billion dollars that the 
provincial treasury has put into agriculture in ad hoc programs since 1982 because of our concerns about 
farmers – my concern about farmers. 
 
All of that information was laid at the feet of the federal government. We said we believe that you have 
to be there in spades to help farmers because they cannot handle sustained drought and the grasshoppers 
and the unfair export subsidies coming out of Europe and the United States, and obviously, Mr. 
Chairman, they responded. 
 
And when they looked at making modifications to the kinds of programs that they have here, they spent 
a great deal of money, and it looks like about a billion dollars on both programs and almost a billion 
dollars in cash coming into the province of Saskatchewan which did not have to be refunded. It was just 
cash that comes in here. 
 
(2100) 
 
Now the hon. member does – and I’m sure he really doesn’t mean to do this, or I’ll just assume it – but 
he doesn’t put very good light on the University of Saskatchewan. He talks about research and academic 
research and people in the universities doing work that is not relevant. Well I can say, as a former 



faculty member at that university, that the University of Saskatchewan is highly respected locally and 
nationally and internationally for the quality of research and the quality of teaching and the extension 
work that it does in the food and agriculture business. 
 
And I don’t believe that the hon. member really meant to do this or to say this, but when he says that it is 
not relevant at the farm, the research and the teaching that is going on in the vocational school, College 
of Agriculture, and the economics department or in the animal science department or the crops and soils 
department, I certainly would have to stick up for the faculty members and the students and the staff at 
the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
They do very relevant work, extremely relevant. And the extension work that goes out, right now as you 
know and the hon. member mentioned it, through to PAMI, through to research organizations, and 
through to farm groups is very, very good. So I would certainly hope that the hon. member would not 
push too hard on the reputation of the University of Saskatchewan. If you look at agriculture graduates 
at the University of Saskatchewan and the kind of work and research that they do across this country and 
indeed internationally, it’s some of the finest that you will find any place. 
 
He went on to say that this teaching about diversification and rural non-farm and integration and all of 
this stuff was not very relevant to the farmer; the farmer wanted to see something completely different. I 
will point out to the hon. member that most Saskatchewan organizations and agricultural organizations 
are quite progressive, quite progressive – with the greatest respect, I would say perhaps even a little bit 
more progressive than the hon. member. 
 
Let’s take one for example, and let’s look at a large co-operative here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And you talk about diversification, you talk about processing and 
manufacturing, integrating the farmer right through to the international markets. And you will find the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool right on the money. 
 
It looked at university research. It looked at the teaching. It looked at the diversification opportunities, 
and it picked up on every single one of them. You look at the fact that they’re not just marketing wheat, 
they’re marketing the product, and they’re marketing the doughnuts, Robin’s Donuts, for example. Now 
that’s integration for the co-op members and the wheat pool members right through to the consumer. 
 
Now that sounds fairly progressive, and it is. And I believe it should be endorsed by all members of this 
legislature and certainly the member from Humboldt, who’s the NDP agricultural critic, because that’s 
precisely what research at the university is telling us we should be doing, linking through to the 
consumers of the world, whether they’re in the United States, or whether they’re in Canada, or whether 
they’re in Japan. 
 
If you look at the vegetable oils, and you look at what we can do rather than just market the raw 
commodity, and we can process it and market it world-wide, and that has a very big bearing on what the 
freight rate should be. And the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is doing lots of research on what freight rate 
differences will do to doughnuts, will do to pasta, will do to flour, will do to vegetable oils. 
 
Let me give you another more recent example, and I think it’s an excellent one. The Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool is looking at being fully integrated from the barley producer right through to the beer 
consumer of Japan. And as you know, there are very . . . I suppose we could say strong speculations 
around that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool will be involve din the privatization of Prairie Malt, which 
means barley producers and employees at Prairie Malt will be integrating together with an American 
firm which will be marketing barley products in the form of malt right through to the final consumer in 



the United States and the Japanese market. Now this is the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool going right back 
to the kind of research, the kind of information, taught at the universities. 
 
And you mention, the hon. member mentions, well this is 1975, 1977, 1978, and people were saying at 
that time it’s going to be extremely dangerous if we keep all our eggs in one basket, if we’re just wheat, 
and just the wheat economy. I can remember watching the former minister of Agriculture, Gordon 
MacMurchy, run around Saskatchewan, and he was a very flamboyant speaker. He says we can afford 
just to be in wheat. We can handle that. We can handle the cyclical nature. 
 
All the research at the time was saying no, you better do what the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is doing. 
You better go back and look at that diversification. You better go back and look at feedlots, balancing it 
with beef and feed grains, processing and manufacturing, adding value so that when you do run into that 
transportation rate you are marketing something that is of high enough value that indeed you can make 
money at it. 
 
An example that I’ve discussed with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the United Grain Growers and 
others links, Mr. Chairman, to the fact that we grow durum wheat in this province. And as we export 
durum wheat it often gets . . . it even goes to Europe and it’ll go into Italy. Italy is well-known as a pasta 
producer, and they’ll produce their durum wheat. When they run out of durum wheat, they can use ours. 
 
And they put our wheat in a bag and they ship it to the Japanese and the Japanese will millet it, and the 
flour from that durum wheat will go to Hong Kong. The Hong Kong people will hire individuals and 
they will make a pasta product or they’ll make noodles, and those noodles are packaged and sent to 
Vancouver and they’re put on a train and they’re brought right back to Saskatoon. Our durum wheat has 
literally gone right around the world and we are consuming it here. 
 
Now you say transportation shouldn’t make a difference. Transportation makes less and less of a 
difference as you have a value added product. If we make noodles here, processing pasta, malt, 
vegetable oils, and market it to the United States and to the Japanese and to the Europeans, we find we 
make more money as opposed to letting them have our raw commodity and bring it all the way back 
around here so we get to consume our own wheat in another form. 
 
The university and the research has been pointing that out for years. That’s the kind of thing that you 
will see Agriculture Canada doing in terms of research. You’ve seen people like Keith Downey trying to 
diversify the economy and what he’s done with canola, with the new kinds of products, and the grading 
system. 
 
I would just say to the hon. member that one of the concerns that has been expressed, that has been 
expressed with respect to the marketing mechanisms in diversification . . . the hon. member asked me 
about marketing boards, and if the hon. members would allow me to just say a couple of things about 
marketing boards, because the hon. member raised it, and my former . . . Mr. Chairman, I’ll just point to 
the hon. member that the trouble we have had in Saskatchewan with respect to marketing boards – the 
hon. member asked – is that they tend to be dominated and run out of Ontario and Quebec. Now we 
don’t get quota. 
 
I’ll give you a couple of examples. When you’re looking at milk production in this country, you have a 
province like Quebec that has a very large per cent of the milk quota, given its population. Ontario has a 
very large milk quota, given its population. Saskatchewan has hardly any quota at all. 
 



We are quite capable of producing more milk and more milk products and into processing. And you talk 
to the dairy people and the co-operators here in the province of Saskatchewan. They want to expand into 
processing and manufacturing. They want to do that diversification that you’re talking about. But do you 
think we can get quotas? The way they’ve designed the system is that Saskatchewan people have not 
been able to get into the feather industry, that is, the chickens and the poultry, and they have not been 
able to get into the milk business. I think it would be only fair if we could have access to that kind of 
quota so that you could see the diversification here in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re certainly 
quite capable of producing and marketing that. 
 
Now as we diversify all of those things, whether it’s through the free market or through marketing 
boards and in the province of Saskatchewan. I will make the observation on the point, 907 per cent of 
what we grow in agriculture is freely traded. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. I would just ask the member from Regina Centre to allow the minister 
to respond to the questions placed by the member from . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll just make the point to the hon. member. Our 
diversification in part is allowed as a result of the fact that 97 per cent of the things that we grow in 
agriculture are freely traded world-wide. The problem we’ve run up against is in central Canada where 
they control those commodities that are under the marketing board system. And they control milk, and 
you know it and I know it. And they control the feather industry, and that’s extremely difficult for us to 
get in. When we have non-control of those, and you go to somebody like the Saskatchewan hog board, 
the marketing commission, they will support freer trade and more trade and more access to markets 
because that’s where we can diversify and we can expand. 
 
So I say to the hon. member, as we change in the food and agricultural business, as we process and 
manufacture more of those goods and services. 
 
The old arguments that we can just be in the wheat business, and therefore the Crow rate is the same as 
it was and the same as it will be in the future takes on a brand-new complexion. And if you go back and 
look what the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is doing today, you look at the kinds of things that other people 
are doing in terms of processing and manufacturing, you will find that as you add more and more value, 
you can compete better in those international markets. 
 
And that’s been the point of universities have been looking at for years, and the processing and the 
manufacturing and that value added is extremely important for us. If we can manufacture the pasta, the 
noodles, the vegetable oils, the meat here, then we will be able to provide a great deal of value back into 
rural Saskatchewan. And it will be rural -- farm and non-farm; and you will find that. 
 
I could speak quite a while on that, and I’ll be glad to because of the nature of rural Saskatchewan and 
people living in towns and villages involved . . . in fact farm families are not unlike urban families. Both 
parents are working; they’re working off farm; they’re working 18 hours a day – some in the potash 
miens, some driving the school bus, some doing some other things – because they have to, to make it 
under these conditions; 1982 prices today at constant prices give them just no income to allow them to 
do that. 
 
So I will say to the hon. member, the concept of processing, manufacturing, and diversification, and its 
linkages to freight rates is very real and it’s alive and we’re watching it in the province of Saskatchewan 
as it unfolds world-wide. Ninety-seven per cent of the things that we produce in agriculture are freely 



traded, and we’re finding more processing and manufacturing. Where we’ve been held up, we say it’s 
been controlled out of Ontario and Quebec and it’s been unfair. 
 
And, in fact, all the ministers of Agriculture have granted even more quarter to the province of British 
Columbia, for example, because of its export market potential for milk, but because it was limited, it 
couldn’t even get into that export market in Japan. 
 
So we would like to see some changes there and I’m sure you would as well. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I anticipated that response and I hope you’ve got it off your chest. I 
know that speech very well. 
 
I want to talk for a minute then just about the litany of programs that you will go through – no, 
undoubtedly you’ll repeat several times during these estimates all the money you say you’ve put out for 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I just think that every farmer out there who hears you say that says, 
but gee, that doesn’t sound like . . . that sounds good, but I just can’t figure out how it’s helped me 
because the debt problem’s still there. 
 
Another comment, well you can try to twist my words as you have tried to twist the other people’s 
words in this legislature before about casting aspersions on the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
It was you I was talking about – your theory, your vision. And that’s where you are coming from and 
that's why it’s not working in Saskatchewan. And as far as the supply and management marketing 
boards go, your solution is to get rid of them. You say, yes, if there’s unfairness in the system, province 
to province. The solution isn’t to get rid of them, Mr. Minister; the solution is to try to improve upon it. 
But through the free trade agreement, you’re trying to eliminate that, get rid of them saying that system 
works better, but it doesn’t. 
 
Back to my question. I asked you what representation you made to the federal government to try to tell 
them that farmers can’t afford an increase in freight rates. Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the rate 
recommended by the NTA (National Transportation Authority) was, and what the rate recommended by 
the WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Authority) was, and what recommendation you gave to the 
federal government as to which rate they selected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we don’t have those with us but we will certainly endeavour to get 
them. They are on file. They might have to come from the Department of Transportation, but we’ll get 
them. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I was just wondering if you knew, because I think that that’s part of 
the problem that you have, and that we have as having you as the Minister of Agriculture, in that you 
don’t know. 
 
A current issue that has just come about, we’ve just gone through it. If you were on top of things, Mr. 
Premier, Mr. Minister, you should know that. So I’ll tell you. 
 
The NTA which is the government’s arm, recommended a rate of $6.97 a tonne which was twenty-two 
and a quarter per cent of the shipping costs. But the federal cabinet chose not to accept that. The NTA 
was basing their formula on about 28 million metric tonnes. The federal cabinet chose to set the rate at 



$9 a tonne. That is $2.21 roughly, higher than what the NTA advised in the set-up. They took the higher 
rate because they said the production was going to be greater than that, about 32 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is a part of the reason why farmers are not making it despite what you’re saying 
you’re doing for them. You take credit for programs coming out of Ottawa saying, you’re right; I got a 
hold of Brian Mulroney and your taking credit for those programs. 
 
But when it comes to sticking up for Saskatchewan farmers on an issue like grain freight rates, the 
average farmer who ships 24,000 bushels of grain is going to pay a thousand dollars more this year – a 
thousand dollars more in hard economic times. On top of that, the rate structure is . . . the formula is 
such that if the production is greater in one year than the formula used, then in the following years it is 
adjusted, and they go up to a cumulative total of about $150 million. And if it’s exceeded, then there is 
an adjustment paid. 
 
But as we know now, the production is going to be down again this year from what it was anticipated a 
month ago because of the heat. You could have made representation to give farmers say to Ottawa, give 
farmers a break, set it at the recommended rate that the NTA set it at. If the production is higher next 
year, then it will be adjusted accordingly. But as we know now the production isn’t going to be higher, 
so farmers are paying more even though they’re not getting that amount of production. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you if you are so much on top of these things, why did you not stand up to the 
federal government? Why did you not show some leadership, come out in the press in Saskatchewan and 
publicly in this legislature and say that I do not agree with the increase in the freight rates because in 
hard economic times farmers cannot afford about a thousand dollar increase for shipping 24,000 bushels 
of grain. Why did you not make that representation loud and clear? Why did you sit on your hands and 
just nod to Brian Mulroney and say, okay Brian; it’s okay, go ahead and do it? Why did you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member and I will agree that we don’t want to see higher 
freight rates. The hon. member said we don’t want to see higher freight rates in difficult economic times. 
Can I then make the assumption that he’d want to see higher freight rates in better economic times? If 
that is not the case then he just doesn’t want to see any changes in freight rates, which is fair enough. 
 
He said their recommendation was six, it ended up at $2.70 higher than that. I’ll point out to the hon. 
member that it hasn’t cost the farmers yet, and he says it’s the cause of the difficulty we’re in to date. 
They haven’t marketed anything to speak of in the last year because there wasn’t any crop, and he 
knows that. There was a drought. The bins are empty and he’s complaining about freight rates. And he 
went on and on about how it’s caused the problem. Well it might cause some problem in the future, but 
they haven’t had anything to market. 
 
They’ve been receiving cheques from the provincial and the federal government that averaged about 
$240,000 a farmer. Deficiency payments and drought payments and cash advances and other things that 
did not have to be paid back, and he’s talking about a thousand dollars on an average production of 
24,000 bushels, and we haven’t produced that on average, and it’s certainly something into the future. 
 
So I know it’s easy for you to stand and say, well, why don’t you complain more about freight rates – 
fair enough. I mean, I said I want lower freight rates. I don’t run the federal cabinet, but that’s fair 
enough. 
 
I also lobbied for a great deal of money to come into Saskatchewan to help farmers, and I was 
successful. Now you and I can agree, it’s not enough. You’re better to get it out of the market. 



 
If you look at 1982 prices for grain, 1981 prices, if you brought them up to today, we’d have to have $7, 
$8 wheat just to break even compared to ’82. We don’t have that. And I’d like to see that. You just take 
1982 equivalents and bring it up today. You have to have very expensive prices to be anywhere close to 
that. We don’t have it, it’s gone. Now when it comes back, we’ll get it out of the market, in the interim, 
they’ve asked us for help and we’ve helped. Clearly, we would like to help more. 
 
You’ve been asking about our deficit. You know, you’ve got to have less of a deficit. Well we’ve gone 
through some times, which probably a lot of people didn’t plan on and frankly didn’t like to much, but 
in those difficult times I recall even Allan Blakeney saying, well, we’d have a deficit too, maybe not 
quite as high as you guys, but we’d have one, and you should protect people during difficult times. Well 
we do, and we have. 
 
So we look at $24,000 in grain sales, 24,000 bushels in grain sales, and you might have your costs run 
up 8, 900 or $1,000. It may be the case. And I’d just make the point. We lobbied for lower freights; we 
lobbied for higher payments to farmers; we’ve lobbied for a great deal more protection. And in some 
cases we were very successful; in some cases we had to experience some increases. 
 
I’ll go back to the process of diversification, manufacturing, and those kinds of things. You will see 
freight rate changes can make a difference there. And we can allow for more prosperity, given any sort 
of reasonable prices. 
 
So yes, we lobbied. We don’t always get the things that we’re after, but in the case of support for 
agriculture producers, it’s been running about 24, $25,000 in cash. So it’s not enough, but it’s an awful 
lot more than they’d ever received in the past, and probably compares favourably to any jurisdiction you 
find, at least in North America, and probably Europe. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I know why people in rural Saskatchewan are saying they can’t 
believe what you say any more, the way you try to twist around what people say. It’s amusing, but it’s 
sad. 
 
Mr. Minister, that increase in freight costs are calculated out to be in the area of 65 to $70 million out of 
the province of Saskatchewan – or not out of the province of Saskatchewan, I’m sorry – in western 
Canada on grains through the wheat board. That is a significant portion on one item. 
 
And you talk about the money that’s come out of the federal government which you say that you’re in 
touch, and you take claim to. But on that one item, you’re taking out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 
about $70 million, and that’s on one item. Not to mention the increase in interests rate and the new 
scheme of cash advances and all the other increases through the federal budget. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that you are not, although you say you are, you are not standing up for the 
people of Saskatchewan, making representation, showing leadership to the Government of Canada by 
saying that these increases should not go ahead. You’re not telling the province of Saskatchewan. And 
what I said was that these increases will be on top of a heavy debt load – not the cause of the heavy debt 
load, but on top of the heavy debt load – that farmers are facing. But you stand idly by and do not make 
representation. 
 
You think that it’s okay for the farmers to have this added 24 per cent added cost onto the transportation, 
and you will again probably get up and talk about all the money that’s come out of the federal 
government. 



 
But what’s happening is it’s coming out of one . . . or the farmers are becoming a turnstile where the 
money comes in one hand and goes out the other, back to the federal government. And that has been the 
case in many, many instances. And the farmers of Saskatchewan are saying, well gee whiz, I’m not 
benefitting from this because it’s simply money going through my hands, and my bottom line is still way 
down there and it’s not coming up. 
 
And you say you’re making representation, have made representation. Well I don’t believe you. I don’t 
believe you for a minute, because if you were standing up on behalf of the Saskatchewan farmers, you 
would have made it loud and clear that the freight rate increase should have been put at the lowest 
possible level. I did not agree with the way the formula is made, because I think it’s unfair because 
you’re basing it on a prediction of what the production will be. But even at that, over a period of years it 
can be adjusted. But at a time when things are down, you are not standing up for Saskatchewan farmers. 
And that’s the point I’m trying to make. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not think . . . if you’re so sure about the representation you made, will you now 
contact the Prime Minister and say, look, this is unfair? Will you write him a letter and say, this is 
unfair, we should not have these increases, and make it public so everybody in Saskatchewan knows that 
what you say here tonight will be on the public record, that the freight rate increases should not have 
gone ahead, and if they had to go ahead under the formula, that the lower price should have been take of 
$6.79 and not $9, $2.21 difference? Will you do that right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Maybe I could ask the hon. member if you’re saying that you agree with the $6 
increase. If you agreed with the $6 increase, I just want to put it on the record that you said six was fine, 
and you didn’t want to go up $2-and-something above that. Well you just said the $6 increase was fine; 
so let’s just make that everybody knows that the NDP agricultural critic from Humboldt says the $6 
increase was okay. In difficult economic times, $6 increase was fine. 
 
Let me just throw an observation out to the hon. member, and I’ll go back to this processing and 
manufacturing. What happens to the freight rate on that 24,000 bushels of grain if it is marketed as malt, 
or if it’s marketed as doughnuts, or if it’s marketed through meat, or marketed through noodles or bread 
or flour? See where the wheat pool is coming from? The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and others are 
saying, do you know where we’re really going to make our money? We’re going to make our money in 
making a fine, higher-valued commodity out of the wheat. Your arguments go back, not to be unkind, 
but they go back 50 years. You’re way back there saying, we are in a horse-and-buggy era where we’ve 
got to have wheat, and we’ve got to be able to have this low rate, and it’s only wheat and that’s all we’ve 
got and we’re locked in, and there’s no other opportunities for us. 
 
Everybody else, from the university to the farmers to the young aggressive people that are going across 
the country and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and UGG (United Grain Growers) and Pioneer and the 
stockgrowers and the hog people and others, are saying, look, that was fine for the 1920s, ‘30s, ‘40s. 
This is the 1990s and the 21st century. We are going to be making things where the transportation cost is 
relatively less important. 
 
If we can have durum wheat go out of this province and end up in Italy and then come all the way back 
here in the form of noodles, and we’re eating our own, transportation isn’t the problem. That’s what 
they’re telling you and telling me and telling others. We should be making that product here and 
exporting it, because all of a sudden they’ve realized, we don’t have to listen to that bogyman of years 
and years ago, that we are confined here; we’re some little place in the middle of the great Northwest 
Territories that doesn’t have access to telephones, communication, transportation. 



 
We are in the middle of a very exciting continent at a very exciting time. If we can make paper here and 
process it and send it all over the world, we don’t have to ship our fence posts out and our logs out. We 
can make our own product here. We don't have to ship raw oil out. We’ll make our own gasoline and 
diesel fuel here. We don’t have to ship out natural gas and somebody else can make the fertilizer. We 
can make it here. 
 
Now that’s a different philosophy. That’s processing and manufacturing and the kinds of things that we 
should have been doing a long time ago. And frankly we are behind in that. That’s one of the reasons 
that I was interested in politics to start with, was so that we could start processing, manufacturing, 
making other things so that we didn’t just have to sit waiting for the price of wheat to go down or 
somebody to change the freight rates on us. 
 
We should be broadening our horizons. And other people in this country agree with that, and other 
people in this province agree with it. I mean your whole argument tonight has been, what happens if 
Ottawa or somebody raises the rates? That’s so far behind. Well, I’ve said enough. 
 
Look, I’ll just say this. We are going to be processing things where that rate won’t make a significant 
difference. You said $6 increase is fine; I don’t even like that. What I do like to see is some new 
alternatives come in here so that we can get on with processing, manufacturing, and doing some things 
in rural Saskatchewan for rural farm and rural non-farm. 
 
If you take Prairie Malt, it’s people working in food and agriculture, living in rural Saskatchewan. 
There’s farm boys and girls working in that place diversifying the economy so we’re not just stuck on 
freight rates on malting barley leaving the country. We can manufacture and make things of more value. 
 
Now that’s a significant difference between what I’ve heard you say for quite a few years in here and 
what we are trying to do working with others in a global economy that says, you better be doing that or 
you’re going to be in some trouble. 
 
I listened with a great deal of interest to the new chancellor at the University of Saskatchewan, former 
president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, spoke just the other day. When we opened up the Canada 
Games, we also had the recognition for the people in agriculture. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Ted Turner says this is a global village. We have to deal with that global village and we have to 
look at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and we have to look at food and we have to look at 
agriculture – and I’m just paraphrasing what he said – and we have to be open because the world is 
changing and we have to recognize that we have to change with it. 
 
I know you campaigned against free trade, and we won’t get into it. Free trade is here; it’s here, and it’s 
going on. It’s over. I mean it’s here and we have to deal with it. And it will be in malt and it will be in 
cookies and manufacturing and in meat and in salads and in potato salads and other things that we’re 
building at Delisle. We don’t have to just depend on raw production, and frankly, we shouldn’t. We 
should look at processing and manufacturing and look at that world consumer. That’s where the value 
will be and that’s how you will protect the farmers in the future, not just talking about a rate that was 
started 50 or 60 years ago under different technology and different times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve had seven years now to do what you say you’re doing. And 
the problem is, Mr. Minister, the problem is that you’re taking a leap in time. I mean, we have always in 
this province been developing along the ways of increasing our production and diversifying our 
production. And you said that you picked up that ball in 1982, and that’s what you are doing. And the 
question I ask is: how have things been going, Mr. Premier? How are things going in the province? 
Under your plan, how are the foreclosures? Are they going down? How’s the population? Is it going up? 
How’s the unemployment figures? Are they going down? How are the social welfare figures? Are they 
going down? 
 
Mr. Minister, just tell me about those things. How is your plan working so far? Give me the numbers on 
the unemployment if this plan of yours is working like you say it was. And what you say is fine, but let’s 
just see how your actions are. give me the numbers on unemployment and give me the numbers on 
welfare. Give me the numbers on people leaving the province. Give me the numbers of people who are 
just totally out of the picture when it comes to agriculture because their debts are so high that they’re 
having problems to maintain themselves. 
 
Would you give me some of those figures, Mr. Minister, just to show us how well this plan of yours is 
working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, what the hon. member is saying – if I can use an analogy – is 
that people have used fertilizer this year; because it didn’t rain, the fertilizer didn’t work as well, 
therefore you shouldn’t use fertilizer. 
 
We’ve got a drought in the province of Saskatchewan, a good part of the country, and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member : -- Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I’m answering the question. You’re saying, well we’ve had $2 wheat, we’ve had 
sustained drought, we’ve had difficult economic conditions. Mr. Minister, that’s your fault because of 
your academic training, and the university’s idea you should process and manufacture because the wheat 
pool is doing it and United Grain Growers are doing it and others. It’s your fault that there’s been no 
income in agriculture. Now if you think that you’re going to . . . You know, I mean, I suppose some of 
your supporters might believe that, but any reasonable thinking man and woman, rural or urban, 
wouldn’t believe that. 
 
We have put in rural gas for farmers. It helps cut their costs significantly. Now does that help or not? It 
helps. You say, well why are they leaving the farm? Well if there’s no income and there’s no crop year 
after year, it doesn’t mean we shouldn’t put in rural gas, it doesn’t mean we shouldn’t irrigate. 
 
You talk about helping farmers. I mean, I am very much in favour of water projects and you’re against 
water projects. You’re against the Rafferty project – saving water so people can use it in this province 
because we’ve got drought. All across the nation people are watching us on this water project. I mean 
that’s a good thing to do. 
 
And you’re saying, well, you know, how’s it going, Mr. Premier? Well frankly, I’d like to see that 
project finished and I’d like to see the water saved. I’d like to see more irrigation, people here want to 
see drought proofing. 
 



Pretty difficult to blame this administration for not building an infrastructure with individual line 
service, rural gas, doing water projects, a brand-new university agriculture building running $90-some 
million, an extension in education, new rural farm service centres. 
 
For what? You’re saying, oh, it doesn’t matter, education doesn’t matter, technology doesn’t matter, it’s 
all your fault because they have no income because it didn’t rain. I mean, you know, you can try that and 
you can spend the next two or three days, the next two or three years saying that and I suppose you will. 
 
But I think the ordinary, common-thinking person says, I like the natural gas; I like your safety net 
programs; I like the new crop insurance; I like to see the diversification because we’re making potato 
salad and we’re making malt and we’re doing these things, because my children are working off the 
farm as well as on the farm, and they are. And young people are doing that and they certainly are 
prepared to work. They’re working 18 hours a day to save the farm, and with our help. And we’ll have 
mortgage back guarantees and we’ll have other things that we’ll help them do as well. 
 
So you ask me how it’s going. I’ll say to the hon. member, it’s been difficult. It’s been difficult. But I 
believe if this province was better prepared in it, and we’ve worked hard on it since ’82, but if it had 
been better prepared earlier than that, and if there’d been some protection against 20 or 22 per cent 
interest rates, it wouldn’t be nearly as difficult because you would have irrigation, you would have had 
gas a long time ago, you would have had better extension services, you would have had the kind of 
technology and the kind of processing, manufacturing, diversification that they’ve asked for for years. 
People in this province everywhere you go would say, you bet, we’ve got to get all our eggs out of one 
basket, we’ve got to just do more than wheat. Well we’re going to do more than wheat. 
 
So I feel for rural families and farm families who have lost their income. When net farm income goes to 
zero from the market, boy that’s difficult. And you say what are the welfare roles? What’s the level of 
income in the province of Saskatchewan? That happens, it’s very low. We won’t even keep up with 
Newfoundland. If you have net farm income going to zero, it’s difficult. 
 
Now you need some help. We’re going to be there to help them. But nobody, nobody likes to see that. I 
mean you might revel in the joys of it politically. You say well, Mr. Premier, you did all that; how’s it 
going? It’s not even fair to try to do that. I mean you can . . . fair enough, you can do it. 
 
I will say to the hon. member, you do your best given the conditions that you face, and if you want to 
help farmers, then we’ve got to come up with the programs to do them. And you and I have talked about 
them. The Leader of the Opposition and I have talked about programs to help farmers, designed a lot of 
them, frankly, almost together, in talking about them and visiting with rural groups and farm groups. 
And that’s the way it should be. 
 
So I’m not going to take responsibility for the drought, though. And I’m not for $2 wheat and the price 
of wheat today compared to what it was in ’82 – it’s out of my hands. And you know that as well as 
everybody else. 
 
But we can make a difference if you start making something with those commodities. And everybody I 
talk to now across this province and indeed across the globe, not only in this country, they’re saying the 
very same thing. So I think there’s more people on my side in terms of the answer, that is, doing things 
for we are creating value, than on your side saying, no let’s just do it exactly the same way we always 
did it and just beat on somebody in Ottawa on the basis of, well, the freight rates are the entire problem. 
 



It’s changed. My friend, the world has changed out there, and I think the faster we both fact that, the 
better off the entire agricultural community will be, not only in this province, but indeed in the country. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you were the one saying that you had this master plan. You’ve had seven 
years to implement it. You were the one saying that your diversification and the transportation rate 
didn’t matter because you were going to get things going in Saskatchewan. The problem is that it’s not 
working. What you say sounds okay, and I’ve said that from day one, whenever I sit down and listen to 
you. But you can’t believe it, that’s the problem. And the people in Saskatchewan don’t believe you. 
You’ve had seven years and what’s the result been? Record numbers of foreclosures, record numbers of 
bankruptcies. And your plan is making things worse if anything. 
 
An Hon. Member : -- How? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Because you’re not doing what you say you’re doing. You’re saying that your economic 
plan is so great. We see 40,000 people on social services, over 30,000 people on unemployment, people 
leaving the province. In 1988, 13,500 people left this province; and up until the end of July this year, 
14,639 people left this province because they don’t believe a word that you say – they don’t believe a 
word that you say – because they know it’s not working for them. 
 
The farmers of this province who are facing notices of foreclosure or seizure on equipment, they know 
it’s not working for them. And you can stand up there and make your fine little speeches, your “Johnny 
Hayseed” speech, how things are going to work. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan are saying that they don’t believe you any longer. You’ve 
had more than enough time to put your program in place. You’ve had more than enough time to create 
an economic atmosphere in this province. The debt’s gone up, the taxes have gone up, people are 
leaving, foreclosures have gone up, and unemployment and social services have gone up. What you’re 
doing, you’re selling and you’re taxing. The people of Saskatchewan can’t stand it any longer and they 
don’t believe you. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, grain transportation rates are only one small issue. And you can say that’s all I’ve 
talked about, but that’s one issue of many that I’ll be raising these estimates. One small issue that’s cost 
the people of Saskatchewan a lot of money that I’ll be raising these estimates. One small issue that’s 
cost the people of Saskatchewan a lot of money. You say that doesn’t matter because you’re going to 
diversify. Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve had ample time to diversify. 
 
The point that I am making, until such time as your economic plan starts to work, then let’s stand up for 
the people of Saskatchewan and tell Brian Mulroney, no, this should not go ahead. Until that time as 
your plan is working, where is your leadership? Why don’t you stand up to the Government of Canada? 
And I say that you don’t do that because you are simply not either capable of doing it or it’s not in your 
vision to maintain rural life in Saskatchewan as we know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to get into a discussion of these 
Department of Agriculture estimates obviously, and I’m prompted to get in at this point by the exchange 
between the Minister of Agriculture and the critic on the question of diversification, rural diversification 
and transportation rates. 
 



I think the Premier will agree with me that this has been a long battle in the western Canadian basin, in 
fact, the prairie basin in North America, the battle of diversifying, getting value added production, 
whether it’s in agricultural spheres or whether it’s in non-agricultural spheres. There are a number of 
hurdles which this province and this region face. The hurdles, of course, relate all the way from weather 
to population to political clout or the lack of it at a national level; also relate to the question of 
transportation, one of the things which is the most immediate subject of the exchange between my 
colleague and the minister involved. 
 
I think everybody would agree with the Premier that the objective of diversifying in agriculture is one to 
which all provincial governments aspire and to the extent that the transportation policy of Canada is 
important, the subject matter of this particular aspect of the estimates, we need to consider and address 
that issue. 
 
I think the problem is, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, as far as I can see, is that there is now firmly 
entrenched in Ottawa and in Regina a philosophy with respect to transportation and agricultural 
development which is rooted in the basic concept that transportation is not a tool of regional economic 
development, that transportation is essentially a function of corporate economic efficiency. 
 
The National Transportation Act and its amendment several years back embodies statutorily the 
principle that competition in the case of transportation shall be the guiding factor. We know that in that 
circumstance out here, where the only effective mode of development which respect to transportation is 
rail, spells curtains for western Canada because there is no alternative effective mode of transportation to 
be competitive and to thereby drive down the rates, or if you will, to be a tool . . . using transportation as 
a tool for economic diversification. And what the Premier espouses, of course, is the goal, but the 
methodology which he advances and supports, like his counterpart, the Prime Minister in Ontario, is a 
methodology which is doomed to failure. It’s not worked, not because it hasn’t rained. Nobody blames 
the Premier for the fact that it hasn’t rained. No one blames the Premier for some of the drought and 
other conditions beyond him. I don’t blame the Premier on that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Chairman, to the Premier as well, I don’t accept that argument as an excuse as to 
why the diversification hasn’t worked. It’s much more complex than that, not the least of which is the 
transportation policy because the transportation policy is firmly rooted in that which I have said. Unless 
and until the governments of Canada, starting with Ottawa and here in Regina, view transportation in 
agriculture and value added processing as an economic development tool, an economic and social 
policy, and accordingly instruct the railways to act in that context, we will virtually never, ever get the 
goal to which the Premier aspires and to which many on this side aspire. 
 
(2145) 
 
You won’t do it. And believe me, I’ve been minister of Transportation provincially for years. We went 
with Jean Marchand, we met with Conservative ministers, provincially and federally, and the issue was 
and is – this is not something futuristic, as you would portray – it is the very history of Canada, from the 
Crow rate to the 1989 period, to the year 2000, and will be so long as we follow this Premier’s 
philosophy, which is that the market-place and competition in transportation is the rule by which we in 
the western region have to play in order to try to get diversification of agricultural produce here. That’s a 
pipe-dream. It’ll never come. 
 
The distance and the lack of competition will doom that objective. There may be some exceptions here 
and there to which we all say hallelujah and God bless. But over all it is doomed, and the double tragedy 
is that in mouthing that objective – and standing by idly while the railways fix the prices and the policy 



in which branch lines live and die, and what the rates are – in mouthing that policy, the tragedy is, in 
addition to all of that, that the farmers who are facing economic difficulty at the current time – that’s 
what my colleague is speaking to – have additional input costs and additional barriers. So you lose 
twice. You don’t get diversification and you don’t save the basic farm network, the basic wheat network, 
the basic cereal crops network upon which the transportation policy of all these years has been based. 
 
And I’d like to say, Mr. Chairman, if I may, with respect to the minister opposite, that we ought not to 
be so worried about being a country determined to use transportation as a goal of social and economic 
policy, something other than pure competitive objectives. We ought not to be worried about that. There 
are countries all over the world that are wheat-producing countries where their producers are subsidized 
and supported as a matter of economic and social policy by their transportation systems to do two 
things: not only to support the person at the farm gate just in the produce; but also in the objective of 
getting the diversification, of which the Premier and of which this side speaks of. 
 
It is the abandonment of the Premier’s belief that anything can be done by way of government 
leadership in this area, federally and provincially, which ash put the province in the pickle that we are, 
and why the goal is going to be unattainable, notwithstanding his best efforts and his worthwhile 
objectives that he might have. And I say this to the Premier with the greatest of respect: this issue and 
this fundamental philosophical approach is not new, not new. His approach has been tried before him by 
others when that transportation Act was amended, and failed, and failed in non-drought areas. This 
approach, which is a repeat of this of 20 years ago or so, a return back to the future, will fail. It will fail. 
It will fail because the other circumstances are against this part of the world. 
 
Unless and until Canadians and people in Regina and elsewhere have the vision to use transportation in 
concert with an economic national development strategy as a tool for economic development, the two-
pronged, double whammy for rural Saskatchewan is going to take place. Neither will we diversify nor 
will we save the farmers at the farm gate . . . I won’t say not save; neither will we help them in their 
ongoing struggles, whether it happens to be drought or whether it happens to be the debt load structure 
or any of the other issues which we are talking about here. 
 
The second point that I wish to make, Mr. Chairman, which I must practically confess was the main 
purpose of why I wanted to rise and participate for a few minutes in this debate today, I got into the 
transportation thing because I was fascinated by the exchange between my colleague and the minister 
and the differences. It’s a question of whose vision is futuristic and whose vision is a reply of the old 
movies. You have my view in this regard. 
 
But the other issue that I wanted to address, to which the Premier and the minister may wish to make 
some comment as well – undoubtedly he will on some of the things that I say in any event – is my 
amazement at what I see as the capitulation of the provincial government to the enactment of the federal 
budget and federal programs in agriculture this current year, which in effect amount to a major reduction 
in government assistance – up to $500 million – and undoubtedly higher costs for the farmers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The news stories in this regard, Mr. Chairman, have been well described and well reported in a variety 
of journals. I don’t wish to go into details of them. Barry Wilson of The Western Producer writes, 
“budget harsh on agriculture.” Jim Knisley of the Leader-Post – Knisley, I’m sorry – says, “fuel tax 
program cuts will boost farmers bills.” Heather MacDonald of the Star-Phoenix writes, “It’s been a bad 
week for farmers.” The clippings are legion in this regard. There are a number that have written, as I 
say, in the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix and in The Western Producer indicating that this is indeed 
a harsh budget. 



 
About $500 million over two years has been slashed during this particular period. And some of the items 
which have been slashed have been well documented. The federal excise tax rebate on farm fuel is going 
to disappear on or about January 1 of 1990, less than five months away, Mr. Chairman. This rebate is 
worth about 5 cents a litre on gas and 4 cents on diesel, if I have my numbers and figures correctly. 
 
Meanwhile as of the reading of the budget, farmers and other Canadians will be hit and got hit with an 
additional 1 cent per litre on fuel excise tax. And on January 1, 1990, a further 1 cent will be added to 
leaded fuels. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool cites or estimates the combination of these two programs, 
federal and provincial, could cost an average farmer in excess of a hundred dollars a year . . . sorry, $600 
a year. And that’s serious. That’s one example. 
 
Another example is with respect to transportation. The federal branch line rehabilitation program has 
been ended a year early, Mr. Chairman. Approximately $52 million is not going to be spent. I don’t 
know the exact percentage in this province, but it’s going to be a large percentage here, that’s for sure. 
 
Today in question period we discussed the cash advances, Mr. Chairman. Cash advances in that federal 
budget by the federal government to grain producers and repaid when the crop is sold will no longer be 
interest free. The rate of interest was not announced, and according to today’s question period, the 
officials say they don’t know the rate yet. Here it is September 1 almost, around the corner, rate of 
interest not announced. But if it’s at the market rate, it could cost those farmers who apply for a cash 
advance of up to a thousand dollars a year in interest payments. That is, if they will be able to get a cash 
advance this fall. 
 
And I again repeat, without going into the details, the story written by Laura Rans and Adrain Ewens of 
The Western Producer again, saying, “No cash advances till fall, government hopes to have legislation 
changed by October”. That’s why I say, if it comes through by this fall, or at least this year. That’s a 
third area. 
 
The Farm Credit Corporation two-year, commodity-based loan program, which adjusted interest rates to 
allow commodity prices, was also ended in this Wilson-Mulroney last federal budget – one of the few 
remaining programs offered by the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) that was designed to help farmers in 
financial difficulty. 
 
And in addition to that, we have been receiving, as my colleague has pointed out – we’ve debated this a 
little bit; I don’t intend to pursue it other than to re-emphasize the point – the change in the grain freight 
rates and the substantial hike there. If my figures are accurate, as of August 1, ’89, freight rate charges to 
ship grain went up approximately 24 per cent. In the last two crop years, Ottawa had put in place a 
special freight rate subsidies. Now after the election, of course, that subsidy is gone. For a producer, say, 
who might ship 500 tonnes or more, paying the increase will cost upwards of $800 annually; the figure 
used by my colleague is in the amount of $1,000. That’s some more bad news on this issue. 
 
And what is puzzling and troublesome, Mr. Chairman, the point that I wish to make about the federal 
budget with respect to the provincial estimates we’re talking about here, is the Premier’s response to all 
of this. The Premier’s response to all of this was not, well I fought against it and I tried my best and I 
lost; you win some and you lose some, as he said a few moments ago to my colleague on his issues. His 
response wasn’t, I object to what they’re doing. His response wasn’t, I’m going to come back next year 
to see if I can get a budgetary change to introduce the programs, given the gravity of the crisis out here. 
 



His response, in fact, is one which I find absolutely puzzling and, I might say, I think most farmers do, 
too. The Western Producer of May 4, 1989, Deborah Sproat reports in the first paragraph, quote: 
 

Premier Grant Devine says the province of Saskatchewan was “treated as reasonably as anybody 
in the federal budget.” 
 

I think the headline of the story was, “Devine takes budget in stride.” Now this is a body blow to rural 
Canada and to rural Saskatchewan people. Our Minister of Agriculture says that we’ve got treated as 
reasonably as anybody else. 
 
Then on April 29, 1989, the Premier is out in Vancouver on a mission on behalf of the government. The 
Canadian Press story says there, quote: 
 

Farmers have to do their part to help bring down the federal deficit, Grant Devine says. In the 
last few years the farmers received a good, healthy share of the taxpayers’ dollar, Devine said in 
interview. If the farmer has to contribute now, then I would think they would believe that is only 
fair. 
 

How those words, I think, resonate with the power of abandonment of rural Saskatchewan and the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t mean to be throwing names at the Premier, but his 
silence is deafening. The silence, the failure to object to Mr. Mulroney is deafening. 
 
And I think that the . . . I can’t put it any more graphically then the Star-Phoenix editorial of April 29, 
1989, and I’m reading now from the editorial, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Devine’s endorsement of budget worrisome. (And the budget says, according to this particular 
article) It’s a budget which requires objection on behalf of not only rural Saskatchewan . . . (but 
we’re talking about Agriculture estimates, so I mean rural Saskatchewan here.) 
 

And the last paragraph, I think, is very, very important. It says, quote, in this editorial: 
 

Devine says Saskatchewan people will tighten their belts and says, boy, I hoe Wilson knows 
what he’s doing. The fact is they’re more likely saying exactly that about their docile Premier. 
 

Now I don’t know exactly what it is that justifies a defence of those kinds of changes, all the way from 
the rebates to the increases in the taxation with respect to gasoline, to the FCC changes, to the freight 
rate hike changes, to the cash advances, interest-free changes, to the $500 million changes from the 
federal government. I think it’s the duty of a Minister of Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, 
not to be out there alibiing or apologizing or soft soaping the federal government’s obviously extremely 
damaging blows to the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, his job is not to be singing the 
Hallelujah Chorus, his job is to be saying, I may be a PCer, but this is a serious body blow to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, and I’m going to object. And the Premier has not objected. 
 
I say with the greatest of respect, Mr. Minister, you have been in great dereliction of your duty with 
respect to the federal budget, great dereliction of your federal duty and your provincial duty to the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, the farmers of Canada. Not only in dereliction because it’s an 
isolated budgetary matter. It’s more than an isolated budget. These programs, whether they are in freight 
rates or whether they are in cash advances or whether they are in other areas – we’ll be exploring later 
with the minister, the recently concluded ministers’ of agriculture conference in Prince Albert where the 
crop insurance rates are going to be going up for the producers. All of this and the net result says that 



farmers are going to be added on with added on burdens because in the words of our minister, they’ve 
got to pay their fair share to get rid of the provincial and federal debts. Well that may be so at some 
point, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, it sure isn’t so at this point. 
 
Everybody knows that that’s the case. And I say that that is . . . the Star-Phoenix says worrisome. I say 
that’s unacceptable. I say that is a situation where the minister has either been two swamped with other 
problems in his cabinet and his government, not enough to pay attention to the agricultural portfolio. 
And goodness knows, the Minister of Agriculture has had problems in his capacity as Premier, whether 
it ranges from GigaText to provincial auditor to SaskEnergy to privatization. 
 
I don’t mean to say this, I don’t mean to provoke the minister to say what has GigaText got to do with it, 
other than to say that as . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I don’t. Other than to say that as Premier he 
is . . . Well because as Premier his responsibilities are for all of the departments, all of them, and this is a 
department which requires full-time attention, full-time attention given a crisis. And you can’t say I’m 
giving full-time attention to agriculture because the natural logical conclusion of that is, the natural 
conclusion to that is that I’m not giving full-time attention to the Premier’s job. It’s one of the two. And 
even when he gets his cowboy boots on, he still isn’t paying full attention to the Minister of Agriculture. 
You’re right, member from Morse. 
 
(2200) 
 
Now look, Mr. Chairman, I’m making, I believe, a very serious point that there is another dimension to 
agricultural policy here, and that is the extent to which a minister can shape and influence through 
objection where necessary, through articulation where appropriate, through negotiation where necessary, 
through compromise where necessary, those policies federally which at the end of the day help the 
farmers at the farm gate. 
 
I say that the Premier of this province has played the role of silent Sam. This has been as a result of a 
very bad federal budget and one that I think deserves some condemnation by the members of this 
committee when we deal under clause 1 with this minister’s spending expenditures. 
 
I guess my question, although I don’t need to make a question, I realize, in Committee of the Whole, but 
I will in order to get the Premier started in his response, is why in the world does, and how does he 
explain this absolute total silence and abdication of responsibility on behalf of the farming community 
and the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I will briefly respond. I think if you go back and look at the main 
part of the argument from the NDP leader across the legislature, he said that you should be able to, as a 
Minister of Agriculture here and certainly as a Premier here, have some clout when it comes to dealing 
with the federal government. You can bargain some, you can deal with them, you can do something to 
make sure that things could be better for the farmers and whether it’s in taxation or rates or other things. 
 
I point out that I absolutely agree with that statement. I think that he’s right on the money. But what 
we’re debating here and what we’re going to argue about here is, who has been most successful in 
bargaining with the federal government? Let’s take during the time that he was the minister, deputy 
premier, minister of transport, and the had ministers of Agriculture, and during the time that I’ve been 
the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier in Saskatchewan. We can look in the 1970s. There was 
drought. We looked at very, very high interest rates, we looked at cows running at 18 cents a pound, we 



looked at some really difficult times, farmers leaving Saskatchewan, the population going down. And 
that happens, the hon. member knows, and I’m not blaming him for the price of cows, or the price of 
wheat, or indeed the price of interest rates. But it was extremely difficult. 
 
Now he stands in his place and he said, you know, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, you should 
be able to do something about these things. And you’d kind of have to imagine that, if that’s the case, 
then maybe that he was pretty successful in getting the federal government – whatever the stripe, 
whether it was Liberal or Tory – in Ottawa to respond to his concerns. 
 
Now I don’t remember, when we had very dry periods, when we received half a billion dollars or a 
billion dollars in drought payments as a result of lobbying from the minister of Agriculture in 
Saskatchewan or the deputy premier was down there. I don’t remember getting any sort of help and 
protection when interest rates were 22 per cent. Obviously I’ve heard a lot of people in rural 
Saskatchewan, farmers. I don’t remember that. Where the hon. member must have been down there and 
he must have been pounding it on. And do you know what? We didn’t get a dime on deficiency 
payments when the price of wheat was low, we didn’t get a dime in the livestock industry when prices 
were low, we didn’t get any protection against interest rates when they were 22 per cent from either the 
provincial or federal government. 
 
Now it’s fine to say, well, Mr. Premier, you’ve been down there and you’ve got this friend, the Prime 
Minister, but you didn’t get it all. And I agree with him – sometimes you win these arguments, 
sometimes you don't. But I will say under conditions of low prices and high interest rates and very 
difficult times with respect to export subsidies from other countries, we were able to get literally billions 
of dollars of assistance. 
 
Now he asked me, he says, well aren’t you upset because they’ve changed the freight rates or they’ve 
changed something on the cash advance. I look at the cash that has come into the province of 
Saskatchewan from the federal government, in co-operation with ourselves, and it will run not a hundred 
dollars or not a thousand dollars or not even tens of thousands; it’s multiples of tens. 
 
Now he could say, well it’s pretty upsetting that you’ve got this change in the freight rate, and I’ll touch 
on that when he comes back and he says he has a plan for diversification if we would just put it into . . . 
as a policy for regional development and diversification. 
 
But when you go back and look at the cash that has gone into farmers’ hands, and he says, well it might 
cost a hundred dollars a year for this, or $600, or even the hon. member from Humboldt said it’s $600. It 
doesn’t even begin to touch the cash, not things that you have to pay back, but the cash that’s gone into 
farmers’ pockets as a result of some pretty sincere lobbying that we’ve done with the national treasury. 
 
They say we should protect these people, we should take on the battles internationally in agriculture. 
Let’s put agriculture right on the table when we go to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. It’s 
always been under the table; let’s put it on top. 
 
Well I will say he may not think it’s a good idea that somebody with my training or somebody born on a 
farm in agriculture who happens to be Premier should be the Minister of Agriculture. I will say, every 
time that I meet with first ministers, every time I meet with the Prime Minister, I am speaking for 
farmers of Saskatchewan because I am the Minister of Agriculture. And for a province of Saskatchewan 
that has almost half the farm land in this country, where our dominant industry is food and agriculture, I 
believe it is only appropriate that the Premier can speak for the Minister of Agriculture and be the 



Minister of Agriculture, to get the billions and billions of dollars and changes nationally and 
internationally that we’ve seen in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And I honestly believe, to the hon. member, if you were my colleague sitting 
beside me, you would echo that because, in the history of Saskatchewan, we haven’t seen that kind of 
response coming out of the federal government when we’ve had really difficult times. And you 
experienced them, and I grant you that you did. You lost population, and it wasn’t easy, and rural 
people’s incomes went down dramatically, and they faced 22 per cent interest rates – not your fault, but 
they did. But you couldn’t get any help out of the feds, and you didn’t get the kind of support that we’ve 
been able to get because we’ve lobbied very, very hard. 
 
Now when it comes to transportation, I’d be very interested in hearing you . . . And I know that you get 
to ask the questions and I don’t here, but elaborate on how you would like to see the freight rates 
designed to encourage diversification. And I’d like to . . . I mean if you care to respond, but how you’d 
like to see the Crow rate or other freight rates designed to encourage processing and manufacturing and 
diversification. 
 
I don’t know what you have in mind. I mean, you were in power for some time. We saw precious little 
processing and manufacturing, precious little. Now you can blame the federal government; you can 
blame the federal government, say you weren’t very lucky and fortunate in getting money out of the 
federal government in agriculture, and you can say, well you weren’t very lucky in getting federal 
money, or changes in transportation. And yet you expect me to get them all. Well, I suppose, to be fair, 
you can’t have it both ways. 
 
What we’re saying is that transportation is part of processing and manufacturing and diversification, and 
you’re saying if we used it as a national policy to facilitate diversification, it could help. Now what are 
you saying with respect to the rates? I can tell you now, and I’m sure that you know, that many of the 
branch lines across western Canada are no longer there. So what do you do? 
 
We’ve entertained the possibility that maybe some subsidy and some federal money should be on 
infrastructure and roads. They used to spend it on the railroads. Now it’s replaced by grid roads. Why 
not put it on roads? People don’t go to church on the railroad, they don’t go to school on the railroad, 
they don’t go a lot of things on the railroad. 
 
In fact, if you look at the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and other elevator companies, they’ve abandoned 
elevators all across Saskatchewan. Now what does that mean, that we should be looking at policies that 
were there 50 years ago? That we should be looking at rail line subsidies where there aren’t rail lines? 
Now the wheat pool has raced reality, and they say much more of this commodity is one, going by truck; 
and two, is being processed into another form and going to the main branch lines, which I believe should 
be supported by the federal government. And we can encourage processing and manufacturing, and 
that’s why we’ve said, I believe half of it should to go the railroads and half should go to the farmers, or 
to the municipalities so that we can build that infrastructure. 
 
Now maybe you can come back and say, now hey, I kind of like the idea of that. I could support 
something like that. If you’re saying, and you want to se federal government, provincial government 
work together in an infrastructure to help diversify the province of Saskatchewan, because we don’t 
have the branch lines – we’re into more roads – then certainly that would be there. But you, I mean, you 
just made a statement but you didn’t elaborate on it, and I know you don’t have to. 



 
But it would be interesting to hear your philosophy on how you would use that freight rate structure and 
money that you might have to help process and manufacture in the province of Saskatchewan, whether 
it’s Prairie Malt or whether it’s bacon, or whether it’s potato salad, or whether it’s feed lots, or whatever 
it might be. And you might want to expand on that. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that it’s important – I’ll just pick up an example – it’s very, very important 
that we recognize that we can do a great deal to help this processing and diversification and 
manufacturing take place. Give the hon. member just an example where I think his old arguments of just 
the freight rate coming out of Ottawa is the key. 
 
If you take, and I discovered this talking to some consumers, and I believe it was the millers in Japan. 
And they said, you know, a bag of puffed wheat is worth about a dollar and a half. And they said, you 
know how much wheat’s in there? About 3 cents, 3 cents. And they said, if you really pushed your 
freight rates, or you really push your farmers, and you really do a whole bunch of thing, and cut your 
costs by another 30 per cent because you’re very efficient they said, do you know what you’d save? 
You’d save a penny, a penny on that bag of puffed wheat. 
 
On the other hand, they said, you know you grow a very valuable commodity, and you’ve got a fine 
grading system. If you packaged that a little bit different, if you looked at . . . now the big demand is for 
oats, and for all the protein and all the stuff it does for cholesterol, fighting that sort of thing, and you 
packaged that in something that was environmentally safe, very good package, very clean, highly 
graded, you might be able to sell that for $2.25. Now he says, where do you think the money is? 
Squeezing it one more time with those farmers and whatever else you may have in terms of freight rates 
or whatever, and get one more cent, 3 cents out of that puffed wheat, or 75 cents if you decided to 
process it and manufacture it and market it the correct way. Now this is a Japanese customer saying, do 
you know what? Your quality is excellent. If you compete on that homogeneous product, everybody’s 
got wheat and here it is; it’ll be $160 a tonne or $3 a bushel or $4, and everybody’s got some. If you 
make something of quality with it and you start to market that, incredible changes and exchanges of 
wealth can come this way. 
 
Now you tell me how the freight rate, under your economic development package, is going to address 
that idea, if you will, that is taking place among the consumers of the world. The environment is very 
important; health concerns these day. Now that’s a long ways from the freight rates. Freight rates are 
important, but when you look at what’s going on in the world today – the environment, health care, 
grading, processing, manufacturing – those kinds of things are exactly what the wheat pool’s looking at, 
that’s exactly what United Grain Growers is looking at, that’s exactly what the food processors, 
manufacturers, and farmers today are talking about: let’s diversify, let’s get our eggs all out of the same 
basket, let’s look at making something with value because we have cut our costs and we have cut our 
costs and we have cut our costs. 
 
Well it’s an interesting difference in philosophy. I think that we can process, manufacture, and add value 
to a very large extent. I think we should be focusing more of our thought on that, as opposed to just the 
battles of saying, well if Ottawa would only do something different, then we'’ be fine. Well I don’t know 
if we all have to just sit around and wait for Ottawa all the time. I think that there’s things that we can do 
to encourage the diversification and processing by allowing the farmers, university, manufacturers, and 
processors to work together. 
 
So we have been able to get money and cash from the federal government. Maybe not as much as some 
people would like, but certainly compared to the past, it’s been considerable; it’s been more than we’ve 



ever received before, and we have fought very, very hard for farmers. And I’m perfectly willing to admit 
that I have a good, solid, working relationship with the Prime Minister of this country. Now I don’t back 
away from that. When I talk to him or I phone him and I talk to him about food, agriculture, farmers, 
crop insurance . . . I said, we need a new crop insurance mechanism to help protect farmers. He says, 
well let’s do it together. I talked to the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Don Mazankowski, let’s build a very 
good stabilization program for farmers. He says, right on, let’s do it together, we’ll make it even 
stronger. 
 
When I can phone and talk to the Deputy Prime Minister of this country and the Prime Minister of this 
country about agriculture issues, and they will listen to the kinds of concerns being raised by 
Saskatchewan farmers, now that’s pretty close. That’s as close as we’ve been able to get, I think 
historically, to the Prime Minister and say, would you listen to the people of Saskatchewan and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan? And they’ve responded. 
 
(2215) 
 
We have got new crop insurance; we’ve got new stabilization programs; we have got new international 
agreements; we have got food and agriculture right on the table at the general agreement on tariff and 
trade, supported by the stock growers and the cattle growers and the farmers’ union and the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and United Grain Growers – all of that because we’ve been close to the 
Prime Minister. I think it’s important that we do stay close to him. 
 
You’re right. We’re not going to get everything we ever asked for, I mean, obviously we’re not the 
Prime Minister. But in talking with him, we can get a great deal of support for farmers, and I think that’s 
worth defending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to say that the Premier has avoided answering the observation 
and the remarks that I make, and it’s up to him how he answers the question of course. But lest the 
Premier or anybody else who might be watching this proceeding in the legislature would share some 
doubt as to the point I was making, I want to make it succinctly. 
 
My point was not that the Premier of this province did not get 100 per cent of his shopping list. I 
acknowledge that he will be a very fortunate person as Premier to get 100 per cent of his shopping list. 
That’s not my complaint. My complaint is that when it came to the federal budget, the Premier 
supported the $500 million net reduction over two years. That’s my point. 
 
My point isn’t that he didn’t go down there and win in everything. My point is that judging by these 
newspaper stories and judging by the fact that there’s a figure to show us in the legislature, any of the 
documentation to the contrary, you supported this initiative. You support these various things that I’ve 
talked about. That is a far different issue that an issue of whether or not you can be 100 per cent out of 
100 per cent, batting 100 per cent every time you go down to Ottawa seeking something from Ottawa. 
Of course you won’t be that, but on these fundamental issues with respect to this budget, you have in 
fact not only not gotten what you wanted, but I can only assume that you support what Mr. Wilson and 
Mr. Mulroney have done to the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s the point that I want to make and to which I felt you would have some response – and 
regrettably, you have no response. Because I believe you believe in that federal budget. I believe that 
you think that those are necessary changes. I think you believe some of the phraseology to justify those 



changes. I believe that you are oblivious to the net result of what those changes have meant in real terms 
for people. I don’t say this in a malicious sense; I just don’t think that the statistics bear you out. 
 
I won’t repeat all of the statistics. We know what it is like, in not only rural Saskatchewan but in all of 
the province, partly because of the drought but partly also because we’re received these blows from 
Ottawa and elsewhere, and there hasn’t been that kind of strong support from the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You say that you speak to the Prime Minister and to the appropriate officials in Ottawa on a regular 
basis. Good luck to you for doing so, and that’s your job. But again, I don’t mean to be personal when I 
say, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister, I think what has happened here in the last little while is that you have 
lost the credibility of this province with those people because they read you as agreeing to everything 
that they advance, even if it happens to be a detrimental project or a detrimental budget for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. There has not been any area, publicly, where you’ve stood up for the 
community, generally speaking, that I know of, in this area whatsoever. 
 
And may I say . . . this is one question that you may wish to mark down, to make some notation of. If 
there is a set of correspondences . . . and I’ll ask before I take my place, Mr. Chairman, whether or not 
the Premier does have a record of correspondence with respect to the federal budget in advance to its 
preparation, in this regard – I’d like to see. Because if he has objected, either before or afterwards, and 
tables those documents before us, then fair enough – that’s something that I’d be prepared to examine. 
But I don’t believe he has, and I believe that the statements which he says are not a matter of not getting 
what he wants 100 per cent of the way, it is a matter of endorsing a $500 reduction from the federal 
support programs for farmers at a time when they need it. And I think that is a very, very bad blow for 
the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, and, as I repeat again, a Premier who is either too busy 
with his job as Premier not to be able to do the job as Minister of Agriculture, or believes in the changes. 
Either way, the net result is very negative. 
 
I won’t pursue the transportation thing in detail at this point because of the interest of time, but some 
time soon, no doubt, the Premier and I will have an opportunity to discuss this in some other estimates. I 
want to make the point if I can, however, on the transportation argument. I think that either the Premier 
fails to understand my point or understands it and glosses over it for his political purposes. 
 
I am saying that in a country of 26 million people strung out within a hundred miles or less of the United 
States border, with two or three knots of large population in central Canada and perhaps on the west 
coast, where the alternatives to the rail transportation mode in this part of the world are virtually nil, 
when the policy of the governments in Regina and Ottawa is that the railways charge what they will 
charge on the theory of some sort of economic efficiency, getting our product . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
Well if the Minister of Education even understood the basics of agriculture, including the NFU position, 
perhaps the government wouldn’t be in as bad position as it is. The problem is he doesn’t read enough 
and doesn’t understand enough about agriculture. And more importantly, he got kicked out as a minister 
of Agriculture because he stopped talking and listening to the Department of Agriculture. That will 
always be his fate. 
 
And by the way, though I argue that the Premier should divorce himself from both Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture, when I know when he has to look around the front benches and the back 
benches as to who he’d put in to Agriculture, maybe I’m convinced that he should just remain with the 



Minister of Agriculture portfolio because there’s absolutely nobody else, absolutely nobody else who’s 
even got a remote chance. But unfortunately, unfortunately, agriculture is suffering. 
 
So I make the point, with respect to transportation, that when you take a look at that basic philosophy 
and you’re trapped in this part of the world, this part of the region, under any other set of circumstances, 
the costs to getting supply and product in and out of market are going to work against this region. These 
people don’t care about that, and the net result is that their diversification is worse than it’s been in 
almost any other period in Saskatchewan history. Ross Thatcher, when he was premier of the province 
of Saskatchewan from ’64 to ’71, talked a great game of diversification, and the results were not as bad 
as they are from 1982 to 1989, but they’re very, very grim indeed. They’re grim and they will be grim 
until and unless this Premier and this government decides that there’s a role for a government policy in 
transportation as part of an overall economic rural diversification strategy. Failing that, they will for 
ever, for ever be out there singing the Hallelujah Chorus to the CNCP (Canadian National and Canadian 
Pacific) people and the federal government. 
 
Now the last point that I want to make, Mr. Chairman, before I sit down on this issue and it’s an 
extension of the earlier point that I made. The last point that I make is this question of singing the 
Hallelujah Chorus or being, as I describe it, the little sir echo of the Mulroney government in Ottawa. 
There’s another issue which is going to affect rural Saskatchewan in a big way, and this one is 
something that the Premier can do something about now, and that’s the federal goods and services tax or 
the national sales tax. 
 
We know now we are engaging in a big debate on this issue. For farmers, I think the tax will work like 
this, if I read the white paper that the federal government has put out accurately. They’re not likely to 
have to charge tax on our basic product sales since groceries are not to be taxed, export products are 
supposedly going to be tax free. 
 
When a farmer buys inputs for his crop, we are told that he or she will get a 9 per cent tax on that, but is 
likely to get some form of a rebate back from the federal government, the details of which we do not 
know – I stress those words because I’m going to ask the Premier about that in a moment. Farm land 
apparently is not going to be taxed if it’s sold as part of the sale of a going concern, sold to someone for 
farming purposes; in other circumstances it could get taxable. Transfers of farm land will be exempt 
when the transfer is between family members. 
 
Now the Finance minister rightly points out that some goods are now subject to a sales tax higher than 9 
per cent, and after the new tax goes into effect, the price of these should decline, is what he says. 
However in the same white paper – and this I think is the damaging and damning part of this white paper 
– the new items which are going to be covered by that 9 per cent and services and the way the tax will 
operate will leave a net additional $5.5. billion dollars from farming people, from working people. But 
we’re dealing with agricultural estimates now for federal coffers. In other words, the suggestion that this 
tax is going t be revenue neutral is false. By the federal government’s own white paper, this tax will be 
revenue generating, and not only for Ottawa. It’s going to be 5.5 billion, it seems, for Ottawa, but I 
suspect it could very well be for the province of Saskatchewan in excess of . . . How much? 
 
An Hon. Member : -- Ten million. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Ten million for the province of Saskatchewan. In fact I would have thought a little bit 
higher than that, but let’s take the figure of $10 million. Farm inputs, as I say, are going to be taxed. 
They say there’s going to be some claw-back or rebate system, the details of which we do not know, and 



I remind you, Mr. Chairman, that the farmers will, on top of everything else, pay all of the ordinary 
consumer goods and services that all other Canadians are paying. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, from what I can see, seven of the provinces have harshly criticized this sales tax – 
seven. They have the white paper and they’re reviewed it as I’ve reviewed it; I presume the Premier’s 
reviewed it. Seven of the governments and the premiers say this is going to be inflationary, it’s going to 
be harmful, it’s undesirable and we simply don’t want this tax imposed. 
 
Our Premier’s response is that essentially, as I see by the newspaper stores, the Premier is quoted, “he 
could live with it.” Not holus-bolus, in his words, but he could live with it. He neither gives the 
assurance that they accept the tax, nor does he give the statement that he will oppose the tax. 
 
He does not clarify how the tax will work on the agricultural industry, does not explain exactly what it 
means with respect to the rebate system. Is it going to be rebate at source, or is it rebate after an 
application form? How is the rebate system going to work? And so far as I know, he has made no 
attempts to find out from the federal government, which is my point about this government being in the 
hip pocket of Mr. Mulroney so deep that it can'’ see daylight any more. 
 
And the result, you find this Saskatoon Star-Phoenix story of Tuesday, April 15. Here’s the quotation. 
“Devine supports federal sales tax.” Good looking picture of a happy Premier. Underneath it says, “The 
right direction is where this thing is going.” The story tells it all. That’s what they say outside the 
legislature. Inside the legislature they would have us believe something else. And no wonder there is 
mass confusion and mass concern about what the impact of this 9 per cent is going to mean with respect 
to rural Canada, rural Saskatchewan people. 
 
That’s the purpose of my intervention this evening, Mr. Chairman. Not only did it come with respect to 
the budget and the points that I’ve raised. The Premier supports them. Now he supports the sales tax 
with its potentially awesome impact. And organizations, whether you’re the western Canadian grain 
growers or the National Farmers Union, one end or the other end say we got to take this thing off, we’ve 
got to stop it, we’ve got to do something about it. Our Premier is either so beholden or so – how can I 
say it – mesmerized by Ottawa that he supports the federal sales tax operation. 
 
And given the desperate state of the agricultural industry at this time, the key question that has to be 
asked is why. Why are we doing this, especially when seven other provinces are saying no? Why do the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, from this Minister of Agriculture, have to be put in this 
position at this particular time? 
 
So my question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says, 
because we dare to be different. Well he’s dead right. They dare to be different all right, so different that 
we’re going to be paying the tax right straight through the nose. I don’t think that’s acting in the best 
interest of the province of Saskatchewan. At least I don’t see what the arguments are. 
 
And I guess I want to ask the Premier whether or not he has taken up with the federal government, in 
writing, his concerns about the sales tax as it relates to rural Canada, rural Saskatchewan in particular. If 
he has, would he be kind enough to table the correspondence. While I’m on my feet, whether the 
Premier would tell us whether or not he has had his Department of Agriculture do an analysis of this tax 
on rural Saskatchewan, it’s impact at the farm gate and elsewhere. I’d ask him to give us that response 
as well. 
 



And what I’d like to ask the Premier is, if he has not done so, is it his intention to make such 
representation – as a third question, in the interests of saving some time – and if it isn’t his intention to 
do any of the above, why? Why is he accepting this body-blow not only to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, but body-blow to the farmers of this province? Why as a matter of policy are we 
accepting this? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I will very briefly respond to the three points the Leader of the 
Opposition raised. He talks about the modest, or the tax increases, and he says the net result is this hurt 
on the province of Saskatchewan. The lobbying that we do is to get a net benefit. 
 
We have received about $2 billion in cash as a result of the lobbying. And that’s a pretty fair body-blow 
if I was going to try to design one for farmers in western Canada to get $2 billion in cash from the 
federal government – far outweighs the modest changes in the tax that you are talking about with respect 
to the fuel rebates, the transportation. I mean, no comparison. 
 
So you want to talk about the net result. The net result is that we’ve received a billion dollars in 
deficiency payments and billion dollars in drought payments and additional support with respect to crop 
insurance which is literally billions of dollars. The net result, the net result was very much in favour of 
western Canadian farmers and certainly in favour of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
The hon. member also says – and I know that he’s got this attitude and I don’t share it – he says that 
we’re trapped here in Saskatchewan in the middle of this continent and we’re spread along this little 
ribbon stuff, and I know he picked that up years ago that, you know, it’s like we’re starting in the 
Northwest Territories all over. And we’re not trapped. 
 
He says there hasn’t been any diversification; where is it? Well we’re making paper and we’re exporting 
it. Transportation, okay? They didn’t make the papermill in New York, they made it here. Okay. Now 
that’s transportation related and it says we can make a high quality product and export it out of here. 
 
We’re making turbines in Saskatoon. We’re making turbines in Saskatoon. He says, well how could we 
do that if we’re trapped? We‘re going to be exporting them down East. We’ve got contracts in the 
Maritimes; 650 power projects across the United States. We’re going to make them here and export 
them. How could we do that if we’re trapped? 
 
See the fallacy that really, really you’ve fallen into over those years and say, oh my gosh, we’re trapped 
here. And you said, show me. We can manufacture fertilizer here and we can export it all over the world 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But we can manufacture those. 
 
What about petrochemicals that we can make here? Why can’t we have upgraders? We can take our own 
natural gas and our own oil and make our own products, and we can export them all over the world. We 
have two upgraders that are going to be able to do that. 
 
And transportation is important, and you say, well but we’re trapped, we can’t do that. I don’t believe 
that, you see, I don’t buy that argument. That’s an old, old argument that says that we don’t have any 
choice, we have to grow a raw commodity and we got to beg on our knees to Ottawa to have a low 
freight rate for a raw commodity and out it goes, and that’s all we got. I don’t believe that. 
 



We can make paper, we can make bacon, we can make petrochemicals, we can make new motor homes, 
we can make fertilizers, we can make all kinds of projects here, and we can export them out. And that 
isn’t being trapped; that’s looking at the 1990s and the 21st century in reality saying that we can 
succeed. 
 
Third, I want to make a point with respect to the goods and services tax. I talked to the Prime Minister 
when he was here when we opened up the Canada Games and we sat and talked about the tax for some 
specific time. And we are doing research with them and we’re exchanging information with the 
ministers of Agriculture and the ministers of Finance and we’re sharing that information. I believe, I 
believe in the final analysis, that this tax will be now worse for farmers, in fact it could be better. Now 
we’ll look and see where it finally ends up. 
 
Let me give you some examples. If there’s an exemption for agricultural goods, tractors and combines 
and whatnot, and right at the source, obviously it’s no big problem. If you take a new three-ton truck 
with a hoist and a box and all the rest of that that sells for, let’s say, $30,000, and right now you pay 
thirteen and a half per cent tax on it, and that thirteen and a half per cent tax is going to be removed and 
replaced with a 0 per cent tax, that’s a four and a half per cent saving. That’s $1,350 that a farmer would 
save under the new system that he can’t do it now -- $1,350 on a three-ton truck with a box and a hoist 
and all the things that you would put on it to make sure that you could have the kind of equipment that 
you would like to have. 
 
Now you say to me, and I just share this with you. If you have any exemptions, and if you have the 
appropriate mechanisms so that farmers are relieved of this tax, and you can go from a thirteen and a 
half per cent tax to a 9 per cent tax on major ticket items like trucks and cars, and farmers certainly buy 
trucks and they buy automobiles. So if he buys a $25,000 car and a $30,000 truck, and he buys other 
large-ticket items that have the thirteen and a half per cent tax on them, he can save literally thousands 
of dollars. 
 
Now we don’t want to just throw that out and say, well I’m against that. We want to find out if it’s 
possible to pass those benefits on to Saskatchewan people. And if we can pass it on in terms of farmers 
or manufactured goods or things that we export. Then I’m going to look at it. 
 
And that's what I’m examining with the Prime Minister, and indeed we’re doing lots of research. We’ve 
talked to them. We’re exchanging letters and information and numbers. And we’ll continue to do that 
because I believe in the final analysis, not only could this be neutral for farmers, in fact, there could be 
some net benefit because we are major processors, manufacturers, and exporters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I had intended to disengage from the debate at this point and allow the 
critic for Agriculture to continue – and I intend to do so – but I really am prompted to get into this 
debate for one last interjection because of the Premier’s obvious, obviously fallacious statements about 
the sales tax. 
 
First of all, the fact is – and the Premier has his deputy and several officials around him, and if I’m in 
error, please show me and I’ll acknowledge it – I say, the fact is that there are no exemptions with 
respect to this sales tax as it relates to farm machinery or farm products. There is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member : -- How do you know? 
 



Mr. Romanow: -- How do I know, somebody says? Because I’ve read this little document called the 
Goods and Services Tax Technical Paper, and I recommend it to the member from Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg and Morse constituencies. You should do a little bit of reading here. It says it. 
 
They hold open the prospect of a rebate, none of the details of which they articulate. And I note very 
significantly that the Premier did not answer the specific question I had to him about what he has done 
with respect to Ottawa to ensure that there’s going to be a rebate and what form it takes. All he tells me 
is we should hope. That’s the first point I want to make: there are no exemptions. So let’s not be sold 
about the sizzle. You know, let’s start taking a look at the steak, not the sizzle – the reality. 
 
And the Premier and the minister can get up and tell me whether I’m right or wrong. In agriculture there 
are no exemptions; there is a rebate to be fair. The question I directed his attention to was: what are the 
terms and the conditions of the rebate and how it’s going to work. That’s the first point I want to make. 
 
The second point I want to make is: his pie-in-the-sky hope that this sales tax could actually save 
farmers something. He says, if we could get the 13 per cent currently existing manufacturers tax reduced 
to 9 per cent, then there’d be a saving. He’s right, if that saving is passed on to the farmer who buys that 
combine or tractor. But I’ll tell the Premier opposite that if he believes that that reduction in the saving 
to the manufacturers is going to end up in the farmers’ pockets and not in the pockets of the 
manufacturers, I’ve got another bridge for him to take a look at and to bring into the province of 
Saskatchewan to build . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There is not . . . not crooks; it’s not crooks. It’s 
not a question of crooks. It’s a question of the . . . 
 
Well the member from Regina South, the Minister of Urban Affairs, absolutely does not know of what 
he talks about. No wonder he’s out of touch with the small-business community, this kind of an 
approach. I say to him, Mr. Chairman, as I said to the Premier, that anybody who believes that that 
manufacturers tax will end up as a saving to the farmers with cash in the farmers pocket, I have got 
another bridge for them to buy and to bring to Saskatchewan, and be part of the PC build Saskatchewan 
program. 
 
The manufacturers want that reduction because they want that money themselves, and they want it 
because they say they can’t compete in the production. They’ve got to have their tooling up and the 
retooling. They need the extra money to do that in order to be competitive. It’s not a matter of being 
crooks. That’s exactly where it’s intended to go. It’s intended to support the manufacturing sector. Now 
there may be an argument for doing that, but don’t tell this legislature, Mr. Minister, with the greatest of 
respect, that the manufacturers are going to pass on the saving to the farmers. Because if he says that, 
then I tell you, after the estimates are over, I got a fellow out there who’s going to sell you another 
bridge, and you can bring it out here in Saskatchewan, and you can build the bridge. 
 
And no farmer out there who knows anything about the way it operates will dispute that fact. There’s no 
rail increase that goes . . . rail cut that goes to benefit the farmers. I mean, it goes in the pockets of the 
railway. It’s the way the world works. When there’s an input, when there’s a subsidy program, it doesn’t 
go in the farmers’ pocket; it goes to the people who charge down the line. That’s the way the world 
goes. 
 
The third and the last point that I want to make, and then I am going to disengage so that the critic can 
get on to this – he’s got another matter of transportation to get on to – the third point I want to make is 
this, Mr. Chairman: time is of the essence on the sales tax. Time is of the essence. I urge the Premier to 
act with dispatch and to get off this dime of supporting he national sales tax. The timetable is that there 



will be a federal House of Commons finance committee studying the sales tax and its impact for the 
purposes of these estimates on rural Saskatchewan and rural Canada. 
 
I asked in the question period whether or not there’s going to be a submission made. I’d like to know 
that. I asked . . . My first question to the Premier was, have you done a study as to its impact on 
agriculture – the national sales tax. He refuses to answer that question. Time is of the essence. All of the 
financial people say that by October, November we’re going to be stuck with this 9 per cent tax and then 
what, when we’re stuck? We’ll be like the federal budget; I mean, we’ll have sung the Hallelujah 
Chorus again. 
 
I want the people of the province to know whether or not there is a tangible, real benefit to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan on the sales tax. The minister has his officials. He must know; he’s been party to the 
development of this tax on a national basis. He’s got to know, and it should be the easiest thing in the 
world for you people to put out a white paper to show us the cost-benefit analysis to farmers. And if it’s 
a benefit, I mean we’d be politically stupid to oppose it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? Well 
Rafferty, we opposed the way you handled it, and we continue to oppose the way you handled it. Oh yes 
we do, everywhere – in Estevan and outside, the way you did it and . . . There are other issues on 
Rafferty. Mr. Chairman’s going to call you to order here now. I want to talk about Rafferty on another 
occasion. 
 
Time is of the essence, Mr. Chairman. It’s an obligation of this government to put this documentation 
out. And I would surely think that for the journalists and for the rural Saskatchewan people, there ought 
to be some incentive to compel the government to table the white paper studies in this regard. 
 
Mr. Premier, why don’t you do it? Why don’t you do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Very briefly, Mr. Chairman, to respond to the hon. member, in my discussions 
with the Prime Minister and the discussions that we have between officials, we have made many 
suggestions. I’m not sure how either the rebate will work or the exemption will work. I have asked him 
for an agricultural exemption, just flat out and said that I don’t ‘think that it’s appropriate that you put it 
on there, and on agricultural equipment. And certainly if you’re going to have a rebate, I said, make it as 
close to the time as possible. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the thirteen and a half per cent and the 9 per cent, I just again make the point 
that if you can drop from thirteen and a half to nine on an automobile or on a big truck or something like 
that, it’s a saving. It’s four and half per cent on 30,000, that’s thirteen hundred and fifty bucks, and that’s 
a lot of money to farmers. Now those big-ticket items are pretty important to agriculture. Now if we can 
get some of that benefit, it’s a good idea. 
 
You make the point that this would not be passed on to farmers, well that’s an old, old – if you allow me 
– sort of partisan rhetoric from the left side and, you know, you’re . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
must have touched a chord. 
 
I’m just saying to the hon. member, I don’t think it’s fair to pick on the implement dealers and the 
automobile dealers and other folks who have either manufactured or sell automobiles or trucks or other 
equipment and say, well they won’t pass it on. I mean, that means that we might as well add tax. 
 
I mean, the argument is that if you take thirteen and a half per cent on, and then the implement dealers 
and the automobile dealers and everybody else, they’ll just take it and put it in their pocket, and it won’t 
make any difference, and national and international competition won’t make a bit of difference. So you 



want to pick on implement dealers, that’s fair enough; you want to pick on the automobile dealers, I 
mean, we’ll tell them all that you think that, you know, they’re not really very ordinary people and so 
on. 
 
(2245) 
 
When we look at . . . You say you don’t really trust them, that’s what you said. You don’t trust them to 
pass it on, yet you would trust, you’d give all the money to the railroad because you trust the railroad. I 
mean, you got to be a little bit careful there. Railroad is pretty big business, you know, pretty big 
business. And you’d say that I can’t trust the manufacturers or the automobile or the implement dealers 
to take off this 13 per cent, but you would give all the money to the railroads – pretty big business. 
 
I think if you take the CPR, I mean, everybody knows they’re into real estate and into other things. And 
if it’s your diversification policy and all of this new stuff to give a bunch of money to a great big 
company like the CPR, and you think that they’re all going to do this, well, I mean, I don’t know. I can’t 
ask you questions in here but I guess you’ll have an ample opportunity to explain. 
 
I’ll just say to the hon. member, we’re looking at the possibility of making submissions to people who 
are examining the tax. We’re going to look at all those possibilities, and certainly you’ll have access to 
information that we present to public hearings or any other kinds of hearings. We’re giving that very 
serious attention and anything that we do in that regard we’ll be glad to pass on to you. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I guess like a typical politician, I make a promise, and when I hear the Premier, I’m 
provoked to break the promise. I just simply have to make one last interjection; it’ll be very short. I hope 
it’s not provocative to the Premier. I know it’s not likely to be the case. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, as far as this estimate on Agriculture is concerned, far be it from me to be arguing 
for the national sales tax, and I’m not. But those who do argue for this white paper proposal argue that 
on the current 13 per cent-plus manufacturers tax methodology, the manufacturing industry – not the 
retail industry, the manufacturing industry – is disadvantaged, disadvantaged in putting together its 
product, vis-à-vis its competitors in the United States and elsewhere. They argue that so long as we have 
that 13 per cent, they’re going to be driven out of business. They argue they can’t compete. They argue 
they should change this to the 9 per cent flat across the piece proposal that this white paper recommends. 
 
Now I don’t buy that argument, but at least it’s a logical, intellectual, intelligent argument. One could 
argue that the 13 per cent manufacturers tax reduced might be a boon for manufacturers in Canada, 
including farm implement manufacturers. And one might argue that if that results, that the farmers might 
get some benefit if you believe that the transfer would be from 13 per cent to 9 per cent passed on to the 
farmers. 
 
But the Premier ought not to, with the greatest of respect – for whatever respect he has from my points 
of view or he doesn’t have my points of view – misrepresent my position to say that this relates to 
somehow with respect to retail sales. And when I say that the manufacturers will keep it, it’s because 
that’s what’s it intended to do. It’s intended to give them extra mobility and cash flexibility and tax 
flexibility to be able to compete in the world at large. 
 
It’s not intended to be able to get the farmer a cheaper combine or a cheaper tractor. That is not the 
objective and that’s why the farm groups are objection got the situation. That’s all I’m saying. 
 



Now he may buy that; he may reject that argument. That’s what I’m saying, and I’m saying . . . And I’m 
going to quit and call the critic of the minister to get upon this feet and to get on to this, unless the 
Premier wants to continue to 11 o’clock. 
 
I simply want to say to the Premier as I close here: you have told us that you have objected to agriculture 
being tied into this. I would like the Premier to consider tabling documents to that effect. If of course 
accept his word, but I’d like to see the documentation, and more importantly, I repeat again as I sit 
down, time is of the essence. It’s urgent. 
 
If they aren’t fixed in their ways now and if we’re going to stop the fact that all of us are going to be 
stuck with this widespread all-encompassing 9 per cent new tax hike come 1991, we have got to have 
this government heard. We’ve got to have this government standing up and speaking up for rural 
Saskatchewan under these estimates, but generally as well, but for rural Saskatchewan. And time is of 
the essence. 
 
It’s mid-August, and that House of Commons Finance committee starts in one months’ time, and all that 
I will say to the Premier – he can respond if he wants – I just urge him to say, come forward with such a 
submission opposing this tax, get off the dime of supporting the tax. Get that brief out, put it on the 
Table. Let the public see it, let us see it, so that we can know whether to respond or whatever we have to 
do in this context. But let’s get on fighting for what we think we need here for the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, just let me say to the hon. member, I think, at least I believe that the 
hon. member said id he wants to get rid of the thirteen and a half per cent manufacturing tax because it’s 
unfair. Every political party across the country has said that, the NDP, the Liberals, and the Tories. They 
say get rid of it. It’s unfair. It hurts us internationally in competition. Now if he also believes in 
diversification, manufacturing is part of diversification. Now he has missed the point with respect to this 
country going into the 1990s and the 21st century. 
 
If all the political parties say get rid of the thirteen and a half because it isn’t a fair tax, and if we should 
get into more manufacturing, then that’s exactly what you should be doing, and if you want to replace 
that with one, a lower tax, and secondly, a fairer tax, then let’s design it together. And I want to see . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well he says it isn’t fair. I want him to tell me, and I wish his party would or 
anybody else, what your proposal will be when you now want the thirteen and a half gone, but you 
won’t come up with anything else. 
 
The people want to see a new tax, a better tax. They don’t like the old thirteen and a half. Let me also 
make the point that in some situations here in the province of Saskatchewan, not only does the thirteen 
and a half per cent go, which is good, but the 9 per cent doesn’t even go on because we are in the 
process of manufacturing and processing and exporting commodities. Now that’s a big benefit. If you 
can get the reduction of the thirteen and a half and not receive the new 9 per cent tax, you’ve got a 
double benefit. 
 
Now we are looking at that. I’ve asked the deputy minister of Finance, Mr. Art Wakabayashi to give me 
all the tax implications on every farm input, on repairs, on big ticket items and small ticket items, and 
we’re putting them all together. 
 
I said to the hon. member, and I think he should be corrected, I was talking about a truck, I was talking 
about cars. I don’t believe that the thirteen and half per cent — and he probably knows this – doesn’t 



apply to machinery now. But what we’re talking about is on the items and the big ticket items that that 
thirteen and half per cent applies to right across the piece, and farmers have to participate in that. 
 
So I will say, Mr. Chairman, we will put all this together, and certainly we’ll be prepared to share it with 
the hon. member. We’re getting all that detail on all the implications of thirteen and a half and 9 per 
cent, and looking at how we can either protect farmers totally or we can change the rebate system or we 
can do other things to make sure it’s as fair as possible, and even a net benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to the agricultural sector. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:54 p.m. 


