


















































April 11, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 11, 1989 
 

699 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you this afternoon, and to members of the 
Assembly, 23 residents in the Speaker’s gallery who are visiting 
us from the constituency of Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are people who have lived in the Lakewood 
Manor Housing Corporation, which is located on the corner of 
Rochdale and Devonshire, and I will be meeting with them 
afterwards, Mr. Speaker, for pictures and to discuss issues of 
the day. 
 
The president of the association is Andy Medwid, who is there, 
and the organizers of the tour are Blanche Green and Myrtle 
Browne . . . or Sally Browne, I think it is. And I’d like to take 
this opportunity to ask my colleagues to join with me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly, and I hope that you enjoy 
your tour here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Licence for Rafferty-Alameda Project 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for the Souris Basin Development 
Authority, and it deals with the very heart of the credibility of 
this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday the Federal Court of Canada ruled that 
the federal government had improperly issued a licence for the 
Rafferty dam project, and it quashed that licence. 
 
This ruling confirms what many in the public have been saying 
for months now, and that is that the environment review process 
was ignored for political reasons. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, to you is this: in light of yesterday’s 
ruling by the federal court of Canada, will you order an 
immediate halt to construction of the Rafferty-Alameda project 
to protect the millions of dollars of public money that are being 
wasted and are at risk here now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that at 
all times Saskatchewan has been in full compliance and has 
since June 17 been building a dam under licence issued June 17, 
1988. 
 
Now there are people, Mr. Speaker, that have said, we don’t 
believe the federal government acted within their authority. And 
so those people — specifically, Mr. Speaker, the wildlife 
federation of Canada — challenged the federal Minister of 
Environment in the federal court.  

The federal court ruled that indeed the federal minister had 
acted beyond his authority. 
 
Now there are people today, Mr. Speaker, that are taking great 
delight in that, some of them for good and valid reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, some of them for good and valid reasons. But, Mr. 
Speaker, members opposite should be ashamed of themselves. 
They have no more respect for the environment, in that 
particular project, than they have for a space project, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question. Yes, the federal 
government acted beyond this authority. It acted beyond . . . Is 
my light on, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I repeat again, in my new question — 
yes, the federal government acted beyond its authority. The 
federal court of Canada has said that, and it acted beyond its 
authority with the agreement and the urging of the Premier and 
the minister opposite of who I am asking the question today. 
That’s unacceptable, Mr. Minister. I’m not surprised by your 
answer. I’m disappointed because you are indicating by your 
evading of the question that you’re prepared to continue 
breaking the laws of this country in order to serve your political 
needs. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, is it your position that a federal 
licence is not required for this project, or are you saying that 
you’re going to ignore the requirement that is inherent in that 
law and proceed anyway? Or will you answer my first question 
and say to this House today that you’re going to stop 
construction of that project immediately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this government believes 
in that project. This government believes in the viability of that 
project. This government believes that protection against 
drought can and must be obtained through water management in 
the Souris River. This government, Mr. Speaker, also believes 
in obeying the law . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I will tell the House right now, 
Mr. Speaker, that as it relates the Rafferty-Shand projects, there 
will be a meeting at 7 o’clock this evening in the Elks hall in 
Estevan for the purposes, Mr. Speaker, of talking to the workers 
and their families about the impact of this project . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. The minister can’t 
be heard if he’s being interrupted. He’s in the midst of a 
question, and I think we should allow him to answer the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, there will be a meeting in 
the Elks hall in Estevan at 7 o’clock this evening, at which time, 
Mr. Speaker, I will explain to the employees and their families, 
who have the right to know  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

700 
 

first, Mr. Speaker, as to the impact that this ruling will have on 
them and their families and their future. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
intend to be there to deliver the message, Mr. Speaker, that 
those people . . . 
 
What would they have us do, Mr. Speaker? What would they 
have us do? Do they want to blow Shand away? What do they 
want — the lights to go out, nuclear power, dam the Churchill 
River, wheat land? Eastend, if the member wants . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you’re no longer representing that 
constituency; they threw you out of there. What would they 
have us do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I say to the 
minister, if he and his Premier had had their house in order, this 
situation would not face the people of Saskatchewan today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And we’re only here today because of 
the waste and the mismanagement and the arrogance of that 
government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, my new question to the 
minister involves again the federal review process. And in view 
of the fact that that process may find that those dams cannot go 
ahead, either in part or at all, I then ask the minister: doesn’t he 
agree that the responsible thing to do would be to halt the 
project until either the appeal of this thing is carried through 
and a judgement is made, if there is an appeal, or there is a 
federal impact study completed so that the public money is 
protected here. Don’t you agree, Mr. Minister, that that’s the 
responsible thing to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, all options will be studied 
and explored. As it relates . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why didn’t you do that before you 
started? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Now chirping from his seat, Mr. 
Speaker, the former member from Shaunavon, who got blown 
out of that seat because people had no respect for him, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it should be remembered, 
and I know that members opposite don’t want to hear this, Mr. 
Speaker, because they’re a little sensitive. They’re a little 
sensitive. They want the project blown away, Mr. Speaker. 
They want that project stopped. They are in no way, shape, or 
form interested in environmental impact or in any way, shape, 
or form. We have complied in every respect, Mr. Speaker. We 
have had a licence every step of the way, Mr. Speaker, and we 
have broken no law, nor will we. 
 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, this evening in Estevan the 
people who have the right to know first as to the impact of this 
decision on those projects are the workers and the families on 
those projects. Now members opposite may not care about 
them, but we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. My final question to the minister. Mr. Minister, this 
project was a political pork-barrel project. It’s been flawed and 
it’s been indefensible from its very beginning. Because if it 
was, Mr. Minister, if it could stand on its own merits, you 
would not hesitate to allow it to stand up to whatever scrutiny is 
required and you’re refusing to let that happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So I ask you, Mr. Minister, why don’t 
you stop this masquerade about your commitment to 
environmental protection? Why don’t you do the responsible 
thing, and why don’t you stop construction of this project now 
and allow the federal environment review process to be carried 
out, so that the money that the people of Saskatchewan have at 
risk is protected before you go too far — and you’ve gone too 
far already — but before you even go further? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need 
a lecture from that member — from that member, Mr. Speaker 
— as it relates to the protection of the environment. He sat, Mr. 
Speaker, on the treasury benches of the government that made 
the decision to put 10 feet of asphalt and dirt over the biggest 
PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) spill in the history of this 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Only a few months ago, Mr. Speaker, 
only a few months ago we finally mitigated a major 
environmental boondoggle perpetrated by that party, Mr. 
Speaker, on the people of Cumberland House with the Squaw 
Rapids project, Mr. Speaker. I need no lecture from that 
member, or any one from that side of the House, as it relates to 
protecting the environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, thank you 
very much. My question today is to the same minister, the 
minister who, for the last two years, has been lectured by the 
people of this province about suppressing information, about 
covering up information, about hiding information, about 
cooking the books on information . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. I’m afraid 
we’re seeing a little bit of debate, and I must say it’s on both 
sides of the House so let’s . . . Order, order, order, order, order. 
I’ve just . . . Order, order. I just remind the questioner and the 
people who answer the questions that debate doesn’t allow for a 
smooth question period, and I’m bringing that to your attention. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

701 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Deputy Premier who has been lectured by 
people across Canada for two years on the fact that his 
government is breaking the law, and who is now reaping the 
consequences for that bad doing. 
 
I recall, Mr. Speaker, as the minister will, Mr. Minister, one 
Elizabeth May, the former executive assistant to the former 
federal minister of the Environment, Tom McMillan, who 
warned you nearly two years ago that proper procedures were 
not being followed, and that your government had cooked up a 
political deal with the federal government in place in Ottawa. 
Mr. Minister, I would say that in light of yesterday’s decision 
by the courts, Miss May has much more credibility on this 
project than anything that you could say. 
 
Mr. Minister, in that regard, will you table the correspondence 
between yourself and between the former Environment minister 
in relation to this project to prove to the people once and for all 
that this was nothing more than a political boondoggle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A couple of points, Mr. Speaker. 
Number one, this Elizabeth May, I’ve never met her in my 
entire life; I doubt that I’ll ever have that opportunity. I doubt 
that I’ll ever have that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, but let me just 
say that this is the woman who resigned on a very significant 
point of principle and couldn’t find it in her heart or soul to tell 
anybody what that was until several months later when there 
was an election looming federally, Mr. Speaker. Tell me how 
credible that is. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member 
who just addressed that question I think is stretching credibility 
to the limit. On almost every occasion when he asked a question 
on this project, or virtually any other, as he did the other day 
when he talked about 40 years to fill the dam and the hydrology 
studies of Mr. so and so . . . well Mr. so and so came back and 
said that he was terribly offended with that member taking out 
of context small excerpts from his study and said the member 
was entirely inaccurate. 
 
And the final point, Mr. Speaker, is that at no time have we 
been operating outside of the law. In all cases we have been in 
full compliance with the federal licence under which we were 
operating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well that’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker. New 
question to the same minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will be aware, and we talked about it in the 
House before, that your government deliberately kept the 
federal government in the dark as to this project. 
 
And I want to quote, Mr. Minister, from an excerpt of a letter 
that I’ve tabled already before, in which George Hood of the 
Souris Basin Development Authority states: 
 

Our strategy has been and will continue to be to  

take the project as far as we possibly can on our own and 
build as much momentum behind it before we open the 
process up to other governments including the federal 
government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, isn’t this . . . Mr. Minister, isn’t this a case of 
where your chickens are now coming home to roost and that the 
dirt that they leave behind in settling on you and your 
government is going to stick on you and your government and 
its credibility? 
 
Why did you, Mr. Minister, why did you deliberately 
circumvent the process of environmental review with the 
federal government when you knew, when you knew that you 
were deliberately trying to supress what was lawfully 
mandated? Why did you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the credibility of that 
particular member went out the window a long, long time ago. I 
think it went out the window even before he wrote the letter to 
President-elect Bush and said that if this project is built, we’re 
going to blow it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how anybody could 
possibly believe that the government, the little old Government 
of Saskatchewan, can steamroller over top of the government in 
Ottawa, the government in Washington, the government in 
Manitoba in Winnipeg, and the government in North Dakota. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government in Canada, the federal 
government in United States, the state government in North 
Dakota, and the provincial government in Manitoba, in addition 
to the Government of Saskatchewan, all agreed to this project. 
Don’t tell me we steamrollered over all of those guys, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the same minister, 
Mr. Speaker. Since its inception, Mr. Minister, this project has 
been surrounded by controversy, by deceit, by cover-up. We 
have challenged you, Mr. Minister, we have challenged you to 
place this controversial project before the International Joint 
Commission. We’re willing to abide by its decision. Why aren’t 
you? What are you afraid of? Why don’t you refer it to the IJC 
(International Joint Commission) so that there’s an independent, 
impartial review of this project to get it settled once and for all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, they want to stop the 
project; they want to stop the project. Since the very beginning 
of this discussion, they want to stop the project. The project, 
Mr. Speaker, is a good one because of the synergies that come 
together with water management and power generation and 
tourism and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The real problem they have, Mr. Speaker, talking about politics, 
the real problem they have is they wanted to build this in 
Coronach in spite of the fact that the cost would be the same, 
and the synergies that create the opportunity wouldn’t be there. 
They wanted to build it in Coronach because they had an NDP 
member in Coronach at that time. That no longer happens to be 
the  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

702 
 

case, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want him. They don’t want the 
guy that used to represent Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker. And the 
people in Estevan and Souris-Cannington and that part of the 
world wouldn’t care if they never saw any of those guys down 
there. They are opposed for purely political reasons. They have 
no respect for the environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization of SaskPower Gas Utility 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question to 
the minister in relation to the Rafferty project which has been 
found illegal. But I want to say that the reason that the members 
on this side wanted the development in Coronach was because 
it could be done at a fraction of the cost for the people of the 
province, which brings me to the point that I want to raise with 
you, Mr. Minister. 
 
You have told us that you intend to sell part of SaskPower, the 
natural gas side. Your own annual report would indicate that the 
sale should be in the area of $400 million, half of what it is 
costing us to carry out this nonsense down in the Premier’s 
riding. When are we going to see some reasonable management 
from this government that would avoid increased costs for the 
people of the province in terms of gas, and leave SaskPower 
intact. Why are you continuing on in this nonsense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower will not be 
sold. There’s not one cubic metre of gas generated at Shand or 
Rafferty or Boundary dam or Island Falls. Even the gas peaking 
generator at Meadow Lake doesn’t generate any gas; it 
generates electricity. What will be offered to the public, Mr. 
Speaker, is SaskEnergy, not SaskPower. 
 
Now, tell me, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I appreciate the interruptions from 
members opposite. It gives me a chance to get my breath and 
another idea to support my argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’m going to interrupt 
again. The minister is attempting to answer the question. I’m 
sure that the people here would like to hear the answer, and 
they’re having great difficulty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — To support my argument that members 
opposite have little or not respect for the environment, Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to point out that that member, when he was 
the member for Shaunavon, announced a coal-fired plant in his 
area at Eastend, Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, in an area that is truly 
environmentally sensitive, Mr. Speaker, with low quality coal. 
And was there any talk of any environmental considerations 
then? None. It was an election year that he had to have an 
announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister will  

know that a coal-fired generator located in Shaunavon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The member who 
is asking the question also has the right to be heard, and I’m 
asking for that as well. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that we believe, and 
the people of the province believe, that the reason you’re 
pushing so hard with this project, this mud hole down in the 
south-east corner of the province, is to avoid a defeat of the 
Premier, to avoid the “Whitemud” of this Premier so that he 
doesn’t end up like Don Getty. That’s what this is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask you: Mr. Minister, don’t 
you realize that the political livelihood of this Premier is not 
important enough to break the laws of this province and of this 
country and to waste a billion dollars of taxpayers’ money on 
something to protect your Premier from defeat, as Don Getty 
was in Alberta? Why are you doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out one 
difference. That member promised a power plant . . . that 
member promised a power plant for Shaunavon when he was in 
political trouble. They promised one in Coronach when Engel 
was in political trouble, Mr. Speaker. There was no talk of one 
in Estevan at that time, and my Premier won, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s point number one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And two lost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Those two lost. That member got 
blown away, Mr. Speaker, and had to find some safe haven in 
the centre of Regina to finally get himself elected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second point, the second point that should be made, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I prefer not to waste the time of the House 
answering that question, because I think my time would be 
much better spent having the idiotic statements of that member 
put on the record so I can circulate them around the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Motion Regarding Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, last Friday your House 
Leader informed us and anyone else who was interested that 
you would be moving a motion which urged . . . in which this 
Assembly urged, in the strongest possible terms, the federal 
government to rescind its interest rate policy. 
 
A few moments before the House was scheduled to sit at 10 
o’clock, you pulled it. Monday, your House Leader announced 
we’re going to deal with it again, and again you pulled it. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

703 
 

Mr. Minister, you’re behaving like a small child on a 
high-diving board. It seems like a great idea until you see the 
water. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: what did Mr. Wilson say which 
caused you to lose your nerve so badly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that question and the 
tone and tenor of that question proves the point that the Deputy 
Premier made today, that the NDP, as it applies to 
Rafferty-Alameda, were only concerned about the politics of it, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
Here they have the issue of the day, Mr. Speaker; the answers 
being given back were totally unsatisfactory to them. Let me 
make it clear that it is this government, the ministers of this 
government, and the members of this government, Mr. Speaker, 
that have been fighting against the interest rate policies of the 
national government, Mr. Speaker, strongly, led by the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. We think that those policies are wrong. 
 
The hon. member wants to debate, I gather today, and I 
certainly assume we can accommodate him to debate the 
interest rate issue, but I think all people will acknowledge and 
see it rather interesting that the NDP had their little political 
discussion with Shand-Rafferty and then wanted to talk about 
something else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Protection of Environment 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, it indeed gives me great pleasure 
to be able stand today under rule 16 to move a motion that 
involves a department that I’m involved with, and I’ll just read 
the motion now, and I’ll be moving at the end of my remarks. 
The motion is: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its dedication and devotion to the 
protection of our environment and for its leadership . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we have an opposition who’ve 
said for years that they believe in the environment. When they 
have an opportunity . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. We have a great 
number of people who obviously wish to get into the debate. 
You’ll all have your opportunity. At this time let us all give the 
opportunity to the member for Nipawin to make his remarks. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, I’d read that once again: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its dedication and devotion to the 
protection of our environment and for its  

leadership in not only enacting environmental protections 
but also in developing new technologies to prevent air, soil, 
and water pollution. 
 

Mr. Speaker, since 1982 this administration has approached the 
issue of the environment with integrity and respect. Over the 
past few years, the environment has become increasingly 
important to people the world over. People everywhere are now 
realizing that the environment is not to be taken for granted. 
 
In the past, people thought nothing of exploiting the 
environment and manipulating it to their own advantage. 
Countless numbers of plants and animals have had to be placed 
on the endangered species list because man’s activities have 
been such that it has made it difficult, if not impossible, for 
them to survive in the environment because man’s activities 
have made fundamental changes to it. 
 
Saskatchewan has been no exception. People here, too, are 
becoming more and more aware of how their activities affect 
the environment, which we all too often take for granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. As I said earlier, those who 
wish to get into the debate will have that opportunity. I don’t 
think it’s fair to the member from Nipawin, who is attempting 
to make his remarks, to be continually interrupted. And I don’t 
think it’s fair for anybody to have to endure that. Therefore, I 
once more ask the members in the House to give him the 
opportunity to make his remarks. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
for people who profess and claim to have an interest in the 
environment, they don’t want to talk about it reasonably and 
rationally, but to holler from their seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the stand that this government has 
taken on the environment. Our policies and initiatives have 
always been guided by, and have only been undertaken after, 
careful consideration of the impact that they’ll have on our 
environment — all of them, Mr. Speaker. This administration 
has a keen awareness of the fact that certain initiatives may 
have adverse effects on the environment, and we therefore make 
sure that we are kept abreast of any potential dangers. 
 
We’ve also undertaken initiatives to reverse some of the 
damage that has occurred in the past. In many cases, Mr. 
Speaker, damage that has occurred is irreversible; however, in 
cases where we can make a difference, we are making that 
effort. 
 
Late last fall, for an instance, the federal government announced 
that as of 1990 leaded gasoline would be taken off the market. 
It’s now fairly common knowledge that that gasoline is posing 
serious threats to our environment. 
 
At the provincial level, our government recently introduced a 2 
cent a litre non-rebatable tax, environmental tax on leaded 
gasoline. The reason that  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

704 
 

this tax was introduced was to discourage people from using it, 
to use more environmentally safe gasoline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only does leaded gasoline produce sulphur 
dioxide which is linked to acid rain when it’s burned, it’s also 
contributing to the greenhouse effect; the greenhouse effect, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re all familiar with — the gradual raising of 
the average temperature of the earth. Saskatchewan is a living, 
breathing example of what that effect can mean. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve already been experiencing severe drought over the last 
year or two. An increase in the average temperature can only 
make matters worse. 
 
We already have a water supply problem without an increase in 
the temperatures. Many of our rivers and streams already run 
dry when the heat of the summer gets to be too long and too 
hot. Mr. Speaker, I’m not an expert in that field, and I don’t 
really know if the process can be reversed. I’m not sure if 
anyone does, but we do know that we have the capacities to 
slow that down, if not to stop it totally. And that’s precisely 
why we have placed the non-rebatable tax on leaded gasoline. 
It’s one more step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Power has become essential to our current way of life, and the 
Shand power project in south-eastern Saskatchewan is going to 
help to provide more power while maintaining a healthy 
environment. With regard to Shand, Mr. Speaker, which has 
been under attack by members of the opposition, not for 
environmental reasons, purely political reasons, this 
government has undertaken extensive measures to make sure 
that that power station does not contribute to future atmospheric 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shand will use the latest in technology to limit 
emissions of sulphur dioxide into the air. It’ll use a zero 
discharge system. It’ll be the first in Canada to use that. That 
system is a water management system. Any water that is used 
will be kept on the site and will be stored in ponds lined with 
non-permeable liners. This will ensure that the water will not 
escape into the river system or into the underground water 
system. Mr. Speaker, it follows from reason that if this water is 
not allowed to make its way back into the river or the 
underground water system, it goes to follow that we are 
protecting our water supply. 
 
In addition, the Shand power station will use a lime injection 
system to remove the noxious fumes that have been associated 
with acid rain. This system works by turning the sulphur 
dioxide into a solid, which then can be collected and disposed 
of, rather than carried away by the wind, thus protecting the air 
and environment. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the sulphur dioxide will 
be reduced by 85 per cent with the addition of a Finnish system 
called Lifac, as well as additional humidification process. 
 
The plant will also use a locally mined lignite coal, which has a 
lower sulphur coal and a higher sodium content, to power its 
turbine. As a result, it is easier to turn the sulphur dioxide into a 
solid and, because the coal has a higher heating value, less is 
required to produce the same amount of heat and energy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, another initiative of this government: last fall we 
announced a joint venture with the federal government to 
establish the Grasslands National Park. This park is located 
between Val Marie and Killdeer in the south-western portion of 
our province, and it will be one of the only grassland areas in 
the world to be preserved in its natural state, one of the only 
grassland areas in the world to be left untouched by man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we entered into another agreement with the 
federal government to establish the Last Mountain national 
wildlife area. It’s a conservation area that is home for many 
wild migratory birds, birds such as white pelicans, gulls, terns, 
cormorants, and others. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this area has 
already become an internationally recognized conservation area, 
and it is a haven not only for those birds and other animals that 
are inhabitants of the area, it is also a haven for bird watchers 
and other naturalists, environmentalists, and botanists. 
 
Another project of this government, an initiative, is the 
aluminum can and the plastic bottle recycling program done in 
co-operation with SARCAN Recycling Inc. Not only are 
disabled people benefitting through the jobs provided there, but 
it is a step toward the elimination of wastes being put back into 
our environment, a utilization of a product which was formerly 
thrown away. It is recycled and reused, Mr. Speaker, not only a 
saving to that project but also to energy and a saving to our 
environment and contamination on our roadsides, parks, and 
other places. Mr. Speaker, that initiative has received praise 
from all over the country. 
 
We’ve established the Boundary dam containment site to store 
PCBs. This is a favourite topic of our members opposite when it 
deals with PCBs. This site . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Could I ask the members on 
the opposite side of the House to allow the member to continue 
his speech, please. It would be appreciated. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This site meets or exceeds all federal and provincial legislation 
regarding the storage of PCBs. Until recently they were being 
stored at various sites across the province, but as of March 1 
this year the process of moving PCBs from SaskPower to the 
Boundary dam storage site was started, and as of June 1 the site 
will open up to industry at large. 
 
The impact of such an initiative is twofold: it removes the threat 
of PCB-related disasters from areas of high population density; 
then it makes regulating the area and ensuring that accidents 
don’t happen much more effective. 
 
I should also mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that while PCBs are 
in transit to Boundary dam storage site, the transportation of 
dangerous goods legislation, which was introduced to reduce 
the risk of accidental spills, must be strictly adhered to. 
 
The only PCB-contaminated material that is not accepted at that 
storage site are mineral oils contaminated at less  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

705 
 

than 500 parts per million. These oils go to PPM Canada Inc. in 
Regina, which use a chemical process to destroy PCBs to a 
level of less than two parts per million. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during this process there are 
no emissions into the atmosphere. The solid wastes are stored 
and shipped out of the province for disposal, and when the 
fluids are brought to PPM Canada Inc., they are stored no 
longer than 10 days in double-lined storage tanks — protection 
for the environment, Mr. Speaker, from a dangerous chemical. 
 
Our efforts reflect not only our concern with its well-being but 
also . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina 
Elphinstone, would you allow the member to continue his 
speech please. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As I was saying, our efforts not only . . . will reflect not only 
our concern with our environment’s well-being, but also our 
efforts to improve the way that wastes are handled in order to 
not pose a further threat to our environment. We know that it is 
our job to act responsibly with regard to the protection of the 
environment, and we are. 
 
We are not the administration that deliberately misled and 
deceived the people with regard to a massive PCB spill that 
endangered hundreds of lives. And if that isn’t enough, the 
administration . . . the former administration, who some 
members presently sit in opposition, actually had the audacity 
to cover up that spill, Mr. Speaker, to put dirt and asphalt on it 
and cover it up to think that it would go away, while 
endangering the lives of the citizens of this city and this 
province. They covered a substance as potentially dangerous as 
PCBs with asphalt to hide it from the people rather than 
warning them and dealing with it. The people have the right to 
know, but instead of telling them and cleaning it up and 
disposing of it properly, they covered it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not the actions of a group of people who 
should be trusted to run a province and look out for the 
well-being and best interests of the people they are paid to 
represent. They are the actions of a group of people who will 
stop at nothing for their own political gain. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people count on this government to keep 
them informed of the situations that they should know about. 
Not only do we respect the environment, we respect the people 
that we represent. The people, Mr. Speaker, people that trusted 
us enough to put us into this Assembly, the least we can do for 
them is to be honest with them and represent them to the best of 
our ability. That’s what the members of this government are 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning of my remarks, I’d be 
moving a motion, seconded by my colleague from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of  

Saskatchewan for its dedication and devotion to the protection 
of our environment and for its leadership in not only enacting 
environmental protections but also in developing new 
technologies to prevent air, soil, and water pollution. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I now so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
participate in this debate this afternoon. It’s a pleasure because 
of the record of this government and the record that it’s set for 
itself in the dedication to the environmental concerns of the 
people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, proof of that dedication can be seen in the actions 
of this government over the past seven years and in the budget 
speech delivered to this House just a short time ago — a budget, 
I might mention, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite voted 
against. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at some of the recent initiatives of this 
government, you can see we are really committed to addressing 
environmental and public safety issues of the day. We 
introduced hazardous substance regulations, Mr. Speaker, 
which took effect April 1. These regulations control the storage 
of hazardous chemicals and are aimed at minimizing 
environmental and public safety hazards. 
 
Some of these measures include the registration of storage 
facilities, ministerial approval for new facilities, and the 
upgrading of existing facilities within specified periods of time. 
They won’t be left for ever. They have to be done, and they 
have to be done in a specific period of time. 
 
The focus of these regulations is prevention, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
on prevention, and that’s where it should be. Let’s prevent the 
problem before it occurs. With the required preventative 
measures installed and the contingency plans in place, the 
potential risk to the environment, to our families, of storing 
these hazardous substances should be greatly reduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in September of 1986 the government announced 
an institutional chemical collection program. Through the 
program the government collected 15 tons of surplus old and 
potentially dangerous chemicals and substances from schools 
and hospitals all over this province. Imagine that — 15 tons of 
dangerous waste in such sensitive places as schools and 
hospitals, left by the previous administration — left. 
 
As a preventative measure, a guide to laboratory safety and 
chemical management in school science studies activities was 
prepared by the department staff and provided to these 
institutions as a means to prevent the same sort of situation 
occurring again. 
 
Again, the emphasis is on prevention where it should be, not on 
cleaning up the mess and not in covering it up. It’s on 
education, Mr. Speaker, and that’s where it belongs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we produced a program, first in North America, 
for our beverage container recycle program.  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

706 
 

Through this we combined a recycling program with the 
employment of the handicapped. There are currently 38 depots 
employing approximately 120 persons with handicaps, Mr. 
Speaker, and eventually there’ll be over 100 in this province — 
100 I’m proud to have here. 
 
I’m pleased to say that one of those depots is in my 
constituency, in my riding, and it’s at Gravelbourg. The 
members opposite talk about job loss with cans. I ask them to 
talk to the people about job creation; I ask them to ask the 
people at Bon Ami; ask them about job creation. 
 
This government introduced PCB regulation, Mr. Speaker. It 
took steps to ensure all waste PCBs in the province are in 
secure storage areas. We know where they are, Mr. Speaker; we 
know where they are; we can guard them; we can safeguard the 
public. We won’t cover them up; we won’t cover them up with 
pavement as the members on opposite did, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
deal with them; we’ll deal with them properly. This government 
cares, Mr. Speaker, but it also acts; it acts properly. 
 
The site near Boundary dam meets and exceeds all federal and 
provincial legislation with respect to PCB storage, and the 
transportation of materials to the site will strictly follow 
transportation goods legislation guide-lines. 
 
We care about the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, but we 
also act; we act to protect them. Mr. Speaker, last year a 
program to eliminate the dangers related with old coal mines 
was established. As far as can be determined, no other province 
has established a separate program to locate, evaluate, remedy 
the problems with abandoned coal mines. We don’t ignore the 
problem; we deal with it. 
 
My constituency has some abandoned coal mines, and I am 
pleased that this government cares for the people of this 
province and the people of my constituency. It’s also prepared 
to deal with the problem; it’s prepared to deal with the problem 
properly and do it now. 
 
This government was involved in the regulation of one of the 
first full uranium mine decommissioning projects in North 
America, Mr. Speaker. This was at Eldorado, Beaver Lodge 
uranium operation, Mr. Speaker. And preliminary monitoring of 
water quality at the site indicates the provincial requirement of 
meeting the water quality objectives will be achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government took steps to clean up 
approximately 20 tons of arsenic trioxide from an old gold mine 
operation on the shores of Douglas Lake. This problem, Mr. 
Speaker, was created in the late ’50s and early ’60s and was 
ignored by every government until the present. We successfully 
completed the program in October of 1987. This government 
cares, Mr. Speaker, it truly cares. But it also acts; it doesn’t 
cover up and it doesn’t ignore it; it acts and it acts properly. 
 
And I’d like to add, Mr. Speaker, that public reaction to the 
clean-up has been very positive; it’s been very, very positive. 
Saskatchewan people truly appreciate that this government 
deals with the problem areas. It acts with them; it acts with 
them properly. It doesn’t ignore them; it  

doesn’t cover them up; it doesn’t drive over them. 
 
I think there’s sufficient evidence to indicate our government 
has been very committed to the quality of life for residents of 
our province that a healthy environment brings and can bring in 
the future. The budget just delivered a few weeks ago indicated 
our commitment continues. It didn’t just begin; it continues. 
 
We are undertaking a blue box pilot project to expand our waste 
recycling activities. This project provides collection boxes for 
newspapers, cans, bottles for recycling. We won’t drive around 
them or over top of them; we’ll collect them and we’ll dispose 
of them properly; we’ll recycle them. 
 
We are introducing a comprehensive water management 
program to firstly and foremostly ensure safe water for our 
communities. We care about the water. We are entering into a 
three-year, $54 million soil conservation agreement with the 
federal government. Our soil, our most valuable renewable 
resource, must be conserved so future generations can enjoy the 
type of environment we’ve had in the past and we’ll have in the 
future. 
 
This year we’ll be providing $1.8 million for the first year of a 
five-year, $9 million commitment to AgWest Biotech 
Incorporated to develop environmentally safe biopesticides. 
This government cares, and cares for our farm families. It cares 
about the children; it cares enough to protect them. New 
technology will help us do that, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government of change and progress, and we’ll progress 
properly; we’ll do it right. 
 
We’ll be providing over $5 million to continue the five-year, 50 
million seedling reforestation program. Reforestation is a 
priority, Mr. Speaker; it’s a priority of this government. Forests 
and reforestation ensure a healthy environment for the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced the 2 cent a litre 
non-rebatable surcharge on leaded fuel to encourage the use of 
unleaded fuel. This government cares about our environment, 
Mr. Speaker; it also acts. It will discourage the use of 
environmentally harmful products. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this represents our first step in taxing 
environmental harmful products. This will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions of this government prove that the 
protection of our environment remains an important priority. I 
am certain that our government will continue to take positive 
action to preserve the natural environment of Saskatchewan for 
the benefit and enjoyment of current and future generations. 
 
And I want to mention, I want to mention for a minute, 
Rafferty, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to mention it. I’d like to mention 
it to the members opposite. 
 
I come from the South, Mr. Speaker; I come from the South. I 
know about drought; I know all about it. I’ve lived it; I’ve lived 
it my whole life. I’ve seen the water come; I’ve seen the water 
come and go every spring, Mr. Speaker. I know about the value 
of water; I know about the value of water, Mr. Speaker. I 
support water  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

707 
 

management; I support water management and I support the 
environment. 
 
I know what water can do for the quality of life of people of 
southern Saskatchewan. This is not a political issue; it’s not a 
political issue. It’s one of common sense. It’s one of common 
sense, Mr. Speaker, one of which the members opposite will 
really have a hard time to relate to, because it involves common 
sense. It doesn’t involve politics, it involves common sense. 
 
Tommy Douglas knew about water management, Mr. Speaker. 
He knew about water management, he knew about the drought, 
and he cared. He cared enough to support it. He supported water 
management, Mr. Speaker. He supported water management of 
the Souris; he supported water management. 
 
John Diefenbaker knew about water management; John 
Diefenbaker knew about water management, Mr. Speaker. He 
knew about the drought and he cared. He supported Rafferty. 
 
Our Premier knows about water management. He knows 
enough to care; he really cares. He cares about floods, he cares 
about droughts, he cares about the people of this province, and 
he had guts enough to do it. He had the guts enough to do 
something about it. He knew about the value of water; he really 
knew. He knows about the South; he knows about drought and 
the need for water and water management. 
 
He knows about the need for power; he knows about the need 
for power and what will happen if the lights go out. He knows 
of the value of water management and its potential for power 
and for power produced in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 
residents, not by people outside of the province. What are we 
going to do? Import it? He knows of the value of power and 
power generation in the ability to create jobs — jobs for 
Saskatchewan people, not for people outside the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He knows about the alternatives: imported power, nuclear 
power. Turn off the lights; energy efficient light bulbs. Wind, 
the only place where there’s enough wind in this country would 
be from the members opposite. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to be able to make some comments for the brief time 
that we have in this debate. I want to begin by simply saying 
that when this resolution was introduced, I concluded that it was 
really stretching a very long bow, but in light of the events that 
have taken place in the last two days, Mr. Speaker, it is 
absolutely incredible. And I guess maybe that is one of the 
reasons why we have the Minister of the Environment not 
taking part in this debate here today, on a very important day 
when such important issues are before this legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me begin by saying the following. We 
are a turning point in the human habitation  

of this earth. No one questions that the environment is a 
complex, delicately balanced system which is being bombarded 
by pollutants at an ever increasing rate. If we don’t act now to 
check the continued pollution of the earth and the destruction of 
our environment, we will eventually destroy the fitness of the 
planet as a place for humans. 
 
And for this reason, we need commitment and political will 
from government. We need a carefully thought out, 
comprehensive, sustainable development strategy which is not 
ignored or not subverted whenever government, for its partisan 
political reasons, feels it should do so as it has done in recent 
months here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government doesn’t have that strategy. It doesn’t have the 
political will. It doesn’t have the commitment, and on too many 
occasions it has been prepared to ignore environmental 
protection requirements to please political friends or to achieve 
political ends, and that’s what’s wrong with their policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It appears recently that someone showed 
this government a poll that said people were becoming more 
concerned about environmental issues, and someone decided 
that some words on the environment were required in the throne 
speech and in the budget. Unfortunately, the words are not 
enough. It’s action and leadership and political will that is 
required, not just a public relations exercise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This government’s record on 
environmental matters is a dismal one, and beyond any doubt 
it’s probably the worst one in all of Canada. Not only has the 
Premier failed to bring into place adequate environmental 
protection policies and programs, but he has conspired to break 
his own laws in order to avoid meeting all the environmental 
protection requirements in the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
This Premier is pretending to be a born again environmentalist, 
but unfortunately he turns out to be like those of the Jimmy 
Swaggarts and the Jimmy Bakkers and others who preach the 
rules of human behaviour but don’t believe those rules that they 
apply to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let us examine that record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of this government and this Premier. That record 
shows that after seven years, seven long years, the environment 
protection and enhancement has been one of their greatest 
failures. Political and corporate considerations have continued 
to be a greater priority than planning for a secure, sustainable 
future. 
 
And just this month, this Minister of the Environment,  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

708 
 

who is the minister today, put on a good act. In fact, it was last 
month. He put on a good act in front of microphones and 
television cameras when he pretended to show outrage at a leak 
of hydrogen sulphide gas from the heavy oil upgrader, a leak, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, which threatened the health of school 
children at Henry Braun School in Regina, and in fact several 
children developed headaches and became nauseous. 
 
The minister admitted that there had been other incidents at the 
upgrader, but said nothing about why he had been so silent 
about them. Workers at the construction site said that this was 
not the first leak of this kind. Oh yes, the minister was outraged 
for one day, but within just a matter of hours the minister had 
turned into a puppy again, and said that no action would be 
taken, that he will turn a blind eye and hope corrective measures 
would be taken. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know very well the signal 
which the minister sent in this inept handling of this matter. He 
told potential polluters that they can go right ahead, they can go 
right ahead and ignore required protection measures because if 
an accident occurs, this minister, this Premier, will let them get 
away with it providing they promise not to let it happen again. 
That’s the signal that he sent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It happened again and the minister, caught in his own 
ineptitude, sounded tough again. But there should be concern 
because one of these times, one of these times, somewhere, 
health will be damaged or life may be lost, or irreparable harm 
may be inflicted on a community, and fake outrage then will be 
too late and not enough. All of this happened, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the same week that the throne speech was read in 
this legislature, putting a lie to the so-called commitment to the 
protection and the enhancement of our environment by those 
members opposite. 
 
During the same period of time, another revelation provided 
evidence that this same minister and the Premier knowingly 
participated in the conspiracy to withhold information on the 
Rafferty-Alameda projects from the governments of Canada 
and Manitoba and from the public in Saskatchewan. And 
yesterday the federal Court of Appeal — the federal court . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would have to ask the 
members to allow the member from Regina North East to at 
least give his address to the House. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
you telling the member from Kelvington-Wadena not to be so 
vociferous in his interruption. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday the federal 
court confirmed all of the suspicions that we and the public has 
had for some time, and the licence issued without the required 
review — a political deal had been struck and environmental 
concerns took second place. 
 
So it is fair to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is the real 
Minister of the Environment? The man who performs moral 
outrage in front of the television cameras, or the man who, 
behind the scenes, agrees that environmental  

concerns should not be allowed to stand in the way of this 
government’s drive to build a pork-barrel project in the 
Premier’s riding. 
 
Which is the real Premier? The man who has in his throne 
speech uttered words which pretend to show concern for 
environmental issues, or the man who has directed that his pet 
project in his constituency go ahead even if his own laws are 
broken, even if serious environmental destruction is caused in 
the process. Which ones are they, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
With this kind of record, anything that this Premier says about 
his commitment to the environment is suspect and just cannot 
be believed. The big lie approach to democratic government 
must be stopped, and another reason why this . . . clearly in the 
eyes of the public, it’s time for a change. 
 
Now before yesterday, Mr. Speaker, before yesterday those 
members opposite could have been excused if they would have 
disagreed with me today. They could have been excused 
because clearly the cabinet has withheld from the back-benchers 
the information on this project which they should have had. So 
one can understand why they would be ignorant about it. 
 
But after the last two days there is no longer any excuse for that 
because they know that they were deceived and they were 
misled by their own Premier and by their own Minister of the 
Environment and by their Deputy Premier. And if they have any 
principle, they would stand up and say that that is wrong and 
they will have no part of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this 
resolution, as unfortunate timing as it is for the government 
opposite, is not a resolution that is worth consideration by this 
Assembly, because it’s irrelevant. 
 
And so I want to move an amendment, seconded by my 
colleague, the member from Rosemont. The amendment I want 
to move is: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to 
develop effective measures to protect the environment, has 
failed to adhere to existing environmental protection laws 
and procedures, and has failed to propose a comprehensive 
strategy for sustainable economic development. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, very much. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m only too pleased to be able to 
rise and second the amendment put forward by my friend and 
colleague, the member from Regina North East. And I do so, 
Mr. Speaker, because to me this amendment signals and 
signifies a new direction that our  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

709 
 

party and our caucus is going to take in regards to our approach 
to questions of development and the environment. 
 
And I want to be able to speak to that, Mr. Speaker, in regards 
to my remarks in a few moments, but I’d first like to deal with 
what I consider the cynical and somewhat hypocritical original 
motion put forward by the members opposite. 
 
I think we want to put their motion in context, and in the 
political context of what’s happening on the global scale, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s evident to everyone in political life in 
Saskatchewan, in Canada, and around the world, that the 
environment has become a major issue, an issue of global 
importance. And there’s a reason why that has taken place. 
 
That reason is quite frankly this: it’s because the world is 
teetering on the edge of numerous ecological catastrophes. We 
don’t have to look any farther than Valdez and Prince William 
Sound in Alaska to see the kind of environmental havoc being 
brought upon the earth. 
 
We don’t have to look very much farther than the St. Maurice 
River and where it flows into the St. Lawrence River system, 
and to see the kind of chemicals that have recently been poured 
into that river by a spill from a chemical plant. 
 
We don’t have to look very much farther than our southern 
neighbours in Brazil to see what has been called the lungs of the 
earth being destroyed through clear-cutting, being destroyed 
through a process and a policy of tearing down the most major 
rain forest, the rain forest which provides one-fifth of all 
oxygen produced on the earth’s surface being destroyed. 
 
We don’t have to look very much farther than those three 
examples, Mr. Speaker, to realize what is happening. The 
people of this planet are not stupid. The people of this planet 
have put together a communications network and have put 
together communications tools so that they’re able to carry 
information from one corner of the globe to the other. And in 
doing so we, the people of the globe, see the kind of 
environmental destruction being wrecked upon this planet. And 
we, the people of the globe, say enough is enough. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, finally the people of the globe are 
getting through to the elected politicians. And in doing so, what 
we have seen is a process whereby those who, not more than 
three or four or two years ago, talked about people who raised 
environmental issues as being kooks or as being crazy or as 
being oddballs, now all of a sudden are trying to wrap 
themselves in the cloak of environmental responsibility and 
respectability. 
 
And that’s the political context that we find happening here in 
Saskatchewan where the members of the Progressive 
Conservative Party who have not cared one whit — not one 
whit — since 1982 about the development of environmental 
policy in this province, now all of a sudden realize that 
environmental issues are becoming more and more critical in 
people’s  

consciousness. 
 
So what do we find? We find a process whereby the Progressive 
Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, and in other places across 
Canada, have said, whoops, it’s politically popular to think and 
talk about the environment, so we better start thinking and 
talking a bit about the environment. And you notice, Mr. 
Speaker, I said thinking and talking about the environment 
because there’s a great gap between thinking and talking and 
doing. Because the record of this government, the record of this 
government since 1982 has been a policy of inaction. 
 
And I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, of the Magna Carta of 
environmental rights which was dangled as bait before the 
electorate by the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs 
— I believe her title is — who dangled it before the election, all 
of a sudden to disappear somewhere into the abyss of the 
Progressive Conservative Party’s litany of broken promises. 
Disappeared, Mr. Speaker, not looked after, not even referred to 
in the Speech from the Throne, not even referred to in terms of 
developing an environmental policy for sustainable economic 
development for this province. 
 
So the record, Mr. Speaker, even on that level, when it’s judged 
by the people of the province, the level of cynicism in dealing 
with the environment is clear. And the issue of 
Rafferty-Alameda does nothing more than reinforce the 
criticisms that people who have been involved in the 
environmental movement have been saying that to reinforce the 
cynical use of the issue of the environment for political 
purposes. If you look at what happened in the 
Rafferty-Alameda environmental review process, it will become 
even more clear. 
 
First of all, we had the government and the minister, the present 
Minister of the Environment, refuse to allow full public 
hearings, official public hearings into the Shand power plant 
project. This despite the fact that they intend to utilize a 
method, an unproven, untried, and totally untested method, to 
reduce sulphur and nitrogen emissions from the coal burning in 
that particular coal-fired plant. 
 
Now we have a new technology that they’re going to introduce, 
but at the same time, time and time again, refuse calls for a 
public hearing. 
 
Secondly, when it came to the dam, Rafferty dam and Alameda 
dam, did the government hold official public hearings into that? 
The answer to that is no. What they did instead was set up a 
panel to hold unofficial hearings. And there’s a big distinction 
in terms of future events, Mr. Speaker. They set up a panel to 
hold unofficial hearings to hear briefs and submissions by 
people who have close connections to the government, 
including Darla Hunter, a lawyer with MacPherson, Leslie & 
Tyerman, who now turns up, Mr. Speaker, on the round table of 
the environment, but who also, Mr. Speaker, makes her 
livelihood as a lawyer for Saskatchewan Power, for the same 
minister that has engaged in the suppression and cover-up of 
information relating to Rafferty-Alameda. 
 
(1515) 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

710 
 

Who else do we find involved in that? We find Dean Brennan 
from the school of commerce at the University of 
Saskatchewan. All of a sudden, Dean Brennan’s wife turns up 
on this round table of the environment to act as another 
consultant to the government on the environment. 
 
One after another after another we see people with close 
political connections to this government trying to undertake a 
political operation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. If the hon. members wish to 
engage in debate, perhaps they should withdraw and engage 
outside, but at this time the member for Regina Rosemont is 
making his remarks. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Time and time again 
we have seen members of the government attempt to utilize the 
political process and the environmental review process for 
political advantage. And Rafferty-Alameda is probably the 
biggest case in which they’ve been caught with their hands in 
the cookie jar. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, being opposed to that kind of environmental 
manipulation is not enough. And as I said earlier, the 
amendment and the fact that the deputy leader of our party, the 
New Democratic Party, is the environment critic, is a clear 
signal to the people of this province that we are going to have a 
new day in dealing with the environment, that we are not going 
to use the environment as a cynical, political issue, but we are 
making a new commitment when it comes to the environment. 
 
The members opposite talk about adding to the greenhouse 
effect, as if somehow the building of the Shand power plant 
doesn’t add to the greenhouse effect. Mr. Speaker, why aren’t 
those members who stand up and say, we don’t want to add to 
the greenhouse effect, standing in their place saying, we’re 
going to stop building Shand, we’re going to put an end to 
coal-fired power stations in this province, we’re going to 
engage in a process where we engage in energy efficiency, in 
energy conservation? 
 
And yes, that includes things like energy-efficient light bulbs 
which, according to SaskPower engineers, would save the 
province between 150 and 200 megawatts of power if they were 
introduced. You know, that may not be as politically popular as 
the Premier of the province building a power plant in his own 
constituency, but it certainly is going to save the environment, 
the ozone layer, reduce the effect of the greenhouse effect, and 
also save Saskatchewan taxpayers money, also save the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers $1.4 billion. 
 
You know, through modern construction techniques, Mr. 
Speaker, we could engage in a new era of energy conservation 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure for me to 
speak on this motion this afternoon, a motion that commends 
what this PC government has done for  

environmental for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The members across the way like to envision themselves as 
environmentalists. The environment is the utmost in their 
minds, or so they would like everybody to think. The reality of 
that, Mr. Speaker, is that our NDP members are opportunists — 
opportunists in every sense of the word, Mr. Speaker. They 
have no policy, so when they realized that the environmental 
concerns were important to the PC Party of Saskatchewan, they 
attached themselves to our cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as the PC government recognize that the 
protection of our environment is a responsibility — it is a 
responsibility of all governments in Canada. Governments of 
today must respond to the stress placed on environment by the 
activities of today’s world. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, odd that the NDP Party, a party 
who has been so irresponsible in the past, would claim to be so 
conscientious today. Yes, Mr. Speaker, conscientious today. 
Let’s reflect for a moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1976 the NDP government of the day chose to ignore — yes, 
Mr. Speaker, ignore a spill of 21,000 litres of PCB fluids in a 
Regina plant here, right in Regina. Yes, Mr. Speaker, ignore. 
And furthermore, besides ignoring it, they covered it up. And I 
listened to the members across talking about cover-ups. I guess 
maybe they were pointing the finger in the wrong direction, 
because who was doing the covering up? It was those members 
across the way, Mr. Speaker. They covered it up with cement, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it took that NDP government two years to 
react to that spill, Mr. Speaker. Two years, Mr. Speaker, to 
react, and that was only because the public became aware of the 
situation, Mr. Speaker. It took the public to bring them to their 
senses. They talk about the cover-ups. I will repeat again, those 
people are experts at cover-ups. 
 
And it was by no means, Mr. Speaker, public knowledge that 
this spill occurred. It was a news leak that advised them of it, 
not the government, Mr. Speaker; it was a news leak. Another 
leak. 
 
Even after the public became aware of the possibility of a PC 
contamination, it took that government nearly five years to 
implement a monitoring and site surveillance program, Mr. 
Speaker. Nearly five years to implement a program, a 
surveillance program. To this day, the slow reaction time of that 
government haunts the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Those people will not forget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because of our public concerns and this government’s 
realization of the effects of PCB contamination, we have acted 
in addressing this problem through a number of programs 
introduced in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. In 1989 the 
Boundary dam PC storage facilities will become operational. 
By centralizing the storage of PCBs in this facility, our 
government will be able to deal with this problem until a high 
temperature incineration facility becomes available. This site is 
specially designed to receive and safely store these wastes. 
PCBs currently in  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

711 
 

storage in over a hundred sites throughout the province will be 
given priority and will be transported to this facility in this year. 
 
The same priority is given to hazardous agricultural chemicals. 
Our governments will be implementing a program to collect and 
dispose of these chemicals which are currently being stored 
across the province. This new program will ensure that dangers 
associated to the storage of these chemicals are eliminated. 
Programs such as these are important to our government. 
 
We are also concerned and dealing with the problem of waste 
materials that are accumulating in many of our communities, 
materials such as cans, bottles, newspapers. As a first step we 
have implemented a recycling program for aluminum cans and 
plastic bottles through the SARCAN recycling system, Mr. 
Speaker. This new program employs over 100 disabled people, 
Mr. Speaker, over 100 disabled people. We have one of them in 
my constituency, the town of Shaunavon, and it has become a 
model for other provincial governments to follow. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, a model. 
 
This budget indicated that we are expanding on our recycling 
activities. I am referring explicitly to our blue box pilot project. 
This project will provide collection boxes, blue collection 
boxes, alongside the regular containers so that Saskatchewan 
residents can deposit products such as newspaper, cans, bottles 
for recycling. 
 
This government has allotted approximately $280,000 to this 
important project, Mr. Speaker. Our recent budget reaffirms our 
government’s commitment to all environmental issues. 
 
We talk about environmental issues. We have one member talk 
about coal-fired plant down in my area; then we have another 
member just standing up and just finished telling us that we 
should abandon coal-fired power plant. Where do they stand? 
They’re either on this side or they’re on that side. No, they’re 
on neither side. They’re either for it or against it; you can’t be 
both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my opinion the members opposite address only 
urban environmental concerns. They have a very narrow 
perspective on a lot of these things on environmental in 
Saskatchewan. Don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, urban issues 
are at the forefront of our minds as well, Mr. Speaker, but in 
addressing them we do not ignore the environmental concerns 
of rural Saskatchewan too. 
 
I realize that the opposition caucus is made up of almost 
entirely urban members, but they should not ignore rural 
members, and that is mainly made up of this side of the 
government. Please recognize all environmental concerns of 
Saskatchewan, but please do not put one ahead of the other 
because they do affect our entire province. 
 
I would like at this time to recognize the drought in 
Saskatchewan. This is an important environmental challenge, 
Mr. Speaker, one that this PC government is addressing. 
Obviously the key concern is the lack of water. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is why we implemented the  

Rafferty-Alameda dam project. 
 
The opposition members across the way called it a mud hole. 
Water conservation projects in this province and in the Souris 
Basin in the south-eastern Saskatchewan — we need those 
kinds of projects. And I am very, very much sensitive about 
somebody calling it a mud hole, because a mud hole is 
something we don’t build. 
 
What we’re trying to do is have a water management project in 
Saskatchewan. Managing our water system is very important to 
agricultural, and mainly so in the south-western part of the 
province, as our member, my member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg mentioned. We live in probably a drier 
area than most of the people do in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we are very concerned about dams, water, 
and water management. 
 
Water management is also . . . we are concerned with this water 
management is . . . comes along is irrigation, flood control, to 
the benefit of the surrounding municipalities. And it also . . . we 
have a big concern because along with this water management 
comes recreation. Water is very important to the south-western 
parts of Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Rafferty-Alameda dams will store water from high flow 
years in the Souris River, Moose Mountain Creek for use during 
low flood years, Mr. Speaker, low flood years. You store the 
water and at a time as we have had in the last few years where 
we’ve been short of run-off, this is where these dams will come 
into play, and this is where this water is so important to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this area has not been developed without 
consideration of the environment. We have committed 
ourselves to no loss of wildlife habitat resulting from this 
development, Mr. Speaker. We are protecting our wildlife and 
their habitat, Mr. Speaker. That is important. We are very 
sensitive about our wildlife. We’re not trying to drive our 
wildlife out of here. But you do have to remember, Mr. 
Speaker, wildlife enjoy water just as well as the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am more than pleased to have 
opportunity to participate for a short time in this debate under 
the rule 16. I’ve listened with interest as members opposite have 
in vain, I must say, tried to defend their government’s record in 
terms of environmental accomplishments in this province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with particular interest as the member 
from Nipawin, and then again the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and the member from Shaunavon just 
now in his remarks, lifted up the tax on leaded gas as a major 
environmental accomplishment of this government — the tax 
on leaded gas, the leaded gas that’s going to disappear within a 
year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if this government in fact were serious about 
protecting the environment and protecting the interests of 
Saskatchewan people and particularly low income 
Saskatchewan people, the simple solution to the leaded versus 
unleaded gasoline would have been simply to lower the tax on 
the unleaded gasoline — equalize the  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

712 
 

price in that fashion. 
 
But no, no. They didn’t choose the simple solution. They chose 
the solution that tends to punish the low income people in the 
province who drive vehicles with leaded gas by putting a 
non-rebatable tax on leaded fuel in this province. The simple 
solution would have been to lower the tax on the unleaded. 
 
(1530) 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, I must say there is even a better solution, and 
I’ll just read that better solution, Mr. Speaker. The solution 
would have been that the government approach the major oil 
companies to reduce the price of unleaded gas, which would 
basically mean no price differential between leaded and 
unleaded gasoline. That was the best solution of all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not claim to be the author of that solution. In 
fact, this solution comes from members of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. This is a policy statement from the 
Progressive Conservative Party as they met in my city of Moose 
Jaw in February of this year. They’re not even listening, Mr. 
Speaker, to their own resolutions. They’re not even listening to 
their own people. Here is a good idea right in their own policy 
documents. Instead of following the logical, the logical course, 
this government chose in fact to just grab a few more dollars 
from low and middle income people in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened also with interest as the members 
opposite, the member from Nipawin and then 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the member from Shaunavon, as 
they highlighted their program of recycling of aluminum cans in 
this province. Well, Mr. Speaker, if there has been a dismal 
failure on the record of this government, it’s the way they 
reintroduced aluminum cans into our province and what has 
happened since. 
 
And you don’t need to see the statistics, Mr. Speaker. All you 
need to do is drive down the highways these days. Now that the 
snow is melting in the ditches, you don’t see just two or three or 
a handful of cans; you don’t see just tens of cans; you see 
dozens and dozens of empty cans in the ditches. All you need to 
do is drive between here and the city of Moose Jaw, and you’ll 
see dozens and dozens of cans in the ditches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that this so-called recycling and program of the 
government — which was intended to protect our environment, 
but it’s failing — that it is a failure is indicated in this year’s 
budget documents. Mr. Speaker, if you were to look on page 
119 of the Estimates this year, you would find a page entitled, 
the environmental protection fund. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the fund established to pay the rebate on the 
aluminum cans. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance is predicting that by the end of this 
fiscal year that fund will contain $9,144,000 — $9 million in 
that fund. That means, Mr. Speaker, that of the nickels that 
come in with the purchase of each can, $9,144,000 has not been 
rebated, or will not have been rebated. 
 

An Hon. Member: — How many cans is that? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — How many cans is that, the member from 
Moose Jaw North asks. Well, Mr. Speaker, if we say 5 cents per 
can not being rebated, at 5 cents a can that’s 20 cans for a 
dollar; at $9 million, that’s 180 million cans that have not been 
returned — 180 million cans. 
 
Now where are they, Mr. Speaker? Well they’re in the 
environment of Saskatchewan; they’re along the ditches; 
they’re along the roadsides. We’re going to find them in the 
bottoms of our lakes; we’re going to see them on the golf 
courses; we’re finding them in the garbage dumps. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re up in the Beaver River. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — My colleague from Regina says they’re up in 
the Beaver River — 180 million cans scattered into the 
environment of Saskatchewan. And this . . . Members opposite 
stand up and boast about this as their great environmental 
accomplishment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s another side to this environmental 
protection fund. We have now $9 million, or will have $9 
million in the kitty, and we’ve had a throne speech that makes 
no mention of this environmental protection fund. I’ve heard 
nothing by way of a ministerial statement or any comment in 
the press from the minister about an intention to use this fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government were truly sincere about 
protecting the environment of Saskatchewan and thereby 
sharing in protection of the global environment; if this 
government were serious about protecting the soil, the water, 
and the air; if it were serious about sustainable development, 
here they have a kitty of $9 million which they could be using, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me toss out a few ideas of things they could be doing with 
this $9 million. This very summer, Mr. Speaker, they could take 
some of that $9 million and, rather than hiring students to sit in 
cubicles and count gas receipts, Mr. Speaker, they could be 
hiring students to go out into southern Saskatchewan and 
northern Saskatchewan to plant trees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We should be planting trees, in my view, across this province. 
A year ago the Minister of Parks introduced to our province a 
provincial tree, and I and we supported him in that. Why is it, 
Mr. Speaker, that this summer, that this summer we are not out 
across southern Saskatchewan planting, planting that white 
birch? Why are we not planting those trees in the ditches and 
around the dug-outs? Why are we not building the shelter-belts? 
 
We have $9 million in a fund. We could be employing young 
people this summer. They could be out working; we could be 
developing nurseries; we could be planting trees, and thereby, 
and thereby, Mr. Speaker, sincerely protecting our environment, 
sincerely dealing with soil erosion problems, sincerely dealing 
with water conservation, sincerely dealing with air quality by 
that one program alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could be taking some of that $9 million in 
funding in our institutions of higher learning, in the  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

713 
 

universities and technical schools. We could be funding courses 
on sustainable economic development. We are going to need 
the best of our young people, the most talented of our young 
people, to be applying their talents to sustainable economic 
development. Why not take some of this money, put it in the 
hands of our educational institutions to fund courses for training 
in sustainable economic development? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could take some of that money and we could 
fund environmental groups in our province concerned about 
environmental issues; volunteers who are out there working on 
behalf of the environment. We could take some of that money 
and share it with local environmental groups and associations 
who are concerned about a problem in their local area. 
 
For instance, for instance, Mr. Speaker, the group of men and 
women around the community of Mossbank who are coming 
together to form an association to deal with the salt drifting off 
Old Wives Lake, a major environmental problem in their corner 
of the province. They need some support, Mr. Speaker; they 
need some help in what they’re doing. We have a kitty here 
now — the Minister of Finance tells us will be $9 million — yet 
we have no notion, no sign, no word of a plan for the 
expenditure of that money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that figure in this year’s budget Estimates tells me 
that, one, their can return system has been a disaster. We have 
now 180 million cans scattered throughout the province. And 
because we have not heard a word, not a word about a plan to 
use that money in a constructive way, it tells me that the 
commitment to the environment that this government purports 
through this motion is insincere, to say the least. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am more than happy to stand in this 
debate and to support the amendment that my colleagues have 
moved and seconded, an amendment that does condemn this 
government for its failure to develop effective measures to 
protect the environment. The headlines of these past few weeks 
are indicative of that failure; obviously they have failed. We 
have spills in our uranium mines; we have clouds of stuff 
floating over Regina. Obviously they have failed to protect our 
environment. 
 
This amendment says they have failed to adhere to the existing 
environmental protection laws. We’re not just saying that; 
environmental groups are not saying that — the federal courts 
of Canada are saying that this week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This amendment condemns this government for its failure to 
propose a strategy for a sustainable economic development and 
that, too, is obvious, Mr. Speaker. This government has but one 
— but one — economic development plan and that’s under the 
name of privatization. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to rise and participate in this rule 16 debate, 
particularly today, Mr. Speaker, when the environment is  

in the forefront. From the statements made by my colleagues, 
there’s no doubt — it has to be obvious to the House, Mr. 
Speaker — that the Government of Saskatchewan is committed, 
even dedicated, to the preservation of the quality of life that a 
healthy environment ensures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than that, we are a leader. I would like to 
talk about some of our programs. The environmental programs 
of this PC government are considered a leader either in Canada 
or the world. Mr. Speaker, in our air and land protection branch, 
there are three programs we are leaders in. The institutional 
chemical collection program that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg spoke of is unique in North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 314 institutions were visited and approximately 15 
tonnes of potentially hazardous material were removed. Not 
only did this deal with the immediate danger, but we’ve also 
addressed the prevention of further occurrences, Mr. Speaker, 
as the member from Assiniboia said. That’s something that you 
see quite regular, Mr. Speaker, coming from this government — 
innovative new ideas to extend our commitment. There are 
presently 273 collection sites which service about 85 per cent of 
the rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in May of 1988, aluminum beverage containers 
were introduced in Saskatchewan. The system for collection of 
these containers is another system unique to Saskatchewan 
across North America. This system that combines the 
employment of the handicapped with the can collection is an 
exciting new innovative idea that covers off two concerns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the collection of the . . . in addition, 
the collection depot here in Regina is also a processing centre 
where cans are crushed for transportation to recycling facilities. 
The densifier used to crush the cans is the largest of its kind in 
Canada. And that is our air and land protection branch, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would like to talk about some firsts in our water quality 
branch. Mr. Speaker, the up-to-date and comprehensive 
guide-lines in our design guide for sewage works and design 
guide for water works are used by municipalities, industries, 
and consultants. The consultants have indicated, Mr. Speaker, 
that they view these guides, those of Saskatchewan, as the very 
best in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, the computerization systems 
we have in our water branch are considered to be the most 
complete in terms of the type of information handled related to 
water and waste water. 
 
In our mines . . . pollution — sorry, Mr. Speaker — control 
branch, this government has a great deal to be proud of. The 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has already spoken on 
these to some extent, but, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add a few 
more remarks. The decommissioning of the Eldorado Uranium 
mine in northern Saskatchewan represents the first full and 
complete decommissioning of a uranium mine in North 
America. And as far as can be determined, Mr. Speaker, no 
other province has established a separate program to locate, 
evaluate and  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

714 
 

remedy problems with abandoned mines. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, the program this government established in 
early 1988 has already completed an initial survey of 
abandoned coal-mines in the southern part of the province and 
has completed remedial work on three dozen of the priority 
sites. 
 
In uranium regulation, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
responsible for regulating the largest industry in the world. And 
the department has responded by establishing a regulatory 
program that is capable of providing a degree of environmental 
protection at uranium mines that is as good or better than any 
other regulatory program world-wide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to touch a little bit on 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. The corporation, established 
by this PC government, is the first and only corporation of its 
kind in North America established to deal specifically with 
water management. Sask Water, Mr. Speaker, has the largest 
pressurized pipeline irrigation development project presently 
under construction in Canada, at Luck Lake. And also at Luck 
Lake, Mr. Speaker, Sask Water is co-operating with Ducks 
Unlimited to develop their most critical intensive water 
wetlands project ever undertaken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken for almost 10 minutes, posting areas 
where the province is a leader in environment and protection 
alone. Those kinds of initiatives are direct proof of our 
commitment to the protection of our province’s environment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I see another $22 million allocated to 
initiatives that will preserve and enhance the environment, 
initiatives like the blue box pilot project, collecting more 
recycled waste, to the soil conservation agreement with the 
federal government, the commitment to help and develop 
environmentally safe biopesticides and the taxing of 
environmentally harmful products — when I see these 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker, I know that our government will 
indeed keep environmental concerns as a constant priority in all 
decision making processes. And because of that, Mr. Speaker, I 
am proud to support my colleague, the member from Nipawin, 
in his motion commending the government for its proven record 
in environmental concerns. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it bothers me just a little bit when I hear the 
members from opposite talking about the Rafferty-Alameda 
dam. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has done no wrong. 
Saskatchewan lived up to every regulation and rule laid down 
by the federal government and all governments concerned, and 
we have nothing to hide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we hear the member opposite, from Rosemont, 
saying he’s proud to have the Deputy House Leader, the 
environmental critic, the same person that buried 22,000 litres 
of PCBs and never said a word about it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Covered them up. 
 

Mr. Britton: — . . . covered them up, I say, Mr. Speaker, when 
we’re talking about hypocrisy, that’s the ultimate. That is like 
putting the fox to look after the chickens. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not here to point fingers, but I am here 
to defend this government, Mr. Speaker. We have lived by 
every rule that was laid down by the federal government. The 
federal government gave us a licence. Now what I would like to 
point out to the members opposite today, Mr. Speaker, why I’m 
pleased to stand here, it is because the very fact that the 
government could rescind the licence proves that environment 
is a major issue and Saskatchewan is prepared to live by those 
rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for your attention. I have a 
few more things I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s time that I made a mention of a thing. I would like 
to . . . I’d like to find . . . I’d like to know where the new 
morality of the members opposite come from. They are 
standing in their seat, Mr. Speaker, and they’re telling us that 
we were dishonest, we hid things, and it wasn’t too long ago, 
Mr. Speaker, when they were burying PCBs which was 
life-threatening, life-threatening, Mr. Speaker. They covered 
that up and, Mr. Speaker, I just can’t believe what I hear when 
they stand up and criticize us when we have, as I pointed out, 
Mr. Speaker, the best records in the world. Many of these 
programs are world-wide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
participate in this debate this afternoon. In particular, I rise, Mr. 
Speaker, to support the amendments that my colleague, the 
member from Regina North East, moved, which read: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to 
develop effective measures to protect the environment, has 
failed to adhere to existing environmental protection laws 
and procedures, and has also failed to propose a 
comprehensive strategy for sustainable economic 
development. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is the Keystone cops of 
government in this country. They talk about the environment, 
yet we see the problems at the NewGrade upgrader. They talk 
about protecting the environment, yet we see the recent 
announcement by the federal government in the federal court 
rejecting the federal licence which has authorized them to 
proceed on the Rafferty-Alameda dam project. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it would be laughable if it wasn’t so serious with 
respect to the impact to the environment in our province. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, in the northern part of the province, 
a uranium spill at Key Lake. And what have they done? They 
stand up in this House, the Keystone cops of government in this 
country, and they issue a resolution saying what a wonderful 
job they’re doing with the environment. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
absolutely incredible what they are doing in every area of 
government, but it’s . . . 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

715 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 1 — Support for the Agricultural 
Community 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today . . . I will be at the 
end of my remarks moving a motion along these lines: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its failure — its failure — to protect 
farm families and the rural communities which are 
suffering from short-sighted, inadequate federal-provincial 
agricultural policies, and from the combined effects of 
drought, low commodity prices, and high debt load. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government, as we have seen in the past, talks 
a lot, talks a lot about nothing. If they were sincere, Mr. 
Speaker, in confronting the problem facing agriculture, they 
would have made agriculture the number one priority in this 
session of this legislature. 
 
But what have we seen out of this government as far as 
initiative is concerned, about talking about the real issue of the 
crisis, the debt, the lack of income? In general, what have we 
seen this government propose to have predictable programs in 
agriculture? Absolutely nothing. 
 
They have a motion on the blues about interest rates, where 
they are going to be the people who are going to change the 
interest rates, go to Ottawa. Well what happened when the 
Premier went down to Ottawa? The interest rates kept climbing 
up. They put the motion on the blues and they do not bring it 
forward, Mr. Speaker, and I ask: why? Why won’t they come 
forward and debate the issue of high interest rates as it is 
affecting the farmers of this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I had a debt of $200,000 as a farmer, and in the 
last year that interest rate rose about four points, about 4 per 
cent, that would increase my debt load by roughly $8,000 per 
year — increase my debt. And yet the government thinks it’s 
fine enough to put a motion on the order paper and let it sit 
there and they are unwilling, Mr. Speaker, to debate it. 
 
And I say they are unwilling to debate it because they have 
nothing to offer to the rural people and the farmers of this 
province. They know that they cannot come out of the problem 
we’re facing in any good political terms. So what are they 
doing? They’re running and hiding. Well they can run, Mr. 
Speaker, but they cannot hide. Because the people, the farmers 
and the rural people of this province, are telling me that this 
government is not footing the bill, mainly because they have no 
predictability in their programs. They are saying, if I’m going to 
be offered something from the federal treasury, or the provincial 
treasury, just let me know so I can budget on that; if I’m not 
going to be offered anything, just let me know so I can budget 
on that. 
 
But what happens is this government continually puts out  

programs. In the long term . . . mind you, the long term for this 
government — I’ll put that in context, is probably three or four 
days, in their long term of three of four days, and continually 
change that program. So they have a motion on interest rates 
that’s costing this province. If you want to put it in grand terms, 
Mr. Speaker, on a $6 billion debt in Saskatchewan, an interest 
rate increase of 4 per cent computes to roughly $240 million a 
year that farmers are paying extra because this government and 
the federal government in Ottawa is not willing to attack the 
problem. The federal government in Ottawa claims it’s because 
they’re controlling inflation in Ontario. 
 
What’s the result in western Canada? We’re seeing higher debt 
to the farmers of this province — to the tune of $240 million a 
year. That’s the problem, and they are unwilling to confront it. 
 
Another question I ask about this government: if their priority is 
agriculture, which we definitely haven’t seen, why did they not 
come forward with Bill 1 as the Bill that helps farmers 
restructuring their debt? In their great budget speech, on page 
11, I believe, there is a statement there that they’re going to 
restructure farm debt. Well I haven’t seen it. 
 
Last year, when Bill 37 came forward, during that Bill the 
ministers were saying, there’s going to be follow-up legislation 
shortly to help farmers. Well we’re over a year, almost a year 
later and all we have is another announcement in the budget that 
maybe something’s coming. Why wasn’t that legislation Bill 1, 
so we could let farmers know exactly if they’re going to get any 
restructuring program; let farmers know if they’re going to be 
able to keep their home quarter; let them know the rules of the 
game. That’s what farmers are asking. 
 
If I’m a farmer out in Saskatchewan, which I am, and if I have a 
debt to the agricultural credit corporation and I have a debt to 
my suppliers and also to the banks, I have to know so that I can 
tell my banker if I’m going to have any extra cash left over 
that’s going to restructuring in ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). I have to know so I tell my 
suppliers. But no, this government does not come forward with 
its first Bill to put forward a program that would help 
agriculture. We have yet to see it. 
 
But what is the first Bill? The first Bill is this government’s 
head-over-heels compassionate relationship with the large 
private corporations, so they bring forward privatization. That’s 
their agenda. Their agenda is to privatize, and the result of 
privatization, rather than working on agriculture, bringing 
forward as Bill 1, their agenda is to work on privatization, so 
who benefits? How many farmers out in rural Saskatchewan, 
about half of them with a severe debt crisis, 60 per cent of them, 
in looking down the road cannot see that things are going to be 
very good? 
 
How many of those people are going to be publicly 
participating in the government’s privatization scheme? Who 
will benefit? is the question I ask the people of this province. 
And who will benefit? I ask the members across the way. I 
know who will benefit. It’s their large corporate friends again 
who are going to benefit, as we saw with  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

716 
 

PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), as we saw with Saskoil 
and Sask Minerals. 
 
And I ask the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, if they think 
they will benefit from privatization. And I think the answer is 
no, especially the rural people who, in the towns, depend on 
agriculture, and on the farms depend on agriculture; and in the 
towns, the small businesses, and on the farms, the farmers have 
large debt. They will not be able to afford it — any program; it 
doesn’t matter what it is. 
 
But here’s the other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker. They won’t 
be able to participate in the program, and all the while the 
efforts of this government to privatize some of our corporations, 
some of our profitable corporations, is taking money out of the 
provincial treasury that could be used to put back into those 
rural communities and those farms. Not only are they losing not 
being able to participate, they’re also losing because this 
province will lose money because they’re giving it to the 
private interest . . . to their private corporate friends. So there’s 
a double whammy here. And that’s the initiative of this 
government — put forward their own political agenda, but who 
will it benefit? 
 
It won’t benefit the ordinary people of this province. It benefits 
only a select few who are going to reap money coming from the 
resources of this province that should be held for the people of 
this province to lower their taxes, to lower their debt. But no, 
they give it away. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I will just use one more example, Mr. Speaker, as to where 
this government’s priorities are. Today, for example, the 
government on its private members’ day puts forward their 
initiative, the topic they want to speak on, the motion that they 
want to debate. And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what that 
motion is? They want to debate NATO (North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization) on private members’ day. With the great defender 
of the family farm, with all their back-bencher rural members, 
they want to debate NATO. They don’t want to debate the 
problems in rural Saskatchewan, of farm families losing their 
farms, of stress and crisis out there. 
 
And yet they’re saying they’re the defender of rural 
Saskatchewan. How hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, and I will not 
stand here and let that pass. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So they won’t come forward with any debate 
on the crisis in rural Saskatchewan, the crisis in the economy of 
Saskatchewan. And that is why we are debating this motion 
today. We have to do something and we are continually trying 
to do something. As the farmers in rural Saskatchewan are 
telling me, why isn’t anything being done to restructure the 
debt? 
 
And that’s why this motion is in there, Mr. Speaker, 
condemning this government for failing to protect family farms 
because of drought, low commodity prices and high debt loads. 
That’s why this motion is here today. That’s the emphasis that 
we on this side of the House  

know has to be placed in the priority list of this government and 
this province; the priority list of agriculture and small business 
being right at the top. Because that is going to be the sector that 
has been and will continue to be the prime sector of making 
sure that this economy flourishes. But this government will not 
debate it. This government will not debate it. 
 
And I ask the member for Rosthern, how many times has he 
talked about a program to restructure the debt in Saskatchewan. 
I can go back in the Hansard, and I will tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that not once has he addressed the crisis of the debt. 
 
The members over there, and the member for Rosthern, will 
talk about everything else around the issue — they’ll talk about 
how they’re going to have a program to . . . In fact, what they 
do is they’ll go through their little book, their little handbook on 
agriculture, and they’ll say, we have the farm purchase 
program. Here it is, farm purchase program. In it . . . where is 
the farm purchase program? They’re still talking about the farm 
purchase program, but they cut it out. So there’s no vehicle 
right now to transfer land, no assistance for young farmers to 
get in agriculture. 
 
If they’re serious, bring forward the Bill. Let us know how 
you’re going to do it. At least debate it with your speeches. 
They had the throne speech and the budget speech to debate it. 
 
What else is there in this little book, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 
production loan program; the production loan program, which I 
think is one of the biggest thorns in the side of this province, 
simply because it was a politically motivated program. They 
knew there was a need for cash, but instead of addressing it and 
structuring that need to help the needs of farmers, they’ve added 
a billion dollars debt. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. All members 
will get an opportunity . . . get their opportunity to get into the 
debate. I’d ask you to allow the member from Humboldt to 
make his point. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can understand 
why the members opposite get a little irritated when we tell the 
truth on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Because the truth is, they will not address the 
real issue out there. They have no predictability in their 
programs. They’re continually tinkering. They have no 
influence or they . . . Here’s another little irony. When any 
money comes out of Ottawa, the Premier of this province and 
the back benchers behind him will say, well, we did it again for 
the people of Saskatchewan, for any federal money coming out. 
 
But whenever there’s a lack of a program, whenever interest 
rates are climbing up, or whatever else is happening federally, 
well, you know, it’s a federal problem and we can’t do anything 
about it. I mean, do they really think the people of this province 
believe that kind of nonsense? The people of this province 
know the  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

717 
 

political agenda behind here, and that is to fleece everybody in 
this province except Tories and Tory friends. That’s the agenda. 
 
I mentioned the production loan program, adding $1.2 billion of 
debt on Saskatchewan farmers. And I agree that in certain 
circumstances that money was used wisely. In certain 
circumstances that money was absolutely necessary, but the 
method by which they put out that program — politically 
motivated — addressed to meet the needs of the political Tory 
government instead of meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 
farmers. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why did they not take that 
amount of money or a lesser amount, probably half of that, and 
reduce the existing debt to the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
restructure their existing debt if they wanted to have a 
subsidized program? That would have allowed farmers to free 
up some of their capital that they’re now using to pay that 
existing debt so that they could get an operating loan this 
spring. But they don’t operate that way because that wasn’t the 
political motive. The motive was to help the government more 
than it helped the farmers. 
 
And if you want to carry on, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already 
mentioned the farm purchase program which they implemented 
for a short period of time to again win an election, and then 
dropped it. Then there’s the livestock cash advance that they 
continue to talk about. Well, the livestock prices right now are 
less than they were a year ago, and the livestock industry, 
especially the beef industry, has come through many years of 
low prices. 
 
But last year what did they do? They reduced the livestock cash 
advance program by 70 per cent . . . by 30 per cent rather, and 
asked farmers to pay that back. Did they think of the fact that 
there was a drought last year, that farmers needed money to 
move their cattle to pasture, move them back, buy feed and get 
water, haul water to cattle or cattle to water? Did they think 
about the prices going down? No, all they thought about was, 
well, we need some of this money back so we’re going to ask 
for 30 per cent of it back. I ask you the logic in that. 
 
A drought affecting the livestock where the farmers need more 
money, a drought affecting the crops where the farmers knew 
their income was going to be down, and yet this sensitive, Tory, 
compassionate government, the government of the farmers, is 
asking for money back, money that farmers could not afford to 
give back. 
 
Oh, many of them paid it back, sure, but I’ll tell you why they 
paid it back. It’s the same thing with the production loan 
program. I’ll tell you, the farmers that I’ve talked to are telling 
me one thing. Because of the way this government operates 
they are going to pay back, get out from under them as quick as 
they can, because they see the ACS actions coming. They see 
the predicted 1,500 actions this year, or 2,000, or who knows 
what the number will be, so they’re scared to get tangled up 
with this government, this government and their hassle-free 
cash a couple of years ago, as they were saying. 
 
Isn’t that quite a way to operate a government. This is the signal 
that tells me that the farmers out there have figured them out. 
They know who they can trust, and they know who they can’t 
trust. And isn’t it unfortunate when an  

economy in Saskatchewan based on agriculture and small 
business, that they can’t trust the government to help them out. 
They’re trying to get out from under them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a number of programs that this 
government has brought forward and have either reduced, 
they’ve tinkered with them, or they’ve wiped them right out. 
And there’s not many programs left. And the point I’m making 
here is that the dollars put out to rural Saskatchewan, it’s not 
that they’re not appreciated, it’s not that any government hasn’t 
got the responsibility to put that money out there, Mr. Speaker, 
but the problem is that they’re continually tinkering with the 
programs. If there’s a political agenda to be met, it doesn’t 
matter what the program is, it will be changed to meet that 
agenda, and a farmer in Saskatchewan and the suppliers and the 
small-business people in rural Saskatchewan cannot operate 
under those rules. And that’s the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move now to further show why we 
brought forward . . . why I put this motion in, condemning the 
government’s failure to protect family farms and rural 
communities by their short-sighted policies, and from the 
combined effects of drought, low commodity prices, and debt. 
 
In this year’s budget, just a week or so ago, if you combine the 
Department of Agriculture and the Department of Rural 
Development, you will see first of all in the budget that the total 
agricultural budget for Saskatchewan, if you look just in the 
budget, it’s about the same as it was, or I believe there’s a slight 
increase . . . a slight decrease, but it was very close. 
 
But when you go into the Supplementary Estimates for 1988 
and you add up in Agriculture and Rural Development, when 
you add up the fact . . . when you add up 35 million — three 
and a half million; and in Rural Development it comes to about 
another . . . there’s 15 and a half, 16 million. When you add all 
that up, what you find is there’s actually a decrease in this 
budget of nearly $50 million in those two departments. 
 
And that is why we have to put motions like this for the record. 
When you try to tell people that you’re not cooking the books 
. . . oh, and sure, I grant them the fact that more money could be 
spent, but I’ll be waiting to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be 
waiting to see. But in fact, as it stands right now, there’s a $50 
million decrease in the budgets to Agriculture and Food, and 
Rural Development. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They need a billion at Rafferty. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s right. My colleague from Elphinstone 
says they need a billion at Rafferty. And that too, in 
combination with what’s happening in the rest of 
Saskatchewan, is the very reason that we have to bring forward 
a motion like this. Because what’s happening . . . and I’ll just 
stray for a minute, Mr. Speaker, into a constituency like 
Estevan, the Premier’s riding. 
 
You ask yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members opposite, 
why is the emphasis being put on this Rafferty-Alameda 
project? Well I’ll tell you why: because the Premier happens to 
be the MLA for Estevan. And I  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

718 
 

don’t know how the back-benchers can sit back and let the 
people of this province fire at them like they’re firing at them 
over the Rafferty-Alameda project just to save the member from 
Estevan, just so he can have some people working in his 
constituency. And they have all their reasons, but if I was a 
back-bencher I’d start to be scratching my head and saying, just 
a minute here; is this the preservation fund for the MLA for 
Estevan, or is this in fact something that’s going to be good for 
the whole province? And I wouldn’t doubt that some of the 
members back there are already scratching their head. If they’re 
not, they certainly should be. 
 
Because we see through the whole process of this 
Rafferty-Alameda project, the Premier of this province, the 
member for Estevan, who also, Mr. Speaker, if you want me to 
relate this to the motion, is the Minister of Agriculture — I 
wonder why the farm groups in this province can’t get a hold of 
him. I wonder why he’s inaccessible. I know why — because 
he’s down making sure that he’s going to get re-elected in 
Estevan instead of looking after the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — What have we come to? Going through the 
motions of pretending they’re the friend of the family farm, but 
yet there’s the other agenda. And I’ll bet you a dollar to a 
doughnut, as long as I’m standing here, that the Premier of this 
province will continue to push that project down there for all 
he’s worth, whether it’s legal, whether it’s illegal, whether he 
has studies or not, because he, in combination with his Tory 
friends in Ottawa, will assure — because it’s the buddy system 
— will assure his own re-election. And that is why we have to 
bring motions here to try to debate, to try to ask the other 
members in this House to debate these issues of agriculture. 
 
They’re so caught up in privatization, profiting only a few. 
They’re so caught up in the preservation of the Premier and the 
MLA for Estevan, benefitting only very few, that they are not 
talking about the real issue of the debt problem, the problem of 
restructuring the debt in this province. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a crisis out there, and I don’t like to say 
that, but the facts are that there is a crisis in rural Saskatchewan, 
in the towns and on the farms, and it’s flowing over into the 
whole economy of the province. 
 
What did the Government of Saskatchewan do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to ensure the farmers received the drought program 
promised by the federal government? What have they done to 
ensure that drought program? 
 
I believe that I know the reason why the delay has been so long 
in the drought program. I think the reason is because before the 
federal election of 1988, I believe there was a commitment 
made from the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture of the 
province of Saskatchewan, saying that he would kick in some 
money to assist the program, saying that he would administer 
the program. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you know what? I 
think he’s even ratting on his Tory friends in Ottawa on this 
one. 
 

I think he’s welshing on a deal, and he’s doing that because he 
can’t keep the economy of this province rolling because he has 
no money left because he’s spending it on other things like the 
patronage. He’s spending it on things like patronage and waste 
and mismanagement, and he’s not getting it in because he’s 
giving away any revenue-generating corporations that’s owned 
by the people of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s the why this drought 
payment . . . one of the reasons why this drought payment has 
been so long. The two Tory governments in Ottawa, both in 
debt, both struggling to find money somewhere are using the 
people of this province. They’re using them by not delivering 
on their promises. They’re betraying them. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what more could a farmer 
do right now when he has his back up against the wall, short of 
revolt, when he was promised a payment, and these payments, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are an investment in that farmer’s farm? 
It’s not a hand-out, it’s not a gift, it’s an investment to ensure 
that he is going to be able to continue farming this year. 
 
But because we don’t have that payment that was promised 
during the federal election — they said it would be out in early 
January — the Premier of this province is not holding up his 
end of the bargain, therefore delaying the process even further. 
And now they’re trying to negotiate to see how much he’s 
going to put in. Those negotiations obviously aren’t going very 
well because we still don’t see the payment. Oh, it’s on its way, 
it’s on its way, a little bit of it. 
 
But tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members opposite, tell 
me how as I farm in rural Saskatchewan this spring and I walk 
into my financial institution and I say, I need money for 
operating, and they say, I’m sorry, you are no longer a good risk 
— where do I turn? 
 
In essence, this government is denying, and the Tory 
government in Ottawa is denying, possibly denying some 
farmers the right to farm their own land by not being able to put 
their crop in this year. 
 
That’s why they don’t get up over there and talk about the crisis 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I didn’t think I’d ever hear 
myself say this, but I don’t think any member opposite, rural or 
urban, care about what’s happening out there. And that’s hard 
for me to say because I’m a fellow rural member and I care. But 
by looking at all the process that we’ve gone through here, I 
don’t know whether they care. If they cared, why aren’t they 
putting pressure on their Premier to say, look, we have to have 
this thing delivered. And it’s not being delivered. 
 
All the while, when farmers are struggling for cash, when their 
incomes are down and the two Tory governments, in Ottawa 
and Regina, led by the Premier of this province, can’t get their 
act together to deliver a predictable program that farmers will 
know at the end — we don’t even now know what the end 
result is going to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

719 
 

Isn’t that terrible when some money should have been in the 
hands of the farmer already, and yet the farmers don’t know the 
final outline of the program? How am I this spring, or any other 
farmer in Saskatchewan, how am I supposed to budget for the 
following spring and summer? How do I budget, when it would 
be very easy for this government here and in Ottawa to put out a 
predictable program that would let me know exactly what was 
happening? 
 
And like I said before, farmers are saying: tell me what I’m 
going to get; if it’s nothing, tell me nothing; if it’s something, 
tell me what the number is; that’s all I want to know. 
 
But the Premier of this province does know something. He 
knows that there’s an election coming up sooner or later in this 
province. 
 
And I just want to talk for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 
the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. I’ve talked earlier 
about his concerns, where they lie. He is now spending $9 
million on a birthday party — $9 million of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money on a birthday party. And oh, he says, it’s 
going to be promoting Saskatchewan and all the activities and 
everything — tourism and all that kind of stuff. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I believe that that’s the guise they’re going to 
put it under. 
 
But instead of spending money on agriculture to help reduce 
interest or help farmers become viable, they’re spending money 
on a $9 million birthday party. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe — if I were guessing, and I don’t think I’m guessing too 
far wrong — that the majority of that $9 million will be spent in 
the six months prior to the next provincial election, possibly in 
the Premier’s riding. But I’ll bet you the majority is spent six 
months prior to the next provincial election on advertising 
promoting government. 
 
Isn’t that quite a little picture. We have farmers in this province 
leaving the land, people exodus-ing, and the government is 
more concerned about self-preservation. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when I talk to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan, they say the only way that they would agree to 
spending $9 million, if it was a farewell party, because it would 
be the best money they ever invested. And I believe they’re true 
— a farewell party for the Tory government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn for a minute to the livestock 
industry, and I touched briefly on it earlier. In Saskatchewan, 
the livestock people are now changing . . . or having a program 
changed to the national tripartite. Stabilization has changed to 
tripartite . . . changing. We have to ensure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this Premier has to ensure that there are a couple of components 
of that agreement that have to be changed. 
 
Number one, it has to be an orderly marketing . . . single-desk 
marketing rather, a single-desk marketing agency. And 
secondly, it has to be a cost of production formula instead of the 
backward averaging formula. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
should know that the averaging formula does not work, because 
when western grain stabilization began they had the same type 
of formula,  

and it didn’t work then so they had to change the program. And 
now they’re saying, well we’re going to have the averaging 
formula. Just because they don’t have the political will to do it 
right, just because they’re falling in line with the federal 
government again — a half-baked program. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the beef industry under this 
tripartite program, we’re assuming that every province is going 
to come into this program on an equal footing. Well I’ll tell 
you, that is ludicrous. We have to ensure in any program that 
we know what the rules are, so that we can ensure an increasing 
number of cattle in our industry, because that’s what’s going to 
put dollars in the pockets of farmers. But this tripartite program 
does not do that. Oh it will cost the farmer less, but they are 
also going to receive less. As I said, the cash advance is cut 
back. 
 
Another component of the cash advance program I’d like to 
touch briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that the 
government is now doing a complete audit. They’re going out 
and counting farmers’ cows because they found out that there 
was a number of farmers who took the cash advance, and when 
they spot checked them, that they didn’t have the cattle there to 
match that. 
 
Well that’s one of the problems that does come into this 
program, and you have to police that. And I agree to that. But 
what I don’t agree to is a complete audit being done by this 
government and charging the farmers to do it. What they’re 
saying is, we used to trust you but now we don’t trust you any 
more. 
 
So they’re taxing the farmer again. They’re charging a service 
fee just like they’re starting to do in all the ag credit corporation 
business. They’re starting to transfer the cost that was in the 
past carried by ACS. They’re transferring those little service 
fees — and it’s not great big amounts of money — to each 
farmer. But the point is it’s transferring, it’s taxing the people, 
the farmers of this province, where they shouldn’t be taxed, and 
especially in the counting of the cattle under the livestock cash 
advance program. Because they’re saying, I’m guilty and I got 
to prove myself innocent. And I don’t think the farmers out 
there like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk for just a minute now 
about the out-migration of people in this province and how it is 
affected and why it ties into this motion. We see in rural 
Saskatchewan, because this government’s failure to implement 
programs that help the rural people, that we’re losing 
businesses; we’re losing families off the farm; we’re losing 
families in town, just to the tune, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year 
of about 16,000 people, and in February, this month, over 6,000 
people. And they’re leaving because this government does not 
have a plan. But then, just a minute, maybe I’m wrong — 
maybe they do have a plan. 
 
Why wouldn’t the government when they see an exodus of that 
number of people — a net outward migration of that amount of 
people — why would they not be trying to stop that? And I 
think part of the reason is because the Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture, still maintains today what he has said and written a 
number of years back, that there are a number of people, 
farmers in this province,  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

720 
 

who are inefficient and should go. And he’s delivering on that 
promise. That’s the only promise that I wish he wouldn’t have 
kept, but he’s delivering on that one. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the out-migration of the people of this 
province is tearing the economy — tearing down the economy, 
tearing down the lives, tearing down the rural communities to 
such a point where I ask this question. With all the programs 
that this government said it has, the great, wondrous programs 
to help this province — privatization, lack of help for the 
agriculture industry, concentrating on birthday parties for 
self-preservation, concentrating on getting the Premier elected 
in Estevan — I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while all this is 
going on and the economy is falling down around them, the 
question to be asked, and the question for the people of this 
province to ask is, what will be left? 
 
What will be left when these people are finished with our 
economy? There will be a few rich Tories around, maybe, but 
they’ll probably be gone by then too. That’s the question. In the 
whole scheme of things, whether we talk about education or 
health or small business or agriculture or anything else, what 
will be left for our children to look forward to when this Tory 
government is done? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think 
there’s going to be much left. 
 
Therefore, in order to take one more step in the removal of 
these people from office, I will end this debate by moving the 
motion, seconded by the member for Quill Lakes: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its failure to protect farm families and 
rural communities which are suffering from short-sighted 
and inadequate federal and provincial agriculture policies, 
and from the combined effects of drought, low commodity 
prices, and high debt loads. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to join and to second the motion from the member from 
Humboldt because certainly if there’s any one single problem 
that this legislature should be dealing with, it’s the crisis in 
agriculture. And this government does not even have the 
courage nor the conviction to come forward here and to debate 
the major crisis in this province. 
 
Let us take a look at the magnitude of the problem that is 
confronting the people of Saskatchewan today. And we are now 
in day 23, and this government has absolutely refused to 
address one single question on agriculture. And they have 
refused to bring forward any legislation or any programs that 
they have mentioned in the budget debate and speech. 
 
Let’s take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the seriousness of the 
situation. In their own document, which they went around 
Saskatchewan and had hearings with the people  

and the farmers — it’s called the Farm Finance for the Future: 
M.L.A. Committee Report — and I want to quote out of there as 
to the magnitude of the problem. Because it said: 
 

A recent Angus Reid opinion poll indicated that over a 
quarter of Saskatchewan farmers do not believe they will 
be in agriculture in three years. 
 

That was in 1987. One-quarter of the farmers were saying, 
when surveyed, that under those circumstances they would not 
be farming. 
 
And last year we had one of the major droughts that has hit this 
province since the last time that we had a Tory government here 
in Saskatchewan, back in 1929, the Anderson government. We 
had a drought then too. But the Angus Reid poll says that 
one-third of the farmers are saying they are unable to stay on 
the farm because of the crisis. 
 
We’ve had a major, major drought. And this government, this is 
the report they brought to this legislature in 1987, and not one 
step has been taken to alleviate the situation which has been 
increased in intensity by the drought. 
 
Let’s take a look at how serious the situation is. Today farmers 
are under the heavy burden of $6.5 billion of debt. Interest rates 
are on the increase, increasing the burden. And what does this 
government do? They absolutely refuse to join with the 
members on this side of the House to urge the federal 
government to cut back on the high interest rate policy. 
 
How bad is the problem? Let’s take a look at a further quote 
from their report. It says: 
 

However, the one-third of the farmers currently holding 
three-quarters of the debt may not have the resources to 
continue farming. 
 

That’s in 1987. That’s the statistics they brought back to this 
House, that one-third. That means that about 20,000 farmers are 
on the verge or have been already driven from the farm, from 
the land. 
 
And what do we have this government doing? Well this 
government, in addressing the debt load, the high interest rate 
they refuse to act on . . . But what they have done is, oh, during 
an election they had a $1.2 billion for a production loan. And 
now when the farmers had had the worst drought that has hit 
this province since the Dirty Thirties under the Anderson 
government, what they have done is commence action against 
the farmers. 
 
Both federal and provincial Tory governments, their statistics 
indicate that in 1981-82, when they first took over, 196 were 
driven off — foreclosure; ’82-83, 282; ’83-84, 380; 1985, 502; 
1986, 358 — there was a drop; in 1987, 976 foreclosures. And 
do you know what you find? The Minister of Agriculture of this 
province in 1988 commenced over 600 actions against farmers 
in respect to ACS, the Agricultural Corporation of 
Saskatchewan — over 600. 
 
And now he has turned over actions against another  
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

721 
 

2,000 farmers in Saskatchewan. That’s the agricultural policy 
that we’ve been getting from the members opposite, and they 
stand up and try to say they’re the friend of the farmer. Well I’ll 
tell you, the farmers don’t believe you any more. You have 
gone to the trough once too often. 
 
You have deceived them, and the last one that broke the trust 
that the farmers had, any trust in you whatsoever, was the 
broken promise in respect to the drought payment. Here the 
Premier and the provincial members, along with the federal 
Tories during the last federal election, indicated to the farmers 
across this province that they would get a drought payment over 
400-and-some million dollars in Saskatchewan, that that 
payment would be made in the early part of the new year. 
 
And now what have they done? The Premier of this province, 
the Minister of Agriculture, has refused, has reneged on his 
agreement to help finance the drought payment. He has refused 
to participate, which he said he would, and as a result we have 
the federal government holding back a portion of the payment. 
On the back of the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, is the 
responsibility for the hold-back in the drought payment because 
he refused to participate, which he indicated during the federal 
fall election, federal election, that he would. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan will not be deceived by this outfit again. In 1985, 
when we went across southern Saskatchewan, when there was 
only eight of us in this legislature, we went across southern 
Saskatchewan to help the drought-ridden farmers of southern 
Saskatchewan, and we talked to them and we told them to 
organize to get results. 
 
And at Bengough there’s 1,500 farmers packed the arena asking 
for action. And in Swift Current another 2,000 people with 
trucks and tractors soliciting, asking for the government to 
come to their assistance. But that was initiated by members over 
on this side working with the farmers and telling them to go to 
the meeting and demand — to demand action from the 
government. And I’ll tell you, we got action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I’m saying, and I’m putting a challenge to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan today: join with us again and we’ll 
get action for you. We’ll throw these birds out of office and get 
a decent government to take over and have an agricultural 
policy that will protect the family farms. That’s what we’ll 
have. 
 
You know, today the farmers have been coming to this 
government. There’s been various groups that have come in. 
There’s a group that came to meet with the Premier and 
representative members of the government, the Christian Farm 
Crisis Action Committee. This is a committee that stemmed 
from the original meeting of the Catholic bishops out in my 
constituency at St. Peter’s College, saying that we as a society 
must defend a way of life, the family farm. This is what the 
Catholic bishops were saying. And they’ve set up a committee 
within the committee. They come forward with a number of  

recommendations. 
 
And they’ve asked this government to do a couple of things. 
They asked the government if they would consider, in light of 
the drought, in light of the heavy debt, in light of what we’ve 
experienced in lower prices and commodities, to give the 
farmers a breathing space; just to give them an opportunity to 
see whether the drought ends, which it may well; give them an 
opportunity to have one good crop at a half-decent price. 
 
Because in 1966, I referred to the number of foreclosures, and it 
was down. And Farm Credit Corporation at that time did put a 
moratorium on foreclosures. And it went down. And what I’m 
saying here is the group that was acting on behalf of the 
Catholic bishops, the Christian Farm Crisis Action Committee, 
they’re asking this government, would you consider putting on 
a moratorium just to give us a breathing space. 
 
These are the reasons why. The federal government, in our 
view, broke a promise and deceived us. That’s what the farmers 
are telling us. We totally depended on getting a drought 
payment in the first part of the year, and the entire amount of 
the drought payment. And many of them banked on it, and they 
were going to be able to use that drought payment if they got it 
in this first part of the year, in one payment, to use that in 
putting in a crop. 
 
But do you realize the crisis that is out there? And people sit 
here and we are not taking action. Farmer after farmer I have 
talked to who is not going to be able to have the operating 
money to put his crop in. Operating loans have been cut off. 
You must be out in your agricultural community. The member 
from Arm River is a farmer and a man that talks to them. Surely 
you know that there are farmers out there that have no operating 
money to put in the crop. 
 
And what I am saying is: do you know what the Christian Farm 
Crisis Action Committee asks? They asked this government: if 
you won’t do anything in helping to restructure debt, which I 
think they should be, half of the $6.5 billion of debt is held by 
the provincial and federal government, and they can act. But I’ll 
tell you, they don’t care about the farmers. That’s the truth of 
the matter. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re foreclosing on them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — They’re foreclosing on them, that’s right. 
 
And if you want policy, Mr. Member from Arm River, and I ask 
you: if you’ve met with the group, the Christian Farm Crisis 
Action group, why don’t you take into account, why don’t you 
come into this legislature and at least debate it; why won’t you 
put on a moratorium for a year, which they’re asking for; why 
don’t you stand up for the farmers instead of for the banks? 
That’s what the farmers are asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Stand up for the farmers and not for the banks. 
That’s what they’re saying. Give farmers an opportunity to 
survive. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

722 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad day that history would repeat itself. We 
have followed the history of the Tory party, and it was over 50 
years that we were without Tories, and this province prospered. 
The last time we had a Tory government was back in 1929 to 
’34 or ’35 — the Anderson government. And I’ll tell you, an 
expression grew at that time that Tory times were tough times. 
And I’ll tell you, history is repeating itself. And that Tory 
government didn’t care about people. They associated 
themselves with reactionaries and right wingists in society, and 
they actually marched around this province supported by the Ku 
Klux Klan. That’s what they did in 1929. 
 
And I’m going to prove to you, Mr. Speaker, that that group in 
1929, that history repeats itself, and how can we expect them to 
act on behalf of the people of this province. Do you know what? 
I’m quoting here from Denny: The Family History, and on page 
41 I want to indicate, and I’m going to relate it to this 
resolution, Mr. Speaker, so let me go ahead: 
 
(1645) 
 

The year 1929 was also marked by an election of the 
Anderson government in Saskatchewan, an anti-French 
government. In 1930 when the strategies of the Anderson 
government made it quite evident that an all-out attack 
would be launched against Catholic schools, at the first 
session of the Anderson government The School Act was 
amended in such a way that it prohibited the presence of 
the crucifix in the public schools. It also prohibited the 
wearing of the religious costumes in the class-rooms by 
religious people. 
 

That was those worthy characteristics of a right-wing Tory 
government in 1929. They associated with the Ku Klux Klan. 
They didn’t bring in policies for the people in Saskatchewan. 
They ran at the Catholic schools, they ran at the French, and 
that’s what we have here today. We have the agricultural 
community bleeding. And do you know where the Tory party is 
going again? They are going back to the Ku Klux Klan. 
 
I read here, and one would hardly believe, that history again 
would come back to repeat itself with the association with the 
Ku Klux Klan. And this is in Alberta, the Tory party is tied in 
with the Ku Klux Klan again: “Filmon criticized for KKK 
incident.” And here it says, and I want to quote just a little 
portion of it. McDonald, a spokesman for the Manitoba 
Intercultural Council said: 
 

Filmon should have admonished Highway’s minister, 
Albert Driedger, for shaking hands with the demonstrators 
last week in Gladstone, Manitoba, and saying later he saw 
nothing wrong with them wearing pointed white hoods and 
carrying torches. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 
better be aware because what we have here is the reincarnation 
of the 1929 Tory party, the association with the Ku Klux Klan. 
It’s in Manitoba; it’ll be  

here. I predict it’ll be here, and the people of Saskatchewan will 
be the ones that suffer. Just imagine, tied up with the Ku Klux 
Klan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order order. We are debating a motion 
on agriculture policies in Saskatchewan, and I’m sure the hon. 
member does realize he’s kind of drawing a long bow. Kind of 
drawing a long bow. 
 
Order, order, order. Order, order. So the motion here, of which 
he is quite aware, is about agricultural policies in 
Saskatchewan. The point I’m making to the hon. member that 
his remarks should relate to that. His remarks should relate to 
that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What I’m demonstrating here is there is no 
agricultural policy. And I’m demonstrating to this legislature 
and to the people of Saskatchewan, the reason that we don’t 
have a policy for people is that we have a government here, and 
its history was tied to a right-wing Ku Klux Klan, that ideology 
of 1929. And today what we have is a Tory movement across 
this country again associating with the Ku Klux Klan. And I say 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan, how can you expect, how can 
you expect to get fair treatment from a group that is tied to a 
reactionary, right-wing, murdering group of Ku Klux Klan? 
That’s what we have as a government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think this . . . I think members opposite 
should be ashamed of themselves. Here we have, in the budget, 
indication that they’re going to bring forward a number of new 
farm finance initiatives. That’s what they said. Here is a 
document which says agriculture, food, and the rural way of 
life. When do the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers, need 
these programs? At the whim and for the benefit of the 
members opposite? Or do they need them now? Well I think 
there’s no doubt whatsoever that if these programs are going to 
be meaningful at all, then these programs have to be initiated 
and they should be debated here. 
 
I challenge you. Why don’t you get off your kick of the 
privatization? The minister here is . . . the first Bill he brought 
into this legislature was privatization . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, and then he wants to include it as a course in the 
curriculum — privatization. 
 
And here in their own report they say that 11 per cent of the 
farmers are insolvent, 28 per cent are in serious financial 
circumstances. And another year has passed and they sit there 
and they don’t even have the shame to bow their heads because 
they’ve deserted the farmers of this province, the like of which 
we have never seen since the last scourge that we had in this 
province was a Tory government in 1929 attached to the Ku 
Klux Klan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, and I’ll challenge anyone of you, 
and I’ll challenge the Premier — you bring in your legislation, 
bring in your programs, and we will sit extra hours in order to 
review them and to pass them. Twenty-three days have passed, 
and not a single Bill on agriculture, and we’re losing farmers 
day after day. 
 



 
April 11, 1989 

 

723 
 

But we’re going to privatize. We’re going to get rid of 
SaskPower, says the minister. That’s more important than 
dealing with agriculture. These people here said, well we won’t 
support your resolution urging the federal government to reduce 
their high interest rates because we’re going to bring one in too, 
ourselves. And so their Deputy House Leader, or whatever the 
name they give to him, put one on the order paper. 
 
And yesterday they indicated that we were going to go ahead 
and debate it, because we cannot — the farmers and the 
small-business men in rural Saskatchewan — cannot survive 
with the high interest rates. You’re going to wipe out rural 
Saskatchewan if action isn’t taken immediately. Absolutely 
wipe out Saskatchewan. 
 
But that’s what you want. Because really what you want to do, 
just as the Premier said when he was at the university — 80 per 
cent, he said, of the farmers were inefficient and should go. And 
boy, the Tory agenda is coming true, because that’s what’s 
happening. 
 
And you know how they’re going to help it on? They’re going 
to set up an equity financing corporation — an equity financing 
corporation that was rejected across this province. And I defy 
any one of you to join in this debate and deny that that program 
was rejected, because it was rejected. It was rejected and you 
have no . . . in order to implement take-over of the farm land, 
because you don’t believe in the family farm. You’re going to 
set up an equity financing corporation. 
 
And where are they going to bring in the money from? Well the 
Farm Credit Corporation officials said, there’s lots of money 
over in Hong Kong. They will come in and buy this land; it’s 
cheap. Europeans will come in and buy this land. And what 
we’re going to do is end up with our farmers, not family 
farmers owning their land, but they’re going to be tenant 
farmers. They’re going to be share-croppers. They’re going to 
have foreign ownership of the land. That’s where we’re 
heading, heading for the destruction of a way of life that was 
unique to Saskatchewan and which was cherished by the people 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, it’s absolutely . . . they stand there and will 
not bring in legislation, will not support us in respect to 
reducing interest rates. They won’t put into effect what the 
recommendations of the committee formed as a result of the 
meeting of the Catholic bishops at Muenster. They sit back, but 
as they sit on their hands the casualties continue to grow. 
 
And you see the headlines throughout the papers, Mr. Speaker, 
and they’re a sad commentary to a society which we ran with 
decency and compassion in the past. 
 
What we find now is headlines like this, “Farmers expect sheriff 
with eviction any time.” Isn’t that wonderful? Two thousand 
more applications to the lawyers to take legal actions against 
the farmers — two thousand more legal actions to be taken 
against the farmers. And you know who’s initiating it is the 
Premier of this province, the  

Minister of Agriculture. I say, shame. Read of the stress of 
families that has taken place in this province, “Farmers cave in 
to stress — staggering debt blamed.” 
 
And I’ll tell you, during the federal election this government 
had no problem when they went . . . when Bill McKnight and 
Don Mazankowski wanted to have an opening of a Husky 
upgrader which the private sector would not in fact put much 
money up. Well I’ll tell you, our Premier went down there just 
like that and he said, we’ve got to work together boys. 
 
He put in 2 or $300 million into an upgrader. And do you know 
what he says now? He says, I’m going to renege on the farmers; 
I’m not going to pay in my share on the drought payment. And 
as a result the farmers are not getting their full payment which 
they deserve and which were promised to them. And that’s a 
breach of promise. 
 
“Farmers cave in to stress.” Have you read these? Do these 
stories not affect you? How do you take your pay and go home 
with no concern and respect to what’s happening to decent 
families across this province. Farmers cave in to stress. Do you 
realize a lady ended up in court the other day, a decent human 
being — I believe from the Rosetown area — caught picking 
something up in the store. Decent all her life. She said she went 
off almost into a nervous breakdown because that day Farm 
Credit Corporation came and were seizing land which they had 
established for their son. And you know what? The court 
believed her, and gave her a total discharge in respect to the 
action that had been taken. 
 
These are the stories of human crisis and misery that stands 
before us. And that minister stands in this House and says, 
privatization is more important than family farms, and family 
decency, and family future. That’s what you’re doing. And I’ll 
tell you the farmers of Saskatchewan will join . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I’d like to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave is granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
you’ll see in your gallery, we have some visitors, and I believe 
they’re all from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. And I would 
certainly like all members to welcome them here, but I would 
just like to explain to our visitors that we are — if the member 
from Quill Lakes would please indulge — I would like to 
welcome you. What is in the debate is a motion on agriculture, 
and it’s both sides of the House going against one another. We 
all have our ideology as to how we feel things are ran and how 
they feel we don’t run things as is, but with your indulgence, 
member from Quill Lakes, I would like you to join with all 
members of the House to welcome our visitors from Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 11, 1989 

 

724 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 1 — Support for the Agricultural 
Community (continued) 

 
Mr. Koskie: — I wish the hon. member from wherever would 
have identified the group that he was introducing, but I take it 
he, again, doesn’t know what he is talking about. But certainly I 
join with the House to welcome our guests. 
 
But I know it hurts that the farmers of this province are turning 
against you; they’re turning against you because you have 
deceived the farmers of this province, that’s what you have 
done. You have deceived the farmers and you can’t get off the 
hook. You promised them a drought payment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. It being 5 o’clock, 
the House now stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


