





























































Hansard: August 14, 1989


August 14, 1989 
 

AFTERNOON PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Revenue Lost Through Lottery Tax 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is once again to the Minister of Finance. We know 
now, Mr. Minister, tat the lottery sales have declined by 28 per cent since your government began taxing 
people’s dreams. In just one month, Saskatchewan’s market share has dropped over 2 per cent. What that 
means, Mr. Minister, is that Saskatchewan lotteries received $2.7 million less in revenue last month because 
of the tax imposed on the people of Saskatchewan that buy these tickets. Will you concede that this tax will 
benefit no one, Mr. Minister, in fact, if it means that many people will continue to not buy the lottery tickets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Minister, this Assembly spent some time this morning in interim supply and asked the 
very same question by the member opposite. Now obviously it’s right to ask the question, but the repetition 
from the NDP is something that is record-setting in the British parliamentary system. 
 
Having said that, I indicated to the hon. member quite clearly this morning, quite clearly this morning that the 
tax moneys are going to hospitals. The NDP oppose that. Secondly, I also indicated this morning to the hon. 
member that the sales were off in the other three provinces, Mr. Speaker, the other three provinces. So he 
doesn’t care, he says, he doesn’t care. 
 
Now I also indicated this morning, thirdly, that yes they are down. And finally, I have indicated that it is far 
too soon. And one of the pieces of evidence he used this morning which from his own report said that sales 
are always down in July, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the letters he read this morning. So it’s far too soon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister knows he can’t hide behind the loss of sales in 
the other provinces, because they are only at 94 and 96 per cent, where Saskatchewan’s is down to 85 per 
cent, clearly, clearly, Mr. Minister, a substantial difference. 
 
Mr. Minister, we know we’re going to lose close to $3 million a month. If you project that over a period of a 
year, that’ll come up to a $30 million loss in sales over the year. You projected a gain in taxation of 25 
million. It looks to us, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan lotteries will lose more in annual sales than the 
government hopes to raise by taxing those sales. How can you justify that, Mr. Minister? How can you justify 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Minister, don’t’ take the NDP’s extrapolation as meaning anything because I have 
tabled documents in this legislature where they extrapolated potash sales based on 1980 up into the, I believe, 
twenty-eight billions of dollars in oil and potash revenues. They extrapolated, Mr. Speaker, oil going up $2 
every month six months because it had a blip of an increase in 1981, Mr. Speaker. So don’t’ take the 
extrapolation. 
 
I think there is a fair question that has to be asked, and that is why are lottery sales down in the other three 
provinces, Mr. Minister? It’s a fair question. I have indicated to the hon. member there can be many factors, 
there can be many factors. There can be the game itself, Mr. Speaker, and most people know that these games 
do have a limited period of time where the public is interested. But it’s interesting, it’s interesting that they 
are down in the other three provinces. 
 
I have said, and I have said repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, that yes, we acknowledge that they’re down. Mr. 
Minister, we have acknowledged that. But I have simply said, as well, to the hon. member on probably 15 or 
20 different occasions that in fact it is too soon to tell what the effect will be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Kowalsky: – New question, Mr. Minister. The Saskatoon branch of the Royal Canadian Legion took the 
time to write the minister a letter to voice their concerns, and they indicate that in Nevada ticket sales alone 
they could lose up to $30,000 this year. And they point out in the letter, and I quote from the letter: 
 

The new 10 per cent is not a tax on those who gamble since the cost of a tickets and the value of the 
prizes remains unchanged. The tax is hurting the Royal Canadian Legions, the business community, 
and all those projects that have hitherto been supporting. 

 
Last year, Mr. Minister, the legion estimates that amount to be well over $20,000. It went to organizations 
like the air cadets, the veterans’ home, senior citizens association, the police soccer club, the crisis nursery, 
blind skiers association, just to name a few. So, Mr. Minister, on behalf of these groups, I ask you once again, 
will you not do the sensible thing and withdraw this harmful and unfair tax today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Minister, I can imagine the NDP caucus today of trying to resurrect themselves after 
the potash debate this morning. And, Mr. Speaker, we see the false bravado of the members opposite. I have 
indicated to the hon. member that it is the policy of this government that it wants more of the gambling 
revenues to go to health care. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, we have indicated on numerous occasions that, as it applies for example to break-
opens. There will be new game in the not too distant future which will have some impact. Obviously one 
cannot prejudge that as to what the impact, but there will be new games coming on the break-opens, Mr. 
Speaker. They will have the usual effect of crating some interest; perhaps losing some in another. Again I 
urge the hon. member to calm down and relax a little, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a major decision with regard to the Supreme Court of Canada today, and the 
telephones in this country, and the NDP brought up what they talked about this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. 
 

National Sales Tax 
 

Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, the lottery tax is unquestionable by the most unpopular tax since the used 
car tax, but its’ being given a close run by the national sales tax. Mr. Minister, by now every provincial 
government except yours has declared its position. Only Manitoba has come out in favour of it, and other 
provinces have been vehement in their opposition. Some such as Alberta, their comments have rang with 
defiance. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you, Mr. Minister: are you going to take a position on this, or are you going to continue to 
avoid the issue? The Premier, in his noncommittal way on the weekend, suggested your favour the tax. Is that 
the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, first of all, is not correct on what he says on the other 
provinces, and I indicated last week that Alberta . . . or I’m sorry, British Columbia was considering its 
position on the matter too. 
 
So having said that, we’ve answered the question on numerous occasions. The position hasn’t changed. And I 
really do find it passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that a major Supreme Court decision comes down reflecting 
SaskTel, and the NDP are deathly silent today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Shillington: – New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your own discernible position is that you have 
no position. The public of Saskatchewan have asked for a little more than that in terms of leadership. 
 
Mr. Minister, ordinary Saskatchewan people are supposed to pay 9 per cent more for almost all goods and 
services without any corresponding increase in income. You of all people should know that the public in this 
province simply can’t afford a 9 per cent increase in the goods and services which they purchase. 
 
Will you, Mr. Minister, take a position on this and show some leadership for the public or this province who 
elected you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s information again is less than complete. There are some 
commodities, Mr. Speaker – automobiles, for example, and some of your major appliances – that in fact have 
a reduction on the sales tax. 
 
Oh I think the hon. member just got a copy of the Supreme Court judgement in a brown envelope, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that’s what he’s waving around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having said that, the provincial government’s position has not changed, Mr. Speaker. It’s the same position 
that I articulated, I had hoped rather well, last week and numerous occasions before that. But obviously not 
acceptable to the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: – New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister exhibits a good deal of impatience with the 
question. Mr. Minister, if you don’t take a position on it, you’re going to get a whole lot tireder of the 
question before it leaves you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, another aspect of this tax is the windfall that it brings to the provinces. And 
other governments, notably the Ontario government has been a great deal more candid in admitting that there 
is a windfall coming to the province with this tax. The Ontario government, for instance, states that the tax 
will bring in an additional $170 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you government follow the same route? Will you, Mr. Speaker, be imposing the provincial 
sales tax on top of the cost of the good and the federal sales tax, Mr. Minister? Is that your position? 
 
Mr. Minister, I can see that you’ve got out your Hansard and you’re going to read a comment to which you 
attribute to me, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d ask you to answer the question and not trot out that tired and 
entirely misleading comment out of there, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Minister, the hon. hand-picked Finance critic, hand-picked by the Leader of the 
Opposition over there, Mr. Speaker, today stands up and says, we’re going to get more money, when in 
Hansard on June 14 he says that: 
 

And if I may attribute motives to that, I think it may in part be due to the fact there might have been 
less money if you had (of) gone into a single system. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, on one hand, accuse us of getting less money, and somebody else says we’re going 
to get more money. Mr. Speaker, it’s just like their positions on the potash. Some of them sitting over there, 
they want to nationalize the whole industry. They happen to have been under a gag order during the debate. 
And others saying that we should sell to Canadians, Mr. Speaker, They’re all over the map and at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, don’t come prepared enough to talk about a Supreme Court decisions affecting SaskTel. 
 



Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: – New question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, one of the many objectionable aspects of this tax is 
the off-again, on-again position of the federal government with respect to the disclosure of the tax on the 
retail item as it’s purchase. On June 22 in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix you stated and I quote: 
 

I’m not at all convinced that the public is well served by seeing all taxes tagged on at the bottom of a 
bill. 

 
Mr. Minister, the question to you is: will this tax be hidden from the people of Saskatchewan? The federal 
government, when asked, have said it’s up to you, it’s up to the provinces. I ask you, Mr. Minister, to give us 
some better answer than simply suggesting it’s up to the federal government, which is what you’ve said in the 
past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Minister, my answer is the same as it was in the past. It’s exactly the same. The 
federal government has the power in our view to impose such a tax. And as a result of that constitutional 
power, they have also the right to state as to how the tax be collected, where the tax be identifiable or not. It 
follows quite legally from its right to impose a tax, Mr. Speaker. Our position hasn’t changed in that they 
have the power to decide whether or not it should be totally up front or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 

Public Hearings on National Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the same minister, and I’m sure the minister 
won’t blame us. The people in Saskatchewan have a hard time understanding what the minister’s doing 
because they view him as the 800-million-dollar man, the same one that made the mistake on the budget. So 
we want you to be very clear about this particular tax. 
 
On federal sales tax, it’s not been hinted that you may hold public hearings. And we know very well that 
Michael Wilson and his Finance department under Prime Minister Mulroney will be spending millions of 
dollars on advertising and brochures and publicity to try and pick up the public opinion of something that he 
public do not want, very clearly do not want. 
 
Can the minister tell us today in this House whether or not the province of Saskatchewan will be participating 
in the advertising on the new federal sales tax, or whether or not you’ll be holding public hearings before you 
make any commitment for or against the tax? And if you do hold public hearings, what is that cost going to be 
to the public in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Speaker, the hon. members asked three questions. No, w will not be participating with 
the federal government program. Two, we, as I have indicated that we would beholding public hearings prior 
to the province making a final decision. I happen to think that’s only fair and that’s proper. We have not done 
any evaluation yet as to the cost of those, but I don’t know why the NDP would object. On the other hand, 
they say we’re out of touch; on the other hand, when we talk to people, they say we’re doing the wrong thing. 
 
So I’m prepared to, whenever that final decision of the format or that, we will obviously have that information 
available to the public. In the meantime, I join all hon. members in trying to hope that the member from 
Regina Rosemont comes out of the closet on potash, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 



 
Mr. Anguish: – I’d like to ask the minister about the position of the provincial government on this federal 
sales tax again. You’re telling us that you have no choice in the matter, that constitutionally the federal 
government has the right to impose the federal sales tax. You said that in the answer to the member from 
Regina Centre. So you have no control over what happens. Now you say that you may have public hearings. 
In fact if I heard you correctly, you acknowledge you will be taking hearings out to the public. And I submit 
to you, you take those hearings out there so that you can try and sell another unpopular move to Saskatchewan 
public. 
 
If that’s not the reason, you tell us what the reason is for holding the public hearings at great expense to the 
public again, when you’ve already acknowledged today in this House you have no determination whether or 
not the federal sales tax will come in or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The hon. member is again all mixed up, because what I said to the member from Regina 
Centre . . . the question was, whether it be a tax that is written up up front, so that the consumer pays it. What 
I simply said at that time, it is our view that because it is constitutionally legal for the federal government to 
impose such a tax, they have by implication the same right to declare how its collected, whether it be up front 
or not. 
 
Now what are the questions that the public will have to deal with, Mr. Speaker, and I thin quite properly? The 
NDP stand up and say, if there is to be such a tax, then there should only be one tax. I’m not convinced that 
that’s right, Mr. Speaker, but I think the public should have a say in that. Many people in the province do 
believe if the tax is coming, it should be one tax. And we have had representation from retail people, the 
Consumers’ Association of Canada have called for one; many of the business organizations saying, if there is 
to be one, that there only be one. And I think that’s a fair matter for consideration by the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They should be listened to in that manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Well I think the Saskatchewan people have spoken very loudly. New question to the same 
minister, Mr. Speaker. The problem is that when the Saskatchewan people speak, your government doesn’t 
listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: – The Saskatchewan people have been asking for you and the Premier to stop playing love boat 
with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and get out there and stand up for Saskatchewan people. So if you won’t 
at least speak out for the federal sales tax, why don’t you say no, we don’t want the federal sales tax. Why 
don’t you and the Premier go down to Ottawa and tell Brian Mulroney and Michael Wilson, forget the federal 
sales tax; why don’t you collect the $35 billion that’s outstanding in deferred corporate tax in this country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated on numerous occasions in the past, as Manitoba has stated 
and as British Columbia has stated, one of the situation that arises from a federal sales . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. We’re having a great deal of trouble hearing the Minister of Finance. We’re 
having some interference from both sides of the House, and I’d like to ask the members’ co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the implications of a national goods and services tax is 
that some sectors of the Saskatchewan economy do benefit – manufacturing sector, the resource sector – 
which is Manitoba’s argument, Mr. Speaker, that that has a significant benefit to their resource sector. That’s 
the reason for British Columbia’s position, Mr. Speaker. So some sectors do in fact benefit by the tax. 
 
Further your recognize there are other difficulties with the tax, and that’s a major reason for wanting to listen 
to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. Some sectors benefit, which mean jobs for our people, and others 
of course have a detriment. And when you have that situation, I thin it only fair and proper to go out and 



consult with the people of this province, and ask them at the same time why, when you get a major Supreme 
Court decision on SaskTel, the NDP are silent, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Sale of Silver Lake Farm 
 

Mr. Thompson: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the minister of privatization, and I wish to 
direct the minister’s attention to the privatization of the Silver Lake farm at Green Lake, Mr. Minister. 
 
By way of information, on June 30th the new owners took over the Silver Lake farm, and ever since the sale 
was announced, your government refused to release any details about the sale. From day one your excuses has 
been that you were waiting for the completion of all legal documents. On August 1 you told this House, and I 
quote: 
 
  . . . at the time of the completion of all legal documents I would provide that to the House . . . 
 
That’s your quote, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, surely even the minister knows that three months is ample time 
to complete legal documents for the transaction. My question, after all, it hasn’t prevented the new owners 
from releasing workers or moving the cattle herd. Now is the time to release the details. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to release those details today to the legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: – Mr. Speaker, for the third time I tell the member that as soon as everything is complete 
on the deal, I will. 
 
It might be interesting to the member opposite, and I’m sure he’s aware that if the caveat that is placed on the 
Silver Lake farm by Mr. Bishop and his group from Green Lake were lifted, the transaction would take place 
very quickly. But until that happens, and it may well be we have to go through legal avenues before that can 
take place. So that could take some time yet. 
 
Mr. Thompson: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you indicating to the House today that you 
are allowing the new owners to operate and release workers on that farm without legal documents being 
finalized for the sale? 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: – As I indicated previously, the new owners have put up the money for the farm. Some of 
the legal transactions have to be completed; the caveat is one of those things. As soon as that is finished, the 
transaction will take place. 
 
Mr. Thompson: – New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your excuses are wearing pretty thin. As each 
day passes this looks more and more like another one of your government’s cover-ups. Mr. Minister, what are 
you hiding from the public? 
 
The officials in your department have stated that the new owner submitted the second highest tender. Can you 
tell this House today, Mr. Minister, why your government chose the second highest bidder and not the 
highest? Who are the new owners, Mr. Minister, and how much did you r government receive for the sale of 
the Silver Lake farm? 
 
Mr. Minister, they are operating the farm now. They’ve taken over and released the workers, so I would like 
you to answer those questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: – Mr. Speaker, there was a number of questions there as I listened to him. First of all, 
again, for the member to realize that when there’s a caveat against a title, that holds up the transaction, and 
until that is removed, there has to be some more legal challenges perhaps will have to take place. 



 
Secondly, did we sell to the second highest bidder? Yes, we did. Why did we? Because the highest bidder 
couldn’t come up with the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. 
 
Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, eight adults 
who are attending the International Atomic Energy Association conference at the University of Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, if I could have the blessings of the opposition, I’d like to introduce them. 
 
We have six countries represented here, Mr. Speaker, representing two from Egypt, one from Ethiopia, one 
from Syria, Iran, Pakistan and Thailand. Mr. Speaker, these group of adults are at the University of Regina 
representing the International Atomic Energy Association. Mr. Speaker, would the member form Regina 
Elphinstone let me introduce the guests, please. Show a little class. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are here attending a conference of uranium exploration, a geological training program. This 
is an agency of the United Nations. Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan, of course, are very proud of the 
progress and initiatives that this province has made in nuclear medicine and I’m sure that our guests are aware 
of it. 
 
Would all members please welcome our guests from around the world. 
 
Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: – Now I think question period is over, and let’s have the members come to order on both sides 
of the House so we can move onto the next order of business. Member from Regina Elphinstone and the 
member from Meadow Lake, just come to order and let us go on to ministerial statement. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motion for Interim Supply (continued) 
 

Mr. Chairman: – The member from Regina Centre. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Because I wish to address the committee, Mr. Chairman. That’s the reason why. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re prepared to be patient with respect to short delays, however, the minister is now 
apparently out doing a scrum on a subject that he did not make a ministerial statement on, and I think there 
are two problems with that: one, any comments he had should have been made within the Assembly; and two, 
it’s a discourtesy to this committee to be sitting here doing nothing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I therefore suggest, Mr. Chairman, that we should move on to other business if the minister’s not here. I don’t 
know what the precedent is for waiting for the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: – Yes, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we could ask simply for a short bit of patience from the 
opposition. The Minister of Finance will be here momentarily. The media are interested in the recent Supreme 
Court decision . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’d like to explain . . . is interesting in that particular 



statement and decision by the Supreme Court, and the hon. member is simply trying to accommodate the 
media. He’ll be back momentarily and we’ll get on with this. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. If members want to ask questions, they’re certainly available to ask 
questions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much. I would like to ask the now Minister of Finance, how much money 
we are going to be putting into GigaText in this . . . how much of this money we have invested is going into 
GigaText, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: – Zero. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, I understood that GigaText was costing us some $50,000 a month. Mr. 
Minister, do I take it that this is money that you have a printing-press running? Where is the money coming 
from, Mr. Minister? Ultimately it’s got to come from the taxpayer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: – Those questions are more appropriately put to the minister responsible for SEDCO . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, the member from Moose Jaw North really wouldn’t understand any 
of this even if he did take the time to pay attention and show some common courtesy for the running of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. It’s a little foreign to that particular member, but the GigaText support, Mr. 
Chairman, comes through the normal of SEDCO. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Chairman, it really is an affront to the legislature. The member from Souris-
Cannington, his grip on the province’s finances I’m sure is solid. But to put questions to this particular 
minister with respect to the province’s finances really is, as I say, really is an affront. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to get to the matter of the sales tax. I think it’s probably unnecessary, Mr. Minister, to 
point out to you that expenditures and taxes are but the flip side of the same coin. The more money one takes 
in, the more one can spend. The less money one takes in, the less once can spend. 
 
Mr. Minister, the province of Ontario has indicated that the sales tax will result in an additional $170 million 
windfall for them Mr. Minister, I wonder what the equivalent figure is for this province. What do we expect 
that this sales tax will bring us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The imposition of the federal tax would mean an increase with the present proposed base 
of about $10 million. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, at the rate of increases of taxation of not only 
your government but your federal counterparts, there is an awful lot of unrest in the business community and 
in other sectors of our society regarding the effects of the new federal sales tax on the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, if there is one concern, it is that your government may in fact impose a tax on a tax 
on the new goods and services tax that is going to be imposed by the federal government. And I would like to 
ask, Mr. Minister, what your position is regarding that tax on the federal goods and services tax. 
 
(1345) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – First of all, it depends to one extent . . . whether there will be an increase or not depends 
on how the retailers price their products. Having said that, for example, it could be on automobiles and major 
appliances, in fact there could be a reduction. The issue of whether the province joins or not is one that we 
have discussed and we’ve talked about or view of how we will proceed. 
 
Some components of the retail sector in Saskatchewan have already approached us, asking us to have one tax 
if there is to be a federal tax. That’s the position obviously articulated by the member from Regina Centre. 
We have not made that decision. 
 
The retail sales tax base for Saskatchewan’s retail sales tax is of course the narrowest in the country of any 
province that imposes a retail sales tax. So there would be some significant changes if it was to piggyback. As 



I say, some want only one tax. In my view, that is a question quite fairly that there should be public 
consultation on. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I can’t see the relevance of a proposed sales tax that is proposed to come in in 
1991, that would be relevant to interim supply which is one-twelfth of the spending for the province for this 
fiscal year. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – The member for Regina Centre on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I had hoped that once the potash debate was out 
of the way that this legislature could get on to the affairs of the province in, shall we say, a more congenial, a 
more normal fashion. Mr. Minister . . . and in a more traditional fashion. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in past times we have enjoyed a fairly wide-ranging discretion with respect to the questions 
put to the minister. It has, I think always been regarded as unfair to put detailed questions to the minister with 
respect to the expenditures of the department but that is certainly within the realm of what’s being discussed. 
It’s just been thought not to be practical to do so. 
 
On the other hand, while we try to avoid putting detailed questions of expenditures to him, we have discussed 
broad questions of general importance to the province and that’s been traditional. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, I thin it is unwise to now decide that we’re restricted to the expenditures, because you 
know, Mr. Chairman, that can take a great deal longer. If we’re restricted to the expenditure, that can take a 
great deal longer than this and it would be a great deal less productive. I would think, Mr. Chairman, the 
policy which we have had in the past, which has been a fairly wide-ranging discussion, is a far wiser one that 
what I sense the Chairman is now propounding. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order. Past policy has been, in the final interim supply, it has been a very broad-ranging 
debate on one-twelfth. One the specifics on one-twelfth of the interim supply has not been a very wide-
ranging debate. And If eel that a proposed tax that isn’t in effect until the year 1991 is not relevant to one-
twelfth of the province’s spending, so I find the member’s point of order not well taken. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Well, Mr. Chairman, I will respect your ruling. My question will be: Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated that consultations regarding the way taxes will be structured in the future will continue. I’m 
wondering, Mr. Speaker, if these will be the same kind of consultation that you had when you made your 
decision to privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I think the form of the consultations will be made aware to the public in the future. I 
happen to believe that this is an extremely complex issue; one that I have stated on numerous occasions. 
Some important sectors of our economy benefit. Others are affected in a way that, and the Leader of the 
Opposition has talked about whether agriculture, for example, there should be a lag on tax. We certainly argue 
that that not be the case. I believe and I’ve said before, that that can be corrected. So there are some 
fundamental questions, it affects a great number of the people of the province, and the consultation will be an 
opportunity for the people of this province to make their vows known. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say that a lot of business people in Saskatchewan are rather 
concerned with the proposed federal goods and service tax in terms of collection of those taxes and the costs 
that they incur in collecting those taxes. And I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if you have had some detailed 
conversation with your federal counterparts regarding alleviation of those increased costs in the future, in 
terms of those increased costs to the Saskatchewan business men and women who are facing ever more hard 
times in order to make their living in this province with the increases in taxes that they’re facing, both at the 
municipal and provincial level, and I’m wonder what those conversations with your federal counterparts 
regarding the increased costs . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I have made a ruling that the goods and services tax is not relevant to interim 
supply no. 5, and I would bring it to the member’s attention, there’s certainly all kinds of opportunity in the 



legislature to debate this tax. It'’ a tax that is not even in place. It isn’t coming into place until January 1, 
1991, or proposed to come in, but that has absolutely nothing to do with the one-twelfth of the province’s 
spending. 
 
So I’ll ask the minister to refrain from asking questions of the minister on the new federal goods and services 
tax. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, you have proposed a dog and pony show with respect to this sales tax. You 
propose expending some money, Mr. Chairman, on a dog and pony show with respect to this sales tax. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order. Is the member challenging the ruling of the Chair? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, not at all. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – IF the member – order – if the member is asking questions on how much is going to be 
spent out of this year’s budget for bringing it to the public’s attention – order, order, -- for bringing it to the 
public’s attention – order – the question then is in order. Order! 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, you have proposed a hoof and woof show, as it has 
been called, a dog and pony show. Mr. Minister, I want to ask you what you . . . I think it should be asked, 
Mr. Minister, what you would expect to accomplish from such a charade. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems patently obvious that the public of this province have made up their mind on the tax. 
The last thing this province needs is one more commission running around the province trying to sell the 
unsaleable. You have expended a good deal of money on a commission of public servants with respect to 
SaskEnergy. Nobody came out to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re expending money on the Barber Commission. It’s apparent, Mr. Minister, that while 
some people are coming out, it is highly contrived, and its’ apparently being organized by the Conservative 
caucus to come out. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if it isn’t apparent that this province has had its full of 
commissions whose real function is to try to sell an unpopular government measure. Surely that’s what the 
Barber Commission is, surely that’s what its predecessor was, and surely that’s what this is. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re expending money on the Barber Commission. It’s apparent, Mr. Minister, that while 
some people are coming out, it is highly contrived, and it’s apparently being organized by the Conservative 
caucus to come out. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if it isn’t apparent that this province has had its full of 
commissions whose real function is to try to sell an unpopular government measure. Surely that’s what the 
Barber Commission is, surely that’s what its predecessor was, and surely that’s what this is. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you . . . if there are genuinely questions to be asked, it seems a little unrealistic to think that a 
public forum is needed. I would venture to say that you could hold public hearings in any part of the province 
and comments are going to be almost universal. They don’t want the 9 per cent tax. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, leadership involves something more than setting up yet another commission to try to 
peddle an unpopular measure. I don’t deny you your right to introduce unpopular measures. I simply question 
the wisdom of it. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I really wonder if another dog and pony show is really needed with respect to this sales tax. 
Isn’t it time you took a stand? Isn’t it time you simply spoke to the people of Saskatchewan on this issue, stop 
wasting money, and stop avoiding issues, more to the point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well it’s not our issue to sell, first of all. This is an initiative of the Government of 
Canada. But I think some legitimate questions, and I’m going to respond, and maybe for the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. There are some differences. For example, small business that now collect the E&H 
(education and health) tax in many cases are more concerned about having to collect two than one. Those that 
don’t collect the federal sales tax, the whole question of commission is one that the federal government’s 
going to have to deal with. I can’t tell you whether that’s adequate or not. 
 



I think there are other questions that have to be dealt with. There have to be the level of the exemption for 
small business at 30,000, an improvement over the original five, but still not high enough in my view. 
 
But I have laid out before the hon. member that some parts of the Saskatchewan economy do benefit by a 
lower manufacturing sales tax. Many of exporters, like I say, are manufacturers and resource industries. And 
they are important to this province; we can’t deny that. So it’s not a matter of selling. 
 
And if we get to the point, as you have indicated, that if it is inevitable, if it is inevitable, then how do we best 
deal with it? And I think the public should be consulted in that regard as well. So there are . . . give the 
complexities, given the fundamental change in the tax structure that comes about as a result of a goods and 
services tax, I think it fair that the public do be consulted. 
 
Now we’ve agreed to disagree on that. Like I say, it’s not our initiative to sell, but there are sectors, important 
sectors of the Saskatchewan economy that do benefit by the tax. And is it unwise to ignore that when we’re 
considering the implications? I don’t think so. I think it is unwise to ignore that. That’s the reason for the 
position we’ve taken. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Well, Mr. Minister, those are, with all due respect, Mr. Speaker. Those are fairly esoteric 
questions to put before the public. Surely, Mr. Minister, there’s a better way to come to a conclusion with 
respect to those questions, like the level of exemption, than to hold a public meeting in a town hall. Surely the 
place to put those is to the chambers of commerce, the boards of trade. I say again, Mr. Minister, the only 
function of this dog and pony show that your’ setting up is to avoid taking a stand. 
 
I really wonder, Mr. Minister, what’s wrong with this government. Other provinces have, without it being 
seen as something approaching sacrilege or blasphemy with respect to the federal government . . . The Albert 
government has taken a strong stand. The Ontario government has taken a strong stand against this tax. Why 
is it, Mr. Minister, that you feel the need of this charade to avoid taking a stand? Why don’t you just take a 
stand with respect to the tax? 
 
Is it, Mr. Minister, as the Premier intimated, that you’re secretly in favour of the tax but just haven’t the 
political courage to say so? If so, Mr. Minister, then that puts you at an even lower level than the Government 
of Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your dog and pony show doesn’t make any sense at all except as an excuse for not taking a 
stand. If you’re in favour of it, say so. I would disagree with you but perhaps applaud your courage. If you’re 
against it, for goodness sakes, say so. I don’t understand how any provincial government can be so closely 
knit to the apron strings of the federal government as not to be able to take a stand on something which 
clearly affects you. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, take a stand, avoid the expense. I cannot imagine public hearings on a subject 
of this sort producing any significant result. 
 
(1400) 
 
Some people will no doubt trot out to say that they don’t like it; undoubtedly there will be a large number of 
people come out to say they don’t like it. I’m sure your Tory caucus can organize some people to come forth 
and say whatever you want. You’ve proved that with the Barber Commission, where the line-up is highly 
contrived and artificial. But I really have to wonder, Mr. Minister, whether or not such a process serves any 
useful function. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, you could save the province the expense if you just tell us where you can stand. 
It is simply not credible at this point in time, most if not all other provincial governments having indicated 
their position, it simply isn’t credible for this government to suggest that it’s still making up its mind. There 
cannot be any information you don’t have, Mr. Minister. Why won’t you just come clean, admit it, that you’re 
in favour of the tax, and stop wasting taxpayers’ money, and stop this over-display of your own cowardice, 
Mr. Minister. And that’s what it is, an over-display of cowardice. 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well you can make the allegations you want, but I’ve restated now on numerous occasions 
– you ask us to consult with the chamber of commerce. My understanding, the chamber of commerce is in 
favour of the tax with some conditions. I look at the Retail council of Canada, Saskatchewan division, have 
approached us saying that one tax . . . that they want us to come out in favour of one tax. Certainly the 
resource sector is a major beneficiary; manufacturing sector a major beneficiary. 
 
So I can understand why Ontario would take a position as it has. The Ontario government has made its 
decisions, for example, on free trade, to not respond to its manufacturing sector and has certainly made the 
same decisions with the goods and services tax not to respond to its manufacturing centre. They’ve made that 
decision in their province. In relative terms the resource sector in Ontario is not as important to Ontario as the 
resource sector is to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the circumstances are different and there are beneficiaries. There are, I believe, further changes coming. 
And I would suspect that as we get through this next really 18-month exercise, or close to it, prior to 
implementation, that there are going to be numerous other problems or complexities or suggestions coming 
up. 
 
This is a major change, a fundamental change. And I think the public should be involved. Now we disagree. 
We can have our political debate on Barber, whether we want to talk about some of the NDP groups that 
appeared before it. We can debate that for some time. I’m not sure that this is the correct forum, but I think it 
fair to say that we agree to disagree. I think there should be public hearings. You don’t think there should be 
public hearings, but I’ve stated what the policy is. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the federal government, in its announced 
goods and services tax, proposes to exempt urban transit systems. And my question is, do you plan to follow 
the lead of the federal government by allowing Saskatchewan transit . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order. The Chair has already ruled that specifics of a tax that is not in place yet is not in 
order in this committee. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: – My question is, if you’d listen, Mr. Chairman, are you going to allow Saskatchewan 
transit systems to apply for rebates of the gas tax, which is very much a provincial tax, and has to do with this 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We’ve debated that before, with respect to the hon. member, and I believe I indicated to 
your that in 1982 when the tax was removed the mayor or one of the two large cities in the province said that 
there was a drop in ridership as a result of the removal of the gas tax. I’m in no position to contest the 
accuracy or otherwise of that statement, but that was the statement. So there is no change. We’ve been though 
it before. The member has articulated his concerns, but certainly as it applies to the budget before us, there 
will no change. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: – Well, Mr. Minister, you know that this measure, this gas tax, which applies to transit 
systems and ultimately to users of transit systems and to local governments that have transit systems. It’s 
costing these people, and I might say a fair number of consumers, it’s going to be costing them millions over 
the years. 
 
You have a rebate system for anyone that drives their own automobile, but for anyone that drives a transit 
bus, there’s no forgiveness on your part and you’re asking them to pay the tax. Transit systems are a very 
cost-effective way to move large numbers of people. If we discourage transit usage because we give an 
advantage to people who drive automobiles and we disadvantage people who take the transit systems, you 
know that we will be encouraging more automobile use, we will be encouraging more gasoline consumption 
and, I might say, you will be giving out more rebates. 
 
And I should also mention that the more we discourage transit use and the more we encourage people to use 
the automobile to get to and from work especially, the more the pressure will on local governments, and 
ultimately on the province, to fund additional infrastructure improvements so as to accommodate the 
automobile. 
 



I might also mention that transit systems are a cost-effective way for the poor or for those on unlimited 
incomes and for the elderly to be able to get around in our larger cities. There was a story in the paper the 
other week which reported on a study by the Canadian Automobile Association which says that it’s costing 
the average Canadian more than $100 a week – more than $100 a week to operate an automobile – and that 
includes items such as gas and insurance and the costs of the car itself, fuel, oil. So it’s a cost-effective way to 
enable those with limited incomes and the elderly, many of whom can’t drive cars. To be able to get around. 
 
And you’re putting the pressure on the transit systems by not allowing for the rebate. And I might ask you, 
Mr. Minister, what sense of priorities do you have that you would say that on the one hand you want to take 
away the gasoline tax through a rebate system for those who drive the private automobile, but you want to put 
that additional burden and tax on those who utilize transit systems? What sense of priorities does that display? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well as I have indicated, that one of the former mayors has said when there was no 
gasoline tax, that in fact ridership had dropped. The reverse argument of course is that if there is gasoline tax, 
then ridership of itself should increase. 
 
But let me indicate that as the hon. member full well knows there are other options available to the large 
centres, for example, in the city of Regina. The city of Regina had proposal before it to consider the use of 
minivans, minibuses, on off-hours. They took that proposal to the transit workers’ union and at the particular 
committee it was decided not to proceed, and the proposal had gone some considerable way. 
 
So there were options available to the local government in the city of Regina to contain its cost, control its 
cost, look for new ways. I find it interesting and disappointing in a way, and I think m any people in the cities 
do, when we see at off-peak hours the huge buses driving around with one person in them. 
 
So obviously there are other options to move people around, perhaps, particularly in the city of Regina. And 
I’m prepared to table, not today, but I am quite prepared to table the committee reports and the proposal of the 
city of Regina to have a new bus system. And the particular committee of the present council took one look at 
the proposals and said, well we better take it up with the transit workers’ union first, and the report back at the 
next meeting was having heard from a representative of the transit workers, the proposal be dropped. 
 
So it’s all right to blame the provincial government for everything, but in fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They’re not telling you everything any more, to the hon. member. Things have improved significantly out 
there. 
 
So what I indicate to the hon. member is that there are options available to local governments for a very 
efficient use of the transit moneys that are available to them – we do supply a grant – and that they can take 
advantage of those options. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: – Well, Mr. Minister, at least we know what your priorities are and that’s local 
government bashing and union bashing. Those are your priorities. 
 
Mr. Minister, you make passing reference to seeing city buses drive around with one passenger on them on 
our city streets because they must maintain some kind of schedule. It’s a pity that the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t see the single minister flying around in their government aircraft every day and every week of the year. 
Then let’s talk about use of resources and using resources appropriately, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t have any further questions. It seems that local government, when it comes to you and 
your government, run into a stone wall. When it comes to the needs of our larger cities, when it comes to the 
needs of the thousands and thousands of people who rely on transit, you say no. Yet you talk on the one hand 
about promoting economic diversification to enable manufacturing in this province, recognizing that those 
kinds of concerns need good municipal infrastructure including transit, but you say no. 
 
And let’s make it clear that your priorities are certainly no with the poor, with those on limited incomes, and 
the elderly who rely on transit, and are not with those who concern themselves with the conditions in our 
large cities and who must provide transit service. Let’s make that clear, Mr. Minister. 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – Let me respond and say, you can say it’s inadequate, but don’t leave the impression that 
we don’t pay anything, because under the municipal transit assistance program, we pay $1,829,800. It’s $4 
per capita to the four largest systems and $3 per capita on the remaining systems. So don’t say that we don’t. 
We also have a handicap transit system funding, which is through the Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment. So to say that we don’t pay is not accurate. 
 
Now we can debate the adequacy, and the hon. member reels it’s not adequate. You misinterpret my remarks. 
What I am saying is that the documents how that the Regina city council had the opportunity for some very, 
very imaginative . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and they did, and they precisely . . . no, they precisely, on 
discussion, decided not even to proceed with it when they had the day and the month for implementation. 
 
So they did have some options. They did have some options, and I believe that they were imaginative options. 
I think the city of Regina could have led the country in terms of imaginative, urban transit systems, and in fact 
chose not to do so. So that’s their choice and that’s their right. But by the same token, to come forward and 
say that there’s nothing else we can do but raise rates or whatever was not accurate. That all I’m saying. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: – Well let me ask you then, Mr. Minister. When you fly around in your government 
aircraft, do you pay the gasoline tax there or what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I believe that we pay the tax in the same way that the opposition members do when they 
also take the government aircraft. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, as it relates to this interim supply Bill, this 
Bill we have before us today, I would like to ask the minister if in fact there are some moneys allocated for 
studies as to how the 9 per cent goods and services tax will affect the average person of this province. 
 
And the reason, Mr. Minister, that I ask that is because the people of this province have been taxed to the 
limit; they’ve been taxed to the hilt. They’ve seen the introduction of a new 2 per cent flat tax that your 
government has imposed, this new innovative way of digging money out of taxpayers’ pockets. They’ve seen 
this government break their word in terms of the increase to the E&H tax. There was a promise, as we all 
remember, in 1982 and prior to that, that that tax would be dissolved, it would be gone. We’ve seen increases 
in person income tax in this province, a rate that is unparalleled. Municipal taxes are going up because of cut-
backs to municipal government sin terms of revenue-sharing grants. 
 
(1415) 
 
And I would want to say, Mr. Minister, I think that it’s very important that you’re taking a very close look at 
the effects of this new goods and services tax that the federal government is imposing upon the people of this 
province. The facts are, Mr. Minister, that it isn’t a revenue-neutral tax. It isn’t a change in taxation structure 
that will be revenue-neutral. It’s going to take money out of the hands of Saskatchewan people in my 
estimations and in the estimations of many business men and women, consumers, and farmers in this province 
who are very concerned that you’re not saying anything, nor is your government saying anything regarding 
the imposition of this new 9 per cent tax. 
 
And I would want to say as well, Mr. Minister, the people don’t believe that it is going to be a 9 per cent tax, 
at least not for long, because it’s their belief that the Mulroney government, not unlike this government, is 
cash-starved because of mismanagement and incompetence and will shortly after the imposition of this tax be 
increasing it to 10 or 11, or whatever per cent that might be. And the fact is, Mr. Minister, the people in this 
province also know that there are some $35 billion out there of uncollected taxes that are owed to the people 
of this country by big corporation, and that your federal counterparts are doing nothing in order to get that 
money back. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, they also know who your friends are and who friends of this government are. 
They know that you choose Cargill over the small-business people in this province. They know that you 
choose Pocklington over Saskatchewan small-business people. And they know that you choose Cargill over 
the farmers in this province. Those are all of the things that people in this province, sir, know very clearly, 
and know very clearly what your priorities are. 
 



And I would like to know, Mr. Minister, if you’ve put your mind to the fact that middle income people in 
Saskatchewan can no longer afford Finance ministers like yourself or like your federal counterpart. 
 
Because I think, Mr. Minister, if you were to take some of the money of this one-twelfth allocation and look 
closely at the expenditures that you’re proposing for this year; and if you would look closely at the 
expenditures that you have made in the last years since you’ve been government; if you would look a the 
$50,000 a month that you’re giving the GigaText operation – and the only reason it’s going in there now is to 
cover it up until the end of this legislative session, because you’ve had enough bad press on it – if you were to 
really look within yourself, Mr. Minister, and understand what the people of this province are feeling. I think 
that we might have a better expenditure of this one-twelfth, of this interim supply Bill. 
 
Because I don’t believe, sir, that even you, an educated man, can believe that the people will take this any 
longer. So I ask you: how much of this money is going to be spent having a look at this federal goods and 
services tax, thinking about working men and women of this province when it’s being done, thinking about 
the administrative nightmare that it’s going to create for small-business people, thinking about increased costs 
in terms of accountants’ fees and in terms or redoing their cash registers and their systems with which they 
collect those taxes for you, sir? I’m wondering how much of this money you’re going to be putting towards 
that way of looking at what, I believe, is going to be an ever-increasing problem in this province when your 
federal counterparts impose this 9 per cent goods and services tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well there’s no money set aside for studies. We do a lot of the research within the existing 
Department of Finance. Our tax people are very knowledgeable people within the department. I think it fair to 
say that we have as fine a tax and revenue group of people within the department of any department in the 
country. So we have no additional money set aside. 
 
I do remind the hon. member of the small-business tax rebate which will be going out this fall to the small-
business community of this province. I do remind the hon. member, as I tried to remind him earlier on the 
goods and services tax, that there are businesses within this province that are asking that it be one tax. That if 
they already collect a sales tax, they don’t want to have to go through and do the two calculations, and are in 
fact asking for one tax which it’s not universal, like the hon. member would leads us to believe. And I’m not 
for a minute saying that it is also popular or universally acceptable. I’m not suggesting that for a minute. 
 
I have stated that some have come forward, some have come forward and saying if there is to be a tax, that 
there be one tax. Some have come forward saying that, look, we are being penalized by the present 13 per 
cent manufacturing sales tax and that it should be reduced. 
 
So we look at interest rate protection. To say that middle income does not benefit from that, I find that a little 
hard to believe. I don’t think that’s the view of most home owners in the province. I think it fair to say that 
most home owners in the province now believe that the interest rate protection scheme is a very, very good 
one, and that they are very supportive of that initiative. 
 
So to generalize, have you done, again we agree to disagree, and the debate and the political debate will 
continue for a very long time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Well, Mr. Minister, on some things we can agree. And one of the things that I would 
agree with you on is that your officials most certainly are competent. But what is happening, Mr. Minister, is 
that the advice that those officials are giving you is not being used by yourself or your cabinet or the 
government members on that side of this House, and that’s why we sit with a $4 billion deficit in general 
revenue and a total provincial debt of around some $14 billion – a dramatic increase since your government 
took over. That’s the problem. 
 
And we’ve asked you, Mr. Minister, on a number of occasions regarding your position, and that’s what I 
would like to know, what your position and your government’s position is. And relating, sir, to this interim 
supply Bill, whether or not there would be some money put aside so that this minister could acquaint himself 
with the problems of the people of this province and the problems that the people of this province are going to 
be facing because of this goods and services tax. And that’s my question. 
 



I would like to know, if he hasn’t formulated a personal opinion or opinion regarding what the cabinet’s 
opinion is on this tax, will he put some money aside in this one-twelfth, in order to acquaint himself with what 
the problems are and what the real problems that are going to be faced by the people of this province because 
of the goods and services tax are going to be. 
 
I know, Mr. Minister, that there may be two ways of collecting that tax; there may be others. We understand 
that. But I, sir, want to know what your position is. Because the people of this province are going to have to 
make a decision as to whether they keep you around, and they’re asking this question of you and of your 
government. They know your incompetence in terms of your $800-million blip in 1986 when you were out 
about some $800 million on your forecasted budget. They understand that. And they understand you did that 
for political reasons as much as any reason. 
 
But they, sir, want to know now what your position is before the implementation of this tax because they want 
to know your position so they can lobby you if they’re in disagreement with what you’re thinking. But to 
stand up here and double-talk and skirt the issue is not going to help them make their decision. What they 
want to know is what their government intends to do; what kind of lobby it intends to impose upon the federal 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well we again can go through the debate and we’ve stated our position on numerous 
occasions. You disagree with it. It’s been stated, I think, given both the complexities and the significance of 
the changes to be made, that the people of this province should be heard; they will be heard. The tax does not 
come into place until 1991. It’s not that it comes in tomorrow. I believe that there’s going to be public 
discussion of this tax for the next nearly 18 month, and to say that that’s not going to happen is not accurate. 
 
And secondly, I also believe that there are going to be changes in federal position as the implement date 
approaches. And I expect that those things will be announced from time to time. And if anyone believes 
otherwise, I think they’re getting themselves out on a limb that way. 
 
So there will be changes as we progress. Ultimately, and on this we agree, the public will make their decision. 
And that’s right; that’s proper. But in the meantime, the debate will go on. We’ve put our position forward. 
You don’t agree with it, and secondly, you’ve taken your position. 
 
I do remind you that all three federal parties have taken a position that the federal manufacturing sales tax 
must be revamped and changed because it causes a real disadvantage for Canadian manufacturers competing 
with importers. And so there’s no doubt at the federal level o all three parties that in fact the present 
manufacturing sales tax has to be reformed. Whether this is the way, that obviously will be a matter of public 
debate. 
 
So again, we can go over the debate for some time. Our position has been stated over and over and over again. 
You disagree with it but it remains unchanged. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Mr. Minister, I want to say, and maybe you can clarify it in a little more detail for 
members on this side of the House and other people in this province, I can’t say that I can disagree with your 
position. I can’t say that I can disagree with your position. I can’t do that in this legislature today because 
you’ve not once every stated your position. Not one time in this House have you indicated what your position 
is. And if you can do it within two or three sentences, sir, I would like you to do that today, because you 
haven’t to do this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Maybe you’re coming around. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Well I ask you again, Mr. Minister, will you state your position in short concise terms so 
that men and women on this side of the House and the people of this province can understand it. Because you 
haven’t once yet articulated what your position is regarding this goods and services tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Same one I thought I’d so carefully articulated about two months ago. 
 



Mr. Lautermilch: – The people of this province will be surprised to hear that you have in fact articulated a 
position, because they don’t what your position is, sir. And if you could, could you repeat it in this House 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’ve repeated it at question period. I’ve repeated it I think two or three times at question 
period, and I’ve restated it on numerous occasions, restated it in previous question periods, that what we will 
do is consult with the people of this province. There are some sectors of our economy benefit, other suffer 
detrimentally with the tax. And I have said on numerous occasions, given the complexity of the tax, the 
importance of the changes, that it is only fair and proper that we consult with the people of this province. 
That’s what we intend to do. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Well, Mr. Minister, I guess what I’d want to say, with your answer it’s pretty clear to the 
people of this province that you haven’t got a position. If you’ve got a position, you’re hiding it very well. If 
you’re opposed to it, you’re hiding it very well. If you’re favouring it, you’re hiding it very well too. But I tell 
you, you aren’t really hiding it very well because the people of this province know that you’re in the hip 
pocket of your federal counterpart, the federal Minister of Finance, and you totally support Mr. Wilson and 
what he’s doing on this tax. 
 
I want to ask you, sir, if you can give us some details in terms of the consultation process. Is it going to be 
another Barber whitewash commission, or are you going to be seriously listening to the people of this 
province and their feelings regarding this 9 per cent goods and service tax? Would you make a commitment, 
Mr. Minister, that you will set up an impartial body, with members of this side in consultation as to the make 
up, so that the people of this province can be comfortable with your kind of consultations, because frankly, 
sir, your record so far has been one that any minister shouldn’t be proud of. 
 
(1430) 
 
Everyone knows what you’ve done with the Barber Commission, how you’ve tried to keep people who 
opposed your views away from presenting petitions. We know clearly that your board, although you want to 
try and cover it as being an impartial board, is clearly not; they support privatization. We know that. And we 
also know that there’s going to be a biased report that comes back from that commission because that’s their 
mandate, that’s what you sent them out to do. Would you give us some indication as to how these 
consultations will work, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We haven’t determined the format. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Would you allow for some public input as to the format? Would you allow for some 
input from members on this side of the House, the official opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well certainly. Submit it to us . . . submit it to me and we’ll certainly be glad to take it into 
account. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: – Why, sir, didn’t you allow for that kind of input when you were setting up your 
privatization committee, the Barber Commission, a bundle of this one-twelfth which is going of to pay for 
that? Can you explain that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – That’s not for me to answer now. I have indicated as it applies to the question that you 
asked, certainly. Send me a letter and we’ll certainly give it fair consideration. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. There are other questions we want to get on to in 
other subjects but I do want to make one last comment on the subject of the sales tax. It seems to me the 
suggestion made by the member from prince Albert-Duck Lake that some resources be put into developing 
what I would call some economic models with respect to this tax would be very, very useful. And it isn’t 
something that’s all that difficult, Mr. Minister. 
 
It has been done at the federal level by any number of groups who have pointed out that the sales tax, if its’ 
implemented, it will result in a fairly sharp increase in inflation. It strikes me that it might be useful if the 
provincial government were to spend some portion of this one-twelfth in developing some models of their 



own. It would be useful to know, Mr. Minister, whether or not, as I think is the case, when you go from an 
income tax to a sales tax, those who pay the tax . . . it is retrogressive is what I’m trying to say, that the tax 
borne by a lower income group of people. I think it would, Mr. Minister. 
 
It would be useful as well to know, as I think is the case, that it’ll have a fairly devastating impact on a 
relatively fragile economy. Later on in this Committee of Finance, Mr. Minister, I want to spend a moment 
discussing our economy, but, Mr. Minister, I think it’s fair to say that Saskatchewan’s economy is the weakest 
in Canada, west of the Maritimes. I think that’s probably a fair comment. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems to me that it’s more germane to this province than to any other to determine what the 
impact of a 9 per cent sales tax is. It would appear the impact would be that people would have 10 per cent 
less money to spend and that would make itself felt all the way through the economy. It seems to me, Mr. 
Minister, that in an economy such as Saskatchewan’s, which is already fragile, and I’m being as polite as I 
can, a 9 per cent sales tax is going to have a staggering effect. Mr. Minister, that would be useful to know, and 
it wouldn’t be that difficult. 
 
The difficulty with your response previously – you said, well my department do examine these things from 
time to time. Your approach through this, Mr. Minister, has been to avoid the issue, avoid giving any 
information, particularly if that information suggests the sales taxis something less than good. 
 
Mr. Minister, we believe, and I think the suggestion from the member from Prince Albert was that this ought 
to be . . . a report ought to be commissioned to determine what the effect on Saskatchewan would be, other 
than by your department, because we don’t have confidence that you’d release it. This information ought to 
be available. You ought to be doing this at the provincial level as a number of groups have done at the federal 
level. You ought to be telling us whether or not the collection of this tax is going to be an administrative 
nightmare, particularly for small businesses who are not on a computerized accounting system. I frankly don’t 
know how they’re going to manage it. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve seen a trace of that with respect to the lottery tax. The member from Prince Albert this 
morning was describing people who were spending an extra two hours trying to sort out the bookkeeping 
mess. The time, Mr. Minister, the time of small business is not unlimited. In fact they put in some very long 
days. I think many of the small-business people will readily admit there are some real satisfactions to working 
for yourself. Your successes are your own, and your failures are your own, but I don’t think any small-
business person would clam that they work fewer hours. Small-business people by and large put in very long 
hours, and the last thing they need is another layer of complexity added to their business, and this sales tax is 
going to add a very real level of complexity. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that this is something else that such a report might review. It might, Mr. Minister . . . 
Well in the narrow form of the minister, I could not see the Minister of Finance for the slender frame of the 
Minister of Education. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That’s out of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – The frame or the comment? I think both. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I say I don’t want to take all day on this, Mr. Minister, but it seems to me the suggestion f the 
member from prince Albert-Duck Lake was a very practical one. We ought to have some of this information. 
You ought to be providing it and you ought to be making it public, otherwise people will never make any sort 
of an informed choice and your public process would be a sham. If it’s to mean anything at all, it must be 
preceded by a good deal of information which simply isn’t available. 
 
There’s been a great deal of heat in this discussion about the sales tax and awfully little light. You’re in a 
position, Mr. Minister, to provide some light. The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake suggested the way 
that that might be done, and I would think, Mr. Minister, his suggestion is worth considering and should not 
have been rejected as quickly as you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I didn’t reject it. I said that if he had some input on the public consultation that we were 
prepared to consider it. I won’t rule out the suggestion the hon. member makes in terms of economic models. 



Some of the information, a lot of the information you would expect that we would get in conjunction with the 
national government, so we have to talk to them about their position. Some of that has already been made 
public. 
 
With regard to the inflationary aspect, and I have said this on numerous occasions, some of the advice I get is 
that when a value added tax has been implemented in other jurisdictions, the inflationary impact relative to 
the tax is of about a six-month duration. 
 
Now I acknowledge that there are many other components that can then come into play, whether it be wages, 
whether it be, in the case of Canada, a national Bank of Canada monetary policy, all of these. I’m talking 
about, and I’m sure the hon. member is, as it comes about because of the tax. So there will be all sorts of 
variables and factors that come into play. 
 
Some of the discussion we’ve already seen it he public debate is a result of the federal government’s 
announcement. They’re talking about the impact and their resulting wage and cost responses to the tax. What 
will be the effect of the Bank of Canada? One of the difficulties, of course, is that we’re looking at the 
economy as it will be in 1991, which again is speculative and requires a great number of subjective decisions. 
 
But I’ll certainly take a look at what of that is available and can be released because I think it will have some 
benefits to the people of the province. And I didn’t reject, in fairness, the suggestion of the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- On, you’ve got the problem. You look after it, buddy, because you don’t have the 
position . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I did not. I stated that we would be prepared to consider his proposal. 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some questions to ask the minister, and I have a brief 
statement I’d like to go into in some depth before I place the questions before the minister here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d say to you initially that one of the problems with you bringing in interim supply is the 
process by which we find ourself at today in the legislature looking at August 14, having been here since 
March 8. The second problem is one of questioning by the public as to where all the money is going, and why 
so much of the money that’s disappearing through the government is being taken from the pockets of the 
average taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
On the first point about the process, Mr. Chairman, the public, I think, find it a little strange that we, having 
been here since March 8, have to deal with interim supply on August 14 – a period of some five months, I 
believe after we’ve arrived here – and that interim supply is not part of the normal budgetary process. 
 
I believe it was prior to March 31, 1988, that the government and you, sir, as Minister of Finance introduced 
the budget laying out where taxation would be received from, and secondly, where those revenues would be 
spent, or the expenditures would be made on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan though the government. 
 
That’s fine. The budget debate took place, and after the budget takes place, all people who follow this system 
know that part of the budgetary process is called the estimates. 
 
And instead of your, sir, and your colleagues in Executive Council and the cabinet who set the agenda of this 
place, instead of bringing in the estimates, you were obsessed by your privatization moves, and so here we 
are, five months after the beginning of this session and still have over half of the estimates to go through to 
approve the budget. 
 
And so as people in the province wait on this government, we find you back here again for another interim 
supply Bill, the purpose of which is to give you money so that you can carry on the day-to-day activities of 
government and spend taxpayers’ dollars with the required legislative authority. So that’s the first point that I 
find a little distasteful in this process that we’re going through here this afternoon, Mr. Minister. 
 



The second thing that people have talked to me about across Saskatchewan as a concern, is the fact that you 
have not in government managed their money very well. From 1982 through to the present term, you have 
never once met the estimated expenditures that you were going to make. When the Public Accounts have been 
tabled for any fiscal year since 1982, you have always, in every case, spent more money than what you had 
estimated you were going to be spending. 
 
Now people ask quite often: is this waste and mismanagement; is it incompetence; it is a lack of planning? 
Well there are a number of instances where I think members on this side of the House and also members on 
the government side of the House could point out that it could be any of those items as to the reason why you, 
sir, and the preceding ministers of Finance under the Conservative administration since 1982, have never yet 
once met a budgeted projection, the estimate was tabled in this legislature through the initial budgetary 
process. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I want to look at one of the examples of what I would call waste and mismanagement. Instead of going to 
many, many examples, I’d like to just concentrate on one. And the one that I’ll use for example of waste and 
mismanagement of government spending and lack of accountability is that of GigaText. 
 
When you look at the GigaText situation, Mr. Chairman, you find a situation . . . Well I know the members 
are a little sensitive. I know that members are a little sensitive on the government side about the GigaText 
issue, but here is the case as it should be laid out for the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
A few years ago there was a priest at a parish in Cochin, Saskatchewan, Father Mercure, who protested the 
speeding ticket he received because he was not served in both of the official languages. And since Father 
Mercure’s language of origin was French, he challenged the authority of the ticket he received. And as we all 
know, at this point in time the case went all the way to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court rule din 
favour of Father Mercure and the case that he had brought to the attention of the legal system in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what the federal court basically said, Mr. Chairman, was that Saskatchewan had to translate some of their 
laws from English to French. And the provincial government got up and made great pronouncement that we 
are in fact going to translate about 45 laws initially and eventually there’ll be more of the statutes, more of the 
laws, translated from English into French. 
 
So since we don’t have a system of translators in the Saskatchewan legislature, as they do in the House of 
Commons, the government was looking for, at that time they said, the most efficient way to translate the 
statutes in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so finally they said, well what we’ve found is we’ve found some people with technology whereby they 
use computers and artificial intelligence to translate English into French. All we have to do is put in the 
statute in the English form, and from the other side out will come the French version. 
 
So the two individuals that came to Saskatchewan said, well we have this technology where one Guy 
Montpetit, a business man from the province of Quebec, and a Dr. Douglas Young, who was originally in 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, those two individuals, sir, had a company called Norlus. And when they came to 
Saskatchewan, after some examination at least by the provincial government that this technology would work. 
So the Crown investments corporation, the banker for the Crowns in Saskatchewan, put in $4 million cash. 
 
So what we had in this situation was Norlus putting up nothing – they said they were putting up the 
technology which we find out to date does not work – and we have the Crown investments corporation on 
behalf of the province of Saskatchewan putting in $4 million hard, cold cash, revenues of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And for Crown investments corporation, they received 25 per cent of the shares for 4 million; 
at this point Norlus put in nothing and they received 75 per cent of the company. 
 
Now in November of 1988, sir, Mr. Kyle, the Chairman of the SEDCO board . . . or sorry, in this case he 
wasn’t chairman of the SEDCO board; he was acting in a another capacity; he was acting on behalf, I believe, 
of Crown investments corporation. Or maybe it was Mr. Kyle. There was a phone call went from Crown 



investments corporation to Mr. Price at SEDCO, and the phone call went, well we have some concerns. And 
obviously the provincial government also had concerns because the provincial government had alleged 
themselves criminality, in this case, because they asked the RCMP to investigate. 
 
Now what were the concerns that we had? What was this waste and mismanagement by the current 
administration? Well first off, when they gave the $4 million to GigaText from Crown investments 
corporation, they gave Guy Montpetit from Quebec sole signing authority over the $4 million. And so in a 
period of less than a year up to the first week in November of 1988, the $ 4 million initial investment has been 
totally expended. Every cent of the initial $4 million had been spent under the signing authority of guy 
Montpetit. 
 
How did this money disappear so quickly, and why, people ask, were not statutes produced in the province of 
Saskatchewan from English to French? Well this could be some of the reasons. First off, Mr. guy Montpetit 
leased a jet from GigaMos Air Services for $35,000 a month. Who owned GigaMos Air Services? Guy 
Montpetit owned GigaMos Air services, the same guy Montpetit who was a major shareholders in GigaText. 
So you have GigaText, GigaMos, same thing -- gigarip-off for people in the province of Saskatchewan -- 
$35,000 a month. 
 
One of the other things that caused concern, Mr. Speaker, was the purchase of some computers. In fact under 
the sold signing authority of Guy Montpetit, they bought some Lambda computers. Now you got to realize 
Lambda computers were no longer in production at that time, but a company called GigaMos Services just 
happened to have 10 or 20 Lambda computers around. Now the Lambda computers had no market value, and 
they had no value when they were brought in to GigaMos Services ltd. Now the questions I want to ask to the 
minister is: why did you allow them to spend $2.9 million on the Lambda computers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well the answer of course, as the hon. member was told earlier today, if he had been 
paying the least bit of attention which would have been a significant change in the way he deals with the 
legislature, was that this is a matter for SEDCO, for the Crown corporation, and not before this committee. 
Now he was told that this afternoon, so it’s . . . The minister was here that was responsible told you exactly 
where you ask those questions. 
 
Now you’ve gone on in your usual diatribe, and, Mr. Chairman, the hon. ember has been told this afternoon. 
Now if you want to filibuster interim supply, go ahead and filibuster interim supply. You walked out for 17 
days; you went on strike because you didn’t want to talk about something. Then you went on for four months 
on potash, and you complained about that, that that wasn’t enough. Now you ask questions 15 times, some of 
the questions you’ve asked already on interim supply. So you can filibuster this. You can filibuster this. 
 
I mean, what you’ve stood up today and said to the people of this province, to the people of your riding in 
North Battleford that yes, he answered the question early, but I wasn’t listening. Yes, I stood before this 
Assembly and I heard the minister say point-blank what the answer was, but I wasn’t paying the least bit of 
attention when that happened, and “m prepared to say to the people – and this is what the hon. member is 
saying – that I don’t care about the operation of the House, where the answers are, what the forum is. All I’m 
prepared to do is get and spout my little role rhetoric that I have been saying now for some three months 
without the least bit of attention to the answer. So you’ve been answered the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It’s more than rhetoric. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – And he says it’s more than rhetoric. We’ve already had the debate on GigaText, Mr. 
Speaker, and oh he says, no we haven’t. No he hasn’t listened to it. This is not the forum for it, if the hon. 
member was to figure it out. That’s the Crown Corporations Committee, and so we’ve been through that 
before. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why don’t you consult the public on that one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – And so we’ve been through that before, and yes, sure the public will decide. That’s fair 
enough. But for the hon. member for some reason to sit and think that he’s had the answer early, but that he 
can get up here for 15 or 20 minutes, repeat the same questions and statements all over again knowing full 



well what the answer is, tells me, tells the people of this province that he isn’t paying the least bit of attention 
anyway. 
 
So the hon. member doesn’t want to pay attention. Take it up with your constituents. You go back and tell 
them that you don’t pay attention. You go back and tell the people of North Battleford that you’ve sat here for 
now, as you said, for four months and you haven’t paid the least bit of attention. You go back and tell the 
people of North Battleford what your contribution was to the strike. You go aback and tell the people of North 
Battleford that you sit here and ask the same questions 17 times, over and over and over again. That’s fair 
enough. That’s obviously your right to do that. But the question has been answered; the question was 
answered earlier. 
 
The forum for that, Mr. Speaker, is the Crown Corporations Committee. If you haven’t figured out in the 
years that you’ve been here how interim supply works, that’s not my problems, that’s your problem. That’s 
your problem. It’s not an expenditure of the budget, so it’s an expenditure of the Crown corporation, SEDCO, 
which I suggest the proper forum of that, at least the historical forum, has been the Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
Now for some reason you don’t think that that’s the right way to do things. If you just wanted to get up and 
spew your rhetoric, there’s another way to do it, and that’s take it as read. File your comments down and do it 
that way. 
 
So what I’m tell the hon. member is, you had an answer earlier this afternoon. It was repeated to you by the 
minister responsible. You didn’t’ particularly like it. Fair enough, fair enough. This is not an agreement 
forum. I recognize that. But come on now, this interim supply has had some historical rules – has had some 
historical rules – and I suggest that you follow them. 
 
Now you can go through your harangue again, and when you get through your 20 minutes, I’ll come back in 
and answer the question. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, I’d like to raise a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – State your point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, in light of the minister’s comments respecting this particular subject, I 
would ask you to provide us with a ruling on the relevancy and the appropriateness of bringing these types of 
questions today during interim supply. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance has made a very good summary of the fact that there are other 
forums, other public forums in fact, that being Crown Corporations Committee, where the Crown corporation, 
SEDCO, which does have responsibility for the financial debate could and should take place. 
 
I do want to remind members that this is interim supply. This is Committee of Finance dealing with the taxes 
and budgets of this province, and I would ask you, Mr. Chairman, to make a ruling on the relevancy of this 
particular subject. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to comment for a few moments in 
reply to the five-minute point of order made by the minister, but I want to say that the point being raised by 
the member from The Battlefords is one, I think, that’s very important to the people of the province. 
Government waste and mismanagement and corruption is one of the biggest issues in the province at the 
present time – one of the biggest issues. 
 
What the member from The Battlefords is asking about is money that flows from the Consolidated Fund – 
that’s what we’re dealing with right now – to SEDCO every year. And I see in the Estimates, it’s clear that we 
deal with SEDCO all the time in this Assembly. In fact, there’s an order in the Estimates called Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation. And out of this legislature, the vote that we’re giving today, money 
flows to the minister is asking for $36 million -- $36 million that will come out of this very vote, part of it, to 



SEDCO. If you divide that by 12 – we’re asking for one-twelfth -- $3 million of this money will go to 
SEDCO. 
 
Now the minister knows that. He knows full well that money will come out of here and go to SEDCO, that 
this one-twelfth of 36 million that’s granted to SEDCO this year will come out of this allotment to SEDCO, 
and part of that money will in fact go to the GigaText project and Guy Montpetit. 
 
And I say to the minister, he’s clearly trying to avoid the issues that we’re talking about. That is money that 
flows out of the Consolidated Fund to SEDCO to pay for GigaText, that fiasco and that corruption, as people 
in this province now call it. 
 
So I think it’s impossible to deal with the interim supply as we traditionally have done. We ask where the 
money goes. It’s called grievance before expenditure, Mr. Minister. You know that full well, and it’s a long-
standing tradition in this House. And that’s what we’re doing. We’re talking here, my friend and colleague 
from The Battlefords, about the 36 million that comes from the Consolidated Fund to SEDCO. And of the 
money we’re allocating today, about 3 million, if we’re granting one-twelfth, will go to SEDCO. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s clear that it’s perfectly within order to talk about hat money that’s being 
granted out of this allotment to SEDCO> 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I find the point of order not well taken. But I would ask the members to relate 
their questions to the interim supply Bill that’s before us. The general debate usually takes place on the final 
interim supply. 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your ruling and it’s understandable that government 
members are sensitive about the waste and mismanagement of their government. 
 
Now the minister said that I wasn’t listening. I was listening very well. I heard the Deputy Premier sitting 
where the Minster of Finance was supposed to sit, saying this is a matter for SEDCO. Well it is a matter for 
SEDCO. You’re putting money into SEDCO and we want to ask you these questions. 
 
We’ve asked the minister of SEDCO in this House, we’ve asked the Minister of Justice, we’ve asked the 
Deputy Premier and, sir, if you were paying attention you could read Crown Corporations where I was for 
three or four days questioning the minister of SEDCO on the very topic of GigaText and the operations of 
SEDCO. So don’t you try and mislead the public in the province of Saskatchewan by laying forth something 
that is not accurate, sir. 
 
If you would try and be accurate instead of being the 8-billion-dollar man that you are, we wouldn’t find 
ourselves in such a troubled situation as we are today, where the third highest expenditure in the budget that 
you, sir, proposed to this legislature is for payment of interest on the debt – 380-some-million dollars. 
 
So you, sir, should try and be a little more accountable to the province of Saskatchewan and to the people who 
pay those tax dollars that they have to work very hard to generate for your government to waste and 
mismanage. 
 
Now, sir, we find the situation with GigaText that SEDCO is still to this day funding GigaText at a rate of 
about $50,000 a month -- $50,000 a month. Now that the 4 million and the interest is all gone, squandered and 
wasted by a negligent board that you, sir, had an appointment on and by the sole signing authority of Guy 
Montpetit over the $4 million plus the accumulated interest, still paying $50,000 a month. And has one word 
of the statutes been translated by the GigaText system? No, sir, it has not. In fact we understand you spend 
additional money at the University of New Brunswick to have them translated manually. 
 
Sir, how long are you going to keep going funding GigaText under the auspices of translating statutes before 
you pull the plug? Why don’t you call it research and development now, is what you’re saying it is. Well then 
why does SEDCO continue to fund research and development? They’re not in that practice. 
 
We find a situation where the word “giga” has taken on a new important meaning in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have GigaText that ripped off the province and lined the pockets of Guy Montpetit. And 



three-quarters or more of the money can be traced back directly to Guy Montpetit that went through 
GigaText. You have GigaMos Systems where the Lambda computers came from, paid $2.9 million for an 
estimated value of about $40,000. Not very good management, sir. 
 
You have Giga Air Services. And do you know what you also have, Mr. Minister? You have a gigadebt in 
this province. Because the “giga” means one billion. The word “giga” means billion. So if you take all the 
debt in the province, you’ve got about 13 gigas in the province in terms of your debt. You still have GigaText. 
You haven’t well dealt with yet the Giga Air Services and the GigaMos systems. And pretty soon we’ll be 
paying giga-interest, Mr. Minister. 
 
And you have the gall to come before this legislature and ask for interim supply again, when you know it was 
the incompetence and obsession of your government is the very reason why the budget has not yet been dealt 
with. Your, sir, and the mouth beside you control the agenda of this legislature, whereby you decide what 
business comes before the floor of the House. And it’s because of your incompetence, because of your waste 
and mismanagement, because of your obsession with privatization, selling off the assets of the province, that 
this budget has not yet been dealt with. 
 
Now, sir, I would like to close off because there are other items that we want to deal with. The member for 
Cut Knife-Lloyd, I’d like to say I was in his riding on Thursday. People had a very good reception, and the 
condemnation I heard for him and his lack of knowledge about anything works, including his constituency . . . 
 
So I’ll leave off for now, Mr. Minister, I would not want to be supporting the things that you’re doing within 
your government. 
 
And I would ask you as my final questions, or I think it will be my final question, Mr. Minister, since part of 
this money is going to SEDCO where SEDCO is still funding GigaText at the rate of over $50,0000 a month, 
and in light of the fact that the minister has taken notice of questions, won’t answer questions in this 
Assembly and in Crown Corporations Committee, if you want this interim supply passed, Mr. Minister, could 
you tell us today: when we ill the government and SEDCO stop funding $50,000 a month to GigaText? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I note the threat that the opposition say they are not going to pass interim supply, the 
threat now made by the minister from North Battleford, and I watched the threat unfold. 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Maybe the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd was yelling too loud for you to hear the question. 
The question was: in light of all the events that have happened around GigaText, in light of the fact that the 
minister for SEDCO has not answered the questions, the Minister of Justice has not answered those questions, 
the Deputy Premier has not answered those questions; and further that you’re funding SEDCO out of this 
interim supply bill, and in turn SEDCO is funding GigaText at a rate of $50,000 a month, my question to you, 
sir, is very clearly: when are you going to stop funding GigaText at a rate of $50,000 a month? 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Mr. Anguish: – I asked a question of the minister. We assume the minister found the question so difficult he 
was sitting there writing out the answer. Is the minister not going to answer the question? Does he not even 
have the courtesy to stand up and tell us when they’re going to stop funding GigaText at $50,000 a month? 
My question to the minister is when are you going to stop funding GigaText at $50,000 a month, sir? 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance is clearly having trouble functioning. I don’t ever 
recall having been in this Assembly in this Committee before when the minister has just ignored . . . The 
minister is having trouble functioning, I therefore move this committee rise and report progress. 
 
Motion negatives. 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Mr. Chairman, is there some indication, if the minister just . . . well, Mr. Chairman, this 
question is to your, sir. Is there some indication, like, when you ask the minister a question, if he doesn’t want 



to answer, is he going to get up and say, well I won’t answer that. Or does he sit there in his arrogant, 
uncaring, unorganized fashion, incapable and incompetent. 
 
People should know why he’s called the 800-million-dollar man. He’s called the 800-million-dollar man 
because in one year alone he misprojected the budget by $800 million – 800 million. Somebody said 
$800,000 -- $800 million he misprojected his budget by – 800 million. Do you know how much that is? Your 
average person couldn’t comprehend that so maybe $50,000 a month now to GigaText and $4 million initially 
means like nothing to him. He doesn’t care about $50,000 a month or $4 million initial investment wasted and 
squandered because he can blow, misproject over $800 million in one year and he doesn’t care. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And he sits there. 
 
Mr. Anguish: – And he sits there. What a cowardly activity of the Minister of Finance in this province. 
 
So I’ll ask another question – maybe he’d like this one better. Other investors who have given Guy Montpetit 
money have taken action in civil court to recover their money. Does the Minister of Finance have any 
obligation of reel any obligation to stop funding GigaText at $50,000 a month? And further, you will consult 
with your colleague, the Minister of Justice to take action in the courts of Saskatchewan to recover money 
that was wasted and went into the pocket of Guy Montpetit? Will you do that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I think the appropriate answer for that is to the minister responsible for SEDCO, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Anguish: – Mr. Minister, the minister for SEDCO has had those questions put to her. We quite well 
expect she’s going to get booted out of the cabinet here any day. We know they pulled SEDCO from Crown 
Corporations after myself and my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake asked questions for at least three 
days, maybe four days; you and your colleagues pulled her out of Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Questions have been not answered in this House because you’ve hidden RCMP investigations and lack of 
knowledge by some ministers. And we maintain and submit to you, sir this is the place to ask questions about 
the involvement of taxpayers’ dollars going to some high-flying business man from Montreal who ripped off 
the province of Saskatchewan. And you, sir, through the Department of Finance into SEDCO, are still funding 
the organization in which he and his partner through Norlus own 75 per cent of the shares. 
 
I’ll give you one more chance, Mr. Minister, when are you going to stop funding GigaText at $50,000 a 
month, and do you and your government contemplate, or will you consider taking legal action in civil court to 
get back the money that was paid out in questionable practices to Guy Montpetit and his associates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well as I’ve indicated on several occasions, as has the Deputy Premier earlier, those are 
the appropriate questions for SEDCO. SEDCO, I believe, is a statutory expenditure. Once that money is 
allocated, Mr. Chairman, they spend it within the framework of that money. 
 
Having said that again, the practice of the committee is that the Minister of Finance is not expected to answer 
the detailed questions of the operation of various departments, agencies, and Crown corporations of 
government. If that’s a change in the practice that’s being made today to appease the member from the North 
Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, then that should be a ruling of this committee, but I have now answered the question 
on numerous occasions. It’s a matter for SEDCO 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, other members have indicated the financial mess that 
this province is in; we’ve reviewed it during the debate on potash. I want to reiterate: we’re sitting with at the 
astronomical deficit of $4 billion, and the budget, which we are dealing with here today, Mr. Chairman, is a 
part of it. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, you came in to this House with an estimated deficit of some $226 million in this 
current budget, which we’re dealing with. I want to ask you a simple question: has that deficit projection 
changed since you introduced your budget? 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well there are the following possibilities of change. One, the new changes to crop 
insurance, and as I had indicated to previous questions earlier in the session, the questions was asked why was 
that not put in. Negotiations we’re going on for some time. The matter was not resolved till well after the 
budget time for various reasons. And historical practice has been in this province when they come in after, 
significantly after budget, they are dealt with at that time. Secondly, it would have been unwise for us to put a 
negotiating position forward that we were prepared to make the specific payments. There is that. 
 
Now when I say that, there is that possibility, because I want the hon. member to understand that there are 
different options being negotiated with the federal government. One of the options requires no payment on the 
crop insurance until the next fiscal year, so it may or may not have any impact, and those are decisions we 
have yet to make. 
 
The historical practice, as well, we’ve had a settlement with the doctors that the hon. member will be aware 
of. And again, historically, those have not been put into the budget for the reasons of . . . two reasons, 
generally. One is the negotiating positions, and secondly, that the settlements could come after a budget 
delivery. But there is, as I have said, a possibility we may not put the drought . . . or I’m sorry, the changes to 
the crop insurance into the next fiscal year. And then I will endeavour to get for you what the settlement cost 
will be for the doctors’ settlement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Well have you included all of the items? I want to turn particularly to an announcement 
recently by the Premier. We have questioned you continuously. When the drought payment was announced 
by the federal government during the last federal election, it was indicated that the provincial governments 
would be asked to contribute. And it came to a realization. And that total sum according to the Premier – but 
again, who knows, it may be or it may not be accurate – but the figure that has been released is $115 million. 
Now is that amount to be paid out of the fiscal year, the $115 million of drought payment? Was that included 
in this budget, and is it included in the deficit? 
 
(153)) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The payment is to be paid over five years, not in one payment. And secondly there is being 
negotiated a credit on interest on some previous crop reinsurance payments, which as I have indicated may 
well not have any payments in this fiscal year, because there would be more than an offset. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – The indication is that the province would be paying $115 million towards drought payment. 
Now you’re standing up and saying that you’re in fact not contributing, is that the fact? You’re saying it’s 
over five years but that this year you may not . . . Is it divided up into equal payments and there are 
cancellation of it? I mean you can’t have it both ways, making an announcement by the Premier that you’re 
going to pay $115 million and then at the same time saying that you’re not paying anything. Can you be more 
explicit as to the arrangement in respect to the $115 million that you have indicated that you rare going to be 
paying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, what I’ve explained to the hon. member is that the payment is over five years, okay, 
but that we are negotiating a payment with the federal government on the reinsurance component of crop 
insurance that we have carrying with the federal government for the federal government. So that’s all. 
 
Now we still may decide to run it through this year, but we are negotiating on the reinsurance component of 
payment back from the federal government which would basically offset that first year’s payment. So there 
may be none this year, but we haven’t made those decisions yet, nor are negotiations finished. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Well is there a cost then transferred to the province for this year in respect to crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The province carries the cost of 75 per cent of the reinsurance under crop insurance. 
Okay? And then we subsequently get federal reimbursement. Do you understand that? And what we are 
negotiating with the federal government now as to offsetting the interest charges on the reimbursement, and 
we’re negotiating that with the federal government now as to offsetting the interest charges on the 
reimbursement, and we’re negotiating that with the federal government, that may not . . . may take us into the 
next fiscal year. Do you understand what I’m saying, that there may well be an offset, or that we would pick 



up those interest costs and offset it from the other payments? That’s being negotiated now. I can’t tell you 
now it’ll be resolved, but it is being negotiated. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – And you’re saying in respect to any further expenditures, you have no estimate of what that 
will be over and above the deficit that you have? I mean, you talk about . . . I asked you, are there any 
components that you may have more deficit that is not with the budget, and you say crop insurance and you 
say the doctors. The doctors, you said you’ll indicate . . . you’ll get us the amount in respect to that. 
 
Now have you got any estimate in respect to all of the arrangements that you’re making with the federal 
government vis-a-vis crop insurance and drought payment and the reinsurance? Have you any estimate of 
what it may possibly be this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I’ve indicated there’s a possibility of that going into the next fiscal year. I’ve stated 
that. And we’ve talked about the doctors. The doctors, approximately $25 million. 
 
There are two other areas, but again it’s too soon to tell. And one is the interest on the public debt. We’re very 
much of the view that the interest will drop in the second half. They are higher though, as of the first quarter, 
than we had expected; but again, the general view is they should drop. And the first quarter has led to some 
increase on the mortgage protection plan. The exact amount of that to this point I am trying to put for you to 
let you know what that is. I gather those are the four. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Mr. Minister, just in respect to dealing with this budget, and we’re with one-twelfth here in the 
appropriation or interim supply, and some of the experts that have looked at the budget say that this is a 
fudged budget, fudged for the standpoint that where did you get $200 million from the Crowns. Fudged from 
the standpoint of the 205 million in respect to Liquor Board in the sense that, first of all, the Liquor Board 
revenue to the government is not at that level, and the $200 million is taking from one aspect in order to arrive 
at a deficit which you claim is staring to decrease. 
 
But those figures there, I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, is it likely that the $200 million that you have taken 
into this year’s budget likely to be repeated in subsequent budget, or is this a one-time hit? Similarly, is not 
the amount of the Liquor board revenues that you have put in on the revenue side also a part of a substantial 
amount of retained earnings over and above what you will receive from the Liquor Board during the course of 
the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – There’s still additional funds left in the Liquor Board retained earning, and again I remind 
the hon. member of the historical practice that hose are drawn down and have been by respective 
governments. And secondly, the latter question with regard to the Crown corporations, it will depend on the 
earnings. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – I thought they were all losers, Mr. Minister, and that’s why we’re giving them away. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, there’s one other revenue that irks the people of Saskatchewan, and to some 
extent, I think you’re heading in that direction in respect to the GST, the goods and services tax, and that is a 
tax on a tax, as demonstrated in respect to the telephone bills that we receive. There the federal government 
knocks on or places on it a communication tax, and along comes the Saskatchewan government and they put a 
tax on the whole entire bill including the tax that is imposed by the federal government. 
 
And I was wondering if you could enlighten us as to the amount of revenue that the government is able to 
collect on E&H tax in respect to its double taxation – that is, taxing on a tax. As I indicated, there’s a 
communication tax on all your telephone bills – federal – and then when you check how much tax is being 
charged on E&H, it’s tax on tax. And I was wondering whether you could indicate the amount of revenue that 
you are stealing from the people of Saskatchewan in that way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We’ll try and get the amount of revenue that come about because of that. The hon. 
member should be aware that the position of successive Saskatchewan governments has been to put the sales 
tax on the last item of tax. And I can advise the hon. member, for example, if you were to check your printing 
bill, you would find that previous governments in this province had put the sales tax after the federal sales tax 



on printing materials. So the practice has been in Saskatchewan, predating this government, to put that tax, 
the provincial sales tax at the end. 
 
Secondly, we should keep in mind with regard to the communications tax of the national government that it 
does not apply to all phone services. It only applies to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m not disagreeing 
with the hon. member. We’ve indicated – and I’m sure we agree –our opposition to the tax. And with respect, 
as I say, I’m not disagreeing with the hon. member on the communications tax itself, but the taxation 
procedure has not changed over the last many years. 
 
And secondly, that tax does not apply to all service, it only applies to long distance, and there was some pretty 
serious calculation difficulties with SaskTel. But having said that, the tax is, as you say, on the tax, and I will 
try and get for you the amount of revenue generated by that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – I’d appreciate it if the minister will provide that information. You were talking in respect . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – If I can answer the hon. member. We have to get it broken down further. I’m told it’s 
about 3.7 for all communications which would include that specific tax, okay? So we have to go back and get 
some calculations for the hon. member which I’ll be prepared to supply, but the total E&H revenue from all 
the communications, which I gather is more broad than just that specific tax, is the amount that I’ve given 
you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – It seems to me I have a vague recollection, Mr. Minister, that prior to your assent into office 
that you promised the people of Saskatchewan you’d get rid of those vicious E&H tax on utility bills. I 
remember that distinctly, but leave that aside. 
 
In respect to the GST, Mr. Minister, you indicated that you’re sitting on the fence at the present time in 
respect to what your position and the government’s position is going to be in respect to Mulroney’s GST. 
You’re indicating that you’re going to be consulting. You indicate that there’s some benefactors. I wonder if 
you could, if you have done an analysis, and whether you could indicate a list of the benefactors and those 
which will be harder hit within society. You must have done an analysis, and perhaps you could provide us a 
breakdown of some of the benefactors and some of those who will be really detrimentally affected. 
 
So you obviously you have been doing some analysis, and I was wondering if you could provide some of that 
information, rather than just a general statement that there are benefactors and there are losers. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – As I’ve indicated, like all sectors, the following groups would pay more. And I haven’t 
included, because it’s a matter of some debate as to what level the tax credit applies. Now we’ll have to get 
that information as to what income levels those have in effect. But let me talk about the general categories. 
 
Retailers. And that leads to the question that some come in that they really have a problem if there are two 
taxes. Those imported goods and, of course, services not presently taxed, okay? The latter of course not 
surprising because that’s one of the objectives of the tax. Those area s of the economy that benefit – resource, 
manufacturing and exporters. 
 
There is some uncertainly which we are trying to clarify. 
 
The opposition, as the hon. member knows, raised the question about the farmers’ exemption and whether it 
will be reliable or not. We have some indication from the federal government as we had argued and as I had 
indicated, that they will be making some modifications in that so that it will in fact . . . that there wont’ be a 
wait. 
 
But there may well be some other areas where farmers will benefit, in areas where they now indirectly or 
directly pay the manufacturing sales tax. It could be some parts, it could be some equipment not directly 
related to farming, and some other equipment. So in some areas there is an indication . . . but we’re trying to 
get that clarified as to whether that fits within the general agricultural exemption. 
 



Mr. Koskie: – Mr. Minister, a great number of people, you talk about retailers, the imported goods, services 
not taxed, and there undoubtedly for the average Saskatchewan person, there’s going to be a heavy impact by 
the imposition of the GST. 
 
I wonder whether you have done an analysis, an analysis of the imposition of the GST at 9 per cent in 
accordance with the white paper or the implementation paper that was put out by Wilson? Have you actually 
gone through and done an analysis as to what it would affect the average Saskatchewan person in addition, 
over and above the position where they’re at now? You hear reports that, on average, the $40,000 a year, one 
wage earner, on average, he’ll be over $500. And what I’m interested in is whether or not you have done an 
analysis of the effect that will have upon the average Saskatchewan person, taxpayer, in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We’re in the process of trying to do that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Well how long are you going to wait? I mean, you have no position. You’re going to go out to 
the public. You don’t even know the impact that it’s going to have on Saskatchewan people. No wonder you 
don’t have a position. I mean, how can Ontario stand up and say, the imposition of it’s going to be $170 
million if we put a tax on a tax? How can Don Getty stand up with the Primer Minister and say, we’re 
opposed to it? 
 
Mr. Minister, you are not coming square with the people of Saskatchewan. I think that you are cap in hand 
with Mulroney. And I think that you’re going to join in with a revenue-making scheme here and that you are 
in fact in favour of the sales tax imposed by the federal government. 
 
And so I ask you, are you able to file any analysis of the direct effect on the average Saskatchewan person 
with the implementation of the GST? Surely by now you have gone through it and done an analysis. Or are 
the public again not going to be defended as the federal government swoops down on the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
I was out over the weekend, and I’m telling you, there’s not a citizen that’s not concerned. And they said, at 
least Don Getty stood up and took a position in respect to the national sale tax. 
 
And what I’m asking the minister, because it’s relevant to this budget, has he done any analysis within the 
Department of Finance so that he can file those reports in order that the people of Saskatchewan would be 
advised and also that the public would be advised. 
 
I can’t believe that you haven’t done an analysis. I’m going to ask you again. Have you done any analysis and 
can you file some of those analyses with the legislature and with the opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m advised that the officials are still working on the effect of the low income reduction, 
effective middle income rates. The model will look at whether we can expect, in the case of some reductions 
where there was a manufacturing sales tax, whether that would be passed through or not. We are still both 
trying to get the federal government to be more definitive on the farmer rebates. And we have now had some 
indication in the last couple of days that they will have the system so that the farmers won’t have to wait for a 
rebate. 
 
So there’s a fair amount of information that we are still analysing on the effect of the tax. In the case of the 
low income reductions, I think there is some public information out on that already, and the same with regard 
to the reduction on middle income rates. But again there’s also the variables that you put into your model, and 
we haven’t completed that yet. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could you give me an indication of what the total 
sales tax revenue for the province of Saskatchewan is in one year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We were financing about $250 million. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – That was your reinsurance cost. And what portion of that is rebated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – It’s the federal share that w would finance, that amount. 



 
Mr. Upshall: – Yes, and if I understand you correctly, you said a little while ago that that amount was rebated 
by the federal government to you. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes, but we carry the cost of financing that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – That was my question, I guess. What was the cost of financing that reinsurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – About $23 million. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Now you indicated, Mr. Minister, that you’re negotiating but it’s possible that that $23 
million would be used as a first payment of five that would your portion of the federal drought payment, is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes, that’s one of the negotiations. Another one is to whether the payment be over five or 
six years. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Okay, Mr. Minister, then what you’re saying is that in normal procedure you would pay that 
$23 million out of your portion of the grain insurance costs, financing that. And now that money will be used 
as an instalment over five or six years on the drought payment. 
 
So my question to you is, that revenue will be lost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan because it’s not rebated. 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, if that would be an added cost, a new cost, something you have to tack on to 
your budget for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, what I have indicated, one we have to pay that. What I’ve said, that may not be 
payable until the next fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Okay, let’s just back up a step then. There is going to be a cost incurred by your government 
for this year for the federal drought payment. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well that’s what we’re negotiating with the federal government as to whether it’s going to 
be paid this year or next year. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Okay, but regardless then of whether it’s paid this year or next year, that $24 million is going 
to be used to make the payment whether it’s this year or next year For your indications I think that’s correct. 
 
Okay, then what I’m saying is, then, that’s $23 million that is not in your budget because if it wouldn’t have 
to be paid out, then it would have been rebated. So is it correct to assume that you can tack on another $23 
million to your deficit this year for costs because we can’t recoup that payment from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well it may, but it depends when the payment is made. Right now, it’s an increase on the 
public debt, okay, which has different impact on the budget than a direct payment. So it may not have any 
impact this year. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is that that $23 million is $213 million that Saskatchewan will 
not have to use because if it’s the normal procedure that would be rebated, doesn’t matter if it’s in this year or 
next year. So I guess I assume by that that you can add that $23 million on to your deficit because that’s 
money that’s not coming back into the province. Go ahead if you want to explain that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – it’s not an assumption you can make. I’m not saying that it doesn’t have to be paid, okay, 
and I haven’t said that. The timing of the payment though can make a difference – it’s just not an assumption 
that you can make – the timing of the payment is being negotiated. IT could, and I have said, it could impact 
on this year’s budget. But those negotiations are going on now. It may not, that’s all I’m saying to you. 
 
(1600) 
 



Mr. Upshall: – Yes, I understand that but regardless of that fact, it’s $23 million that is going to be out of the 
coffers of Saskatchewan. I want to move on now . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You have to pay it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – You have to pay it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Sooner or later we acknowledge we have to pay it. One of the other considerations that has 
to be looked at is that we are negotiating a payment over six years rather than five, so that will show up in 
future budgets as well. Certainly we have to pay it; I haven’t denied that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Yes, it’ll be a deficit in either this year or next year’s budget then. 
 
I want to move now, Mr. Minister, to the farm Bills that were passed in this legislature about a month ago. 
And I wonder if you could give me any indication of whether or not the regulations are in place now so that 
we may know what type of expenditures we’d be looking at to carry through those Acts. Are the regulations 
in place so that we know what the costs will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – What regulations are you referring to? 
 
Mr. Upshall: – The farm finance Act and the amendment to the ag credit corporation Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We will have to find out where the regulations are. The funding of course is already set out 
in the budget in the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) mandate provision. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Mr. Minister, I believe that would put some restrictions on your program, would it not? If you 
don’t know what the program is, don’t know the formulas . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I can’t speak for the Department of Agriculture. All I said was I will have to find out 
where those regulations are. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Just for the record, Mr. Minister, what have you budgeted in your programs, what amounts to 
cover the amendments to the ag credit corporation and the farm finance Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – If you go to the Department of Agriculture and Food, ordinary expenditure, vote 1, item 
14, you will see the increase in expenditure. Vote 1, item 14, approximately $4.1 million increase. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Mr. Minister, I assume that’s the total amount of increase to cover the new programs that your 
government has put in place to supposedly get farmers out of this financial crisis they’re in. Now it seems to 
me that with a $6 billion farm debt in Saskatchewan, I mean the interest alone is more than that – the interest 
alone is more than what you’ve totally budgeted to finance those programs. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there has to be some questions asked in this regard about exactly the usefulness of these 
programs. And the question I would ask you is, have you had any representation from the Department of 
Agriculture to increase that amount if necessary to provide adequate protection to farmers in that amount is 
requested by the Department of Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Not at this stage, we haven’t. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Now, Mr. Minister, if we want to take a look at one program at a time, when we have the 
amendments to the ag credit corporations where they’re going to refinance home quarter and the possibility of 
refinancing other parcels of land. There’s another program where you have the guarantee on the vendor 
financing. 
 
Mr. Minister, surely there has to be some representation to you to put in your budget ahead of time so that you 
could come up with a figure, or did that figure just kind of pop out of the air. When you’re making your 
budget and you have to budget a certain amount of money to finance a program, surely there is some criteria 



by which the department will give to you . . . or they will give you a ballpark figure as to how much you 
should budget. 
 
Is there any indication, Mr. Minister, and can you explain to me how a $4 million increase will cover a 
program for farmers in Saskatchewan who are in a great financial difficulty? And could you explain to me 
how the department came up with those figures so that you would know that there was needed a $4 million 
increase to finance some of these programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Understand that, one, I think in fairness, that these detailed questions of the Department of 
Agriculture should be asked in agricultural estimates. I mean, I have indicated to you the overall budgetary 
increase. It’s a matter of debate whether that’s enough or whether it’s going to do the job or whether it’s 
adequate or if it’s too much. That’s something that, with e the greatest of respect, that you take up with the 
appropriate minister. I’ve indicated to you where it was in the budget, which items it was. The details of the 
programming and how the programming operates is best asked of the appropriate minister. 
 
But having said that, the overall budget process, they will argue for X amount. We go through the normal 
balancing of demands, priorities, objectives, whatever, and an amount is arrived at. In many cases, it may b e 
the amount asked for. I don’t know whether this was the amount asked for or not. Btu that’s the amount that 
has been in the budget since March, and I can’t answer more detailed questions than that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – Well, Mr. Minister, is it not in your capacity to question the department, because if the 
Department of Agriculture comes up and says, well the amount of money indicated is not enough, that we 
need some more money, that relates directly to your budget this year. And despite the fact that we had to force 
the government in to bringing forward their farm finances and . . . all their farm Bills rather, and now we find 
some four or five weeks later that there’s still no regulations in place, that we don’t know what the program 
will be. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I didn’t say that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – I know you didn’t say that, but I’m telling you. Then do you have some commitment on your 
part to find out, because you’re the guy in charge of the taxpayers’ dollars, you have some commitment to 
find out from that department whether or not $4 million is going to be enough. 
 
And you should be questioning the amount, because the whole scheme of things, with the debt in 
Saskatchewan, that is a very minuscule amount in relationship to how many farmers are in debt and how 
much the cost is actually going to be when you say that your government says, these farm Bills are going to 
help farmers out of financial difficulties. It seems to me that that amount is totally insufficient, and you should 
be asking the Department of Agriculture for future reference, whether or not that’s going to be enough. Have 
you done that and will you be doing that in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well, I mean, I have every confidence that if it’s not enough, the Department of 
Agriculture will be the first ones at my doors asking for more money. 
 
Mr. Upshall: – That is my point exactly, Mr. Minister. We are here talking about expenditures through the 
Department of Finance for a period for this year – one-twelfth. Mr. Minister, it is up to you to tell the 
taxpayers whether or not this amount that’s in your budget and the portions that we are spending now is an 
accurate figure. And it seems to me that this figure will be totally inadequate if your government plans to 
carry out a procedure of farm refinancing like it says it’s going to. 
 
I mean, it obviously . . . that there is something that’s not going to add up here. So that any amount that they 
come back . . . and you admit that they’ll be the first ones back at your door asking for more money if this is 
not sufficient. I say it’s totally insufficient and that that is part of a growing deficit, a hidden deficit, that we 
do not see in your budget or in any of the expenditures that we have to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We’ve been through the debate before. The appropriate place for questions of that nature 
is the departmental estimates, which I gather you’ll be able to do this week, as are the whole question of 
guarantees, etc. Certainly they’re part of the financing package. We’ve never, never denied that. But I mean, I 
can’t answer more than that. 



 
Mr. Upshall: – Mr. Minister, can you tell me where the 75 per cent from crop insurance comes from? Out of 
what department does that come –the 75 per cent of funding, the reinsurance? Is it crop insurance, Agriculture 
department, or where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – It’s just an advance from Finance to the crop insurance corporation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have some questions in relation to the revenues in 
your budget. I want to ask if you have had your officials determine what the actual revenues were for the 
1988-89 fiscal year from the oil industry? 
 
In your budget you indicated that the estimated revenues were $311.372 million. Have you got a figure as to 
what they actually were? I’m asking, Mr. Minister, whether you have had your department officials determine 
what the actual revenues were for oil for the fiscal year 1988-89. In your budget you’ve indicated that the 
number was $311 million and change, and I understand the actual amount realized is much less. 
 
I have some questions following that. If you could get me the figure, I’d appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – It came in about one eighty-seven, eight sixty-two. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – So the actual revenues from oil in 1987-88 were $347261 million; and then in 1988-89 the 
actual was $187 million. Minister, I find that quote low. 
 
And I want to ask now whether you have a tacking figure for what the royal . . . whether or not you were 
going to be achieving your estimates of 1990. You estimate in the blue book here that the revenues will be 
$173.6 million, which is less than 1988-89. Do you have any indications to date from your officials whether 
that figure will be achieved at this point, or whether it will be lower or higher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – It will probably be higher. If you may recall that on earlier debates, we had estimated 
1,608 West Texas intermediate, and right now it’s 1,790 and you may recall that in the first quarters, it was in 
most cases generally quite a bit higher than that. So right now, based on what information we have, we expect 
it to come in higher than estimates. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – So if the price is on the first quarter about 10 per cent higher than you had estimated, would 
your revenues be about the same percentage greater or would they be . . . is that impact on the amount of 
revenues you might have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No you can’t just take that figure because it’ll depend on both production and exchange 
rates as well. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Well, Mr. Minister, what we have here is really a very poor effort on the government’s part 
with respect to getting the fair share of revenues from the resources that belong to the people of this province. 
Mr. Minister, during the course of the last number of years, the province of Saskatchewan has depended a 
great deal on revenues from oil, and we’ve seen your government, since being elected, introduce a number of 
initiatives which have basically shifted the tax burden from those who have the greater ability to pay to those 
that have a less ability to pay. 
 
And I remind you, Minister, as others have done, that since you got elected in 1982 as the government, you 
have increased personal income taxes which now I think are 104 per cent higher than they were eight years 
ago after you promised to reduce them by 10 per cent. 
 
You’ve increased the sales tax by 40 per cent – from 5 per cent o 7 per cent – after you promised to eliminate 
it. You’ve reintroduced the gas tax, which the Premier indicated in May of 1982 would never, ever be 
reintroduced under the Conservative government. You created one the most bureaucratic red-tape nightmares 
with that gas tax. You as well, Minister, through the course of that gas tax increased from what it was in 1982. 



There was about, I think, a 33 per cent increase in the tax overall from . . . I’m sorry, 40 per cent, from 6 cents 
a litre up to 10 cents a litre. 
 
You’ve also, as a Minister of Finance, been involved with this government’s initiative in creating new taxes. 
You created the new sales tax on used vehicles which you eventually withdrew because the people of this 
province thought it was the goofiest tax you ever undertook to levy on them, and you at that time at least 
listened to them. 
 
You’ve introduced other new taxes like the lottery tax, which is being subjected to a lot of criticism, and 
people that I speak with and my colleagues speak with around the province have the same feeling about this 
lottery tax they had about the used car vehicle tax. They think it’s one of the more goofier efforts to tax 
people that they’ve ever seen. 
 
So you’ve increased taxes when you promised to decrease them. You’ve created new taxes, including the flat 
tax on people, and you’re government that’s becoming more of a burden on the taxpayers of this province 
than any other government in the history of a province and certainly in the history of the country. Minister, 
along with that you haven’t made one tax cut. 
 
You’ve reduced the taxes to oil companies, and we’ve been subsidizing the oil companies in this province to 
the tune of $2.469 billion in the last seven years. And I want to just review with you some numbers that are 
taken from the annual reports and the financial statements of this province. 
 
In 1982, in that fiscal year, the province of Saskatchewan received about $700 million in revenues from the 
oil companies that produced in this province, and that’s when the price was lower than what it is right now. In 
1983, we received about 685 million; in 1984 we received about $740 million; in 1985 we received about 
$674 million – and that’s when the prices were at 33, $34 a barrel. So they almost doubled from 1981-82 to 
1984-85 and ’86, yet the revenues actually went down overall on an annual basis. There was one year where it 
was bit higher. 
 
And then in 1986 fiscal year, we had royalties of $213 million. And now you’re telling us in - -that’s ‘86-87 – 
you estimated 387 million; we received $180 million in tax revenue. And when you look at the numbers, from 
1983 to 1988, based on those royalties, because of the tax cut, you subsidized the oil companies in 1983, $272 
million worth. The taxpayers of this province in 1984 through your tax cut program for the oil companies 
subsidized them a further $429 million approximately. 
 
In 1985, you and your Conservative government subsidized the oil companies again, the poor starving 
Imperial Oils and Texacos and others, including PanCanadian, about $621 million. In 1986 you made the 
taxpayers subsidize them again to the tune of $422 million. In 1987, Mr. Minister, you forced the taxpayers of 
this province to contribute to the shareholders’ bottom line in these oil companies to the tune of $471 million. 
In 1988, we can go on and on. 
 
Minister, we’ve estimated until the end of the ’88 fiscal year that your tax cuts to the oil companies have 
meant $2.469 billion have been foregone as a result of your tax cut initiatives for the oil companies. And I 
want to ask you, Minister, whether you feel its’ an appropriate tax rate to have on the oil companies right now 
that has produced the low amount of revenues to the people of this province, and whether or not you have any 
intentions as the Minister of Finance to work with the government in the cabinet to try and resolve that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well we’ve debated the respective policies with regard to the oil industry. And it’s our 
government’s view that we will expand the oil industry. Now certainly it’s down this year; the gas industry is 
way up. But let me remind the hon. member that in 1981, as percentage of tax revenue, corporations under the 
NDP paid about 4.7 per cent, and now in this budget they pay 6.1 per cent. So we are in fact getting more 
money out of the larger corporations. 
 
We have increased the corporate capital tax; we did put the surcharge on last year. At the same time we’ve 
tried to reduce the rate for the small business corporations. Now I realize that the reduction in that corporate 
income tax rate for the smaller businesses where we chose to use the business tax rebate for that purpose. 
 



But yes, we’ve debated many times over the years the different polices with regard to the oil and gas industry. 
I do remind you of the revenue increases and I do remind the hon. member of the relative percentage of total 
revenue that corporations under the capital and corporate income tax pay now as opposed to 1981-82. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – And you didn’t answer the question that I asked, Minister, as to whether or not you plan to 
change the governments, or work with the government to try and change your policies as they apply to the 
non-renewable resource sector, as they apply to the royalties received from resources such as oil and potash. 
Your government’s record as it applies to getting a fair share of the resources that are shipped out of this 
country, out of this province, is very poor. Your record is very poor. 
 
The royalties, in total, are declining, even though the prices seem to be stabilized. Potash had record 
production figures last year, yet your revenues from potash were not that substantially greater; as a matter of 
fact, they went down. In oil your production is as great as it’s ever been, yet your royalties are on a slippery 
slope downward. 
 
And that can only . . . you can only conclude one thing from that record, Mr. Minister, and that is that you are 
not working for the taxpayers of this province, you are working for the large national corporations and 
multinational corporations, and the taxpayers of this province are subsidizing their efforts to take our 
resources and ship them out of this province and out of this country. 
 
And I’m asking again if you would be willing to work . . . or can you make some statement in this House 
today on what your plans are to rectify the situation as they apply to oil royalty revenues and potash royalty 
revenues – in particular oil, because that’s what we’re talking about right now – and whether you think that’s 
a high priority or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – The position with regard to oil, of course, that oil in pricing has dropped, if I recall earlier 
estimates, I think somewhere around $30 a barrel some years back. It didn’t quite work out that way, built I 
can advise the hon. member that there are new royalty agreements in place with regard to both potash and 
uranium. And certainly they’re always the balance of both either stimulating or maintaining the industry, at 
the same time trying to get the maximum revenue. 
 
Now we disagree on our oil policies, but we’ve had that debate numerous times. And the hon. member says 
that we should have a significant increase in oil royalties. I would be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I ask you what was your position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well our position is that we have our policy in place and it’s stated. There has been any 
change in the oil royalty agreements. There has been with regard to potash and uranium. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Well can you tell us this afternoon whether your new policies, as they apply to potash and 
uranium, will increase the revenues to the province, and by how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We don’t have the amounts. Potash will be roughly the same. There should be an increase 
in yield on uranium. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Well if you’ve go new agreements coming forward, I take it then that the potash agreement 
would be revenue neutral and that the uranium agreement would provide how much increase to the treasury in 
terms of royalty revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m sorry, I apologize. I’ve been advised it will be revenue neutral for uranium – revenue 
neutral for uranium. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – SO in response to my question about whether or not you feel the royalties from our non-
renewable resources will be increasing or they should be increasing, you’re saying that you’ve got some new 
agreements but that will equal no increases and therefore is revenue neutral. And what is the purpose then, 
Minister, of having these new agreements? Can you tell us that? 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – We expect to do better when prices up on both commodities than we would have under the 
old regime. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – What you’re saying then is that the new agreements in effect with potash and uranium will 
be price sensitive, so that as the prices of the product, the resource, increases, that revenues to the province 
will increase? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
And if that’s the case, Minister, what are we looking forward to in the following two scenarios: number one, 
if we have a price increase of 20 per cent in each are, what effect will that be on our royalties; and number 
two, if we have a price decrease of 20 per cent, what effect will that have? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We don’t have those. We’ll have to prepare them for you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Are you saying that your officials don’t have the models worked out as they apply to the 
agreements or you don’t have them here? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Not here. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – The minister says he doesn’t have them here. Would you be able to provide that to us as 
soon as possible? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – The minister says yes. Within the next four or five days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m advised, yes. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Okay, thanks very much. Well I just want to make a couple of comments about the impact of 
the oil policy of your government, Minister. You have subsidized, or I should say the taxpayers of this 
province have subsidized the oil business in this province in the last seven years to the tune of about $2.469 
billion according to our calculations, and you are saying that you do not have any plans to change that. 
 
Coupled with the important fact that the revenues of the province from the oil resource has declined 
dramatically and is on a downward slope – it is now appearing to be about 200 or $187 million this year from 
a high of around $724 million a few years back – I want to just make a comment about and ask you a question 
about what a wonderful job you’re doing subsidizing the oil business. Because we’ve seen this subsidy of two 
million, four hundred and sixty-nine million dollars go to the oil companies from taxpayers’ dollars. Yet 
we’ve seen, having travelled around the province and talked to a number of people in the oil patch, one of the 
worst years in the history of this province as it applies to the oil business. 
 
Now your arguments have been and the Minister of Energy’s arguments have been that the reason we’re 
undertaking these very rich subsidization programs the oil business is because they create thousands and 
thousands and thousands of jobs. It depends on what MLA you talk to across there on how many thousands of 
jobs it creates. 
 
But I have an article here, Mr. Minister, and before I get to that article which will make a few comments on 
your records, I want to tell you that I’ve been around some of the oil producing areas and the people that are 
in the oil business are telling me that this is the worst year they’ve had in at least 10 years. Some of the 
companies are saying that it’s the worst year they’ve had in Saskatchewan in at least the last 15 or 25 years, 
depending on who you talk to. 
 
The underlying consistency of all the comments have been, from all the people I’ve spoken to, including 
those at the Weyburn oil show where I spent two days talking to an awful lot of people and listening to them, 
is that the oil business in this province is on the ropes. They’ve got some great difficulties. The number of 
people that are working in the industry is down. Many people who work in the oil business, you’ll know, 
Minister, are people who live in the rural communities, the smaller communities, as well as people who farm, 



and they rely on this kind of business for off-farm income. Yet your wonderful programs and policies have 
resulted in ensuring that the oil business is having one of its worst years on record. 
 
And I quote from an article, Mr. Minister, from the Regina Leader-Post and it talks about drilling activity. 
And it says here: 
 
 Resource companies have cut their drilling activity in Saskatchewan by nearly half. 
 
And this is on the basis of the first six months of this year. And they say it’s down from 43 per cent from the 
same period last year. That’s total overall drilling. 
 
And when you look at the drilling, I’ve got the latest edition of the Oil Week, and it shows that in 
Saskatchewan the total number of wells drilled as of the end of . . . actually July 29, 1989 is 769 wells. Last 
year at the same time, there was not 769 wells, but 1,253. So we’ve got 63 per cent of the activity of wells 
being drilled in this province. 
 
And when you look at the oil well drilling program, which we are spending a lot of tax dollars subsidizing, 
it’s even worse. I mean that’s the overall. It wouldn’t be that good if it hadn’t been for the gas wells. When 
you look at the oil wells last year at this time in Saskatchewan, there were 875 oil wells drilled and now there 
are 167. There were 524 per cent more last year at this time in oil than there is now. 
 
And so I’m finding it very hard, Minister, to support your position as they apply to subsidizing oil companies 
when in fact we’re seeing a massive decline in jobs provided in the industry in this province. We’re also 
seeing one of the largest drops in oil drilling activity in this province in the history of the province. It’s 
dropped off. It’s only 19 per cent of last year’s. Hundreds of millions of dollars annually in tax subsidies, but 
our oil drilling activity is way down. 
 
And I wasn’t to ask you whether you as Minister of Finance have a concern about this. And if you do, do you 
have any plans to address this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well the specifics with regard to departmental policy should be pursued with the 
department, but I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Taxation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, not necessarily taxation. Taxation may or may not resolve the problem. Certainly the 
oil industry, to my recollection, made some decisions prior to the season that prices were going to be lower. 
They were higher than the oil industry expected, but the decisions are made at the usual time each year. I 
would expect that if the oil prices stay up, the range where it was in the first quarter of this year, you’ll see a 
tremendous increase again in the oil drilling activity. So there’s that component. 
 
I do remind the hon. member in his opening remarks he was talking that we weren’t getting enough moneys 
from the oil industry and that we should be having higher royalties, and now he expresses on the other side 
fact that the industry is having some difficulty. Certainly the drilling is down. I urge the hon. member to look 
at some of the gas activity. I think it is holding up at least reasonably well. 
 
But we have no plans at this time to make any modifications to the royalty structure. And this government has 
had good communication with the oil industry and will continue that to deal with both their successes and 
their difficulties. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Well the point I was trying to make, Minister, was you and your government have spent 
$2.469 billion of taxpayers’ dollars in putting forward a program to help the oil business in this province. And 
we’ve seen the results of this subsidy in this Conservative program. The result is the worst year in 10 years in 
Saskatchewan, and 10 years ago the NDP were in power. 
 
And I’m asking you . . . I’m not saying we have to provide more incentives, and if you talk to the oil people, 
they don’t’ want incentives. They want some kind of consistency from the government and some kind of fair 



rules to play under. But I’m asking you whether you feel that your policy of subsidizing the oil business has 
resulted in a good economic climate in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – You used the argument, subsidize, and again we’ve been over this debate many times over 
several years, and I think it fair to say it was a matter of debate during the last provincial campaign – our 
approach to the oil industry versus yours. I do suggest to the hon. member that if oil drops down to $10 a 
barrel, you say that that was a subsidy by us changing the rules; I suggest that under any regime you would 
not have got the revenues. And to say it’s a subsidy is, with the greatest respect, not accurate. 
 
And again, we recognize that the drilling activity is down, that the policies we’ve had in place have given the 
industry certainly a degree of activity in this province that it hadn’t had before. So for you to say that our 
policies are wrong, that’s a matter of fair debate. Again, we’ve been through it’ I think we were through it 
rather aggressively in the 1986 election. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Mr. Minister, in the 1987-88 annual report of the Department of Energy and Mines there is a 
figure in there which I found quite startling, and the figure says that 94 or 96 per cent, around that figure, of 
the total wells drilled in the fiscal year, that were drilled and were put into production, were oil royalty free; 
that all the oil that was produced was royalty free in this province – some wells for one year, some for two, 
and some for three years in total. But in effect, in that fiscal year, 94 or 96 per cent of all the wells drilled in 
this province were royalty free. 
 
You’ve subsidized the oil companies when prices ere fairly stable and high, and now that prices are low, 
when they need help, there’s nothing that you can do because you’ve got no money left, you’ve given it all 
away. And my contention is that you undertook a policy without any long-term planning involved. 
 
This government is renowned in every department and agency for not having a plan, and as a result, your 
whole government’s initiatives don’t have a plan. You operate from day to day, from one disaster to the next, 
and I think it’s about time, Minister, that you sat down and figured out a plan. Every business that operates in 
this world that has spent a day in business will tell you very clearly that they put together a business plan. And 
they have a short-term plan. Some of them even do a daily or weekly plan or monthly plan, but almost always 
they have a year or two-year plan ahead of them. This government can’t even plan for three weeks from now. 
 
I am asking you whether or not, considering you’ve had all of these incentive programs for oil companies in 
the past when prices were a lot higher than they are now, on whether or not you as a minister who is in charge 
of the expenditures and revenues, in general, would apply yourself to putting together a plan for the energy 
sector, and put it together not only in numbers and books that you can use for election purposes, but 
something that you can count on and something the government can use as a reference and try and aim 
towards, and people in the industry of energy know where you’re going and what it’s going to cost them. Are 
you interesting in doing that sort of thing, or do you have such a plan already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I think it fair to say that our oil resource policy have been accepted and 
acknowledged by the industry. It’s been in place for some time. Let me advise the hon. member that in 1981, 
the production was 46.5 million barrels; 1988 was 75.6. Let me also remind the hon. member that you had a 
grant program in place – same grant program that went to the Essos, the large oil companies. So we have a 
different system. 
 
Recoverable reserves, or the wells drilled: ’81, 791; ’88, indicated, they made the decision based on a lower 
oil price. Wells capable of producing; in 1981,there were 11,000; 1989, 19,000. 
 
Now there’s been a significant increase in the activity in the province to the benefit of not only the industry, 
but I believe the people who work in the oil industry. So yes, they are down this year, I’ve freely 
acknowledged that. So yes, they are down this year, I’ve freely acknowledged that. But our current policy is 
in place. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have several questions I want to ask of the minister. Mr. 
Minister, this budget that this interim supply Bill is looking after is now some five months old. That’s almost 
half of the fiscal year, so there certainly has been sufficient time for you and your other departments to put 



into place some of the major announcements that were made by yourself in your budget speech back in the 
month of March. 
 
Now at that time, and I have a copy of a page from that speech here before me, you announced what I thought 
was a fairly positive initiative in light of the fact that one of the greatest issues that is almost of crisis 
proportions which we face in our country, and particularly in Saskatchewan today, is soil degradation and soil 
erosion. The statistics about the losses that come with that annually are horrendous if not to say frightening, 
because of the implications that come with them. There is clearly a great deal of support by the public for 
some major government initiatives in this respect, and so I suspect you recognized that when you made your 
announcement that this budget provides funds for a three-year $54 million soil conservation agreement with 
the federal government. 
 
(1645) 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you providing in this interim supply finally some money to fund some of the 
soil conservation projects that have been desperate to get some funding? And if so, Mr. Minister, can you 
indicate to what amount . . . or what amount of funds you’re providing in this interim supply so that some of 
those organizations which ran out of money on March 31, because of this new proposal, can finally get some 
of the funding which they so desperately need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I can’t tell you how much has been paid out. My understanding is an agreement was 
recently signed with the federal government in this area, but I would have to get from the Department of 
Agriculture the status of that and what payments have been made. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – If money has been paid out, Mr. Minister, I would be rather surprised because the 
agreement had not been signed the last time I checked. If it has been signed, it would be recently. So I’m 
surprised to hear you say that some money has already been paid out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, I said I don’t know if moneys have been paid out. My understanding, and the advice I 
have, is that the agreement has been recently signed. I said I didn’t know if payments had been paid out. 
We’ll have to check that with the Department of Agriculture. So I didn’t’ say payments had been made out. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Let me get that clear. You’re saying to the House, Mr. Minister, that that agreement has 
been signed between Saskatchewan and the federal government. That is now signed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – That’s what I’m advised that it was recently signed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – That being the case, Mr. Minister, what kind of provincial funding do you have 
allocated therefore in your budget, and therefore I hope some of it is in this interim supply, to meet the need 
that’s out there under this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – All I can advise the hon. member is that it’s one-twelfth, and it will be one-twelfth of the 
Department of Agriculture and Food’s budget. What amount is being specifically spent on that program we 
would have to check with Agriculture? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Mr. Minister, I hope that it’s more than one-twelfth because it is five months late that 
you are addressing this problem. 
 
I draw to your attention one particular organization, and it’s not the only one, but I think it’s the Wheatland 
soil conservation district, the Wheatland Conservation Area (Inc.), which is in the Swift Current area, which 
as been in operation for several years, has involved something like between 300 and 400 farmers doing an 
excellent job, doing a lot of innovative work on their own initiative with some funding from the PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and other sources. They have not, I understand, been able to 
have any access for funding because the Premier and the federal minister, Mr. Mazankowski, were quibbling 
over some terms of the agreement and therefore it was not signed. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you assure me that there is more than one-twelfth in this interim supply to meet the backlog 
that has now accumulated, which has not been provided because the funding ran out on March 31? 



 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I don’t know if the department on its previous allocations would have spent moneys 
towards the particular program. As you’ve indicated, we have dome several interim supply Bills. And again, 
all we can do is go back and check with Agriculture. All that I can simply advise the hon. member is that the 
advice I have received is that an agreement was recently signed. Previous expenditures may have picked up 
some of that. I can’t tell you that. I don’t have the answer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear that the agreement has been signed because it is clear 
– and I don’t think you will disagree and nor would anybody else who knows what is happening – that our 
soils are at risk and our future is eroding. I think if the last couple of years haven’t convinced everyone in 
Saskatchewan that that is a very serious problem, then the future, I think, would be pretty grim or glum. Can 
you tell me, Mr. Minister, would your department have been involved in the signing of this agreement? I 
suspect they would have because it’s a major dollar ticket. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes, we would review all agreements in the normal course, but any specific details, again, 
we would have to get from Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: – I intend to do that, Mr. Minister. I have one final question. Can you tell the House then 
where this agreement was signed, and if your officials were involved, I’m sure they’d be able to inform us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We’ll get that for you. Again, I’m taking the advice that I received that it was recently 
signed, but I’ll have to get that for you. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- This week? Just drop me a note. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Let you know this week! I thought you said was it signed this week – no. Yes, we’ll get 
the information yes, this week. 
 
Ms. Simard: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have in front of me an article from the Leader-Post 
of July 25 that talks about . . . the headline is, “Harried nursing staffs still waiting.” And you will recall that in 
the health care budget there were 370 positions created for new nursing staff. Apparently on a portion, small 
portion of these positions, I’m not sure exactly how many, have been allocated, and I understand that there’s 
going to be substantial saving to the provincial government by the fact that it has been delayed. 
 
The explanation that was given, Mr. Minister, by the Minister of Health, was that it was necessary to weight 
the situation in various hospitals and agencies to determine where these nurses should be allocated. But the 
point I wish to make, Mr. Minister, is the fact that I’m sure the Department of health was on top of this when 
they for 370 positions. And it appears very much that this is a delaying tactic, and that in effect what is 
happening is the Department of Health is trying to save the government money by not proceeding with the 
370 new positions. 
 
So my question, Mr. Minister, is: when these positions will be filled . . . when will they be filled? And will 
you be filling all of these 370 positions in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We can’t answer that specific question with regard to the detailed expenditure of Health. I 
think it’s better put to them. I don’t know why they would be filled this year, but I gather that in the normal 
course there are negotiations between the hospitals and the department and the various hospitals concerned. 
So I can’t answer more than that. 
 
Ms. Simard: – Well, Mr. Minister, we’ve seen a situation in Saskatchewan where health care has been cut 
back over a number of years. There have been a substantial reduction in health care services which have 
created unprecedented waiting lists in hospitals which have put some health care professionals out of work, 
such as dental workers. We have seen specialists and health care professionals leaving the province in 
unprecedented numbers. And it is because this government has not mad health care a priority. 
 
Now this government, in this new budget, attempted to rectify some of the wrongs that it had committed over 
a period of years. But what appears to be happening is that it was all false, Mr. Minister. The PC government 
was saying they were going to have X numbers of dollars, and these 370 new nursing positions have not been 



filled; only a portion of them have been filled. And what you’re doing is attempting to hold down the deficit 
on the backs of our health care institutions, Mr. Minister; that’s what’s happening. And I think that our 
nursing staff in the province of Saskatchewan is grossly overworked. 
 
I hear from patients on a regular basis. Today I spoke to another parent who had their child in the hospital and 
who stayed overnight with the child and the child’s IV went dry, and the mother had to run around looking for 
somebody to fill it. And all she was saying is, thank goodness I was there; just think of what would’ve 
happened if I hadn’t been. 
 
And that is because, Mr. Minister, our hospitals are grossly understaffed. We need those 370 positions. The 
Department of health should’ve been on top of it months ago. After they get the allocation, then they start 
looking into it, and it takes them – how many months? March, April, May, June, July, August – we’re looking 
seven months and they still haven’t figured out where these nursing positions go. Mr. Minister. Well I say 
that’s completely unacceptable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well I look forward with some interest to the debate between the hon. member and the 
Minister of Health who will, in his usual mild manner, refute each and every argument having presented by 
the hon. member, but I gather than opportunity will take place shortly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much. Time is very short, actually. Let me just . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- A second is a second is a second. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – I see. The member from Weyburn is giving us what has really been a brilliant, a brilliant 
exposition of time. It’s a subject which has interested philosophers for aeons. Thanks to the member from 
Weyburn, we now have clear concise idea of what time really is. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- When he speaks, it feels like an eternity. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Yes, that’s right. And if you want to understand the meaning of eternity, listen to the 
member from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Minister, the subject matter that I want to raise . . . the question I want to raise with you is the broader 
question on the method in which this government is financing its expenditures. It would appear, Mr. Minister, 
that this government having found deficits to be politically unacceptable, has now begun the process of 
paying its bills by utilizing funds which really are not renewable. Mr. Minister, your budgeting, I would 
suggest you, is not a sustainable process. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have taken $200 million out of SaskTel, after a manner of speaking. You can’t pretend to 
be able to do that on a year-to-year basis. And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that your method of budgeting 
is a non-sustainable method and that there is going to be an awakening, and I suspect the awakening is going 
to be awfully rude after the next election. 
 
It seems to be fairly obvious, Mr. Minister, that what you want to do is get past the next election without 
looking to . . .and look as if you are reducing the deficit. When you take $200 million out in one fell swoop 
out of a fund which has not much more than that, you’re clearly not operating your finances on a sustainable 
basis. And there’s no question but what you can do it for a time, but there’s equally no question of what you 
can’t do it for ever. 
 
I’m tempted to ask where you think you’re going to get the next 200 million but I shudder at the answer 
because the answer’s probably going to be the sale . . . the proceeds from PCS. 
 
Mr. Minister, the subject matter, which I want to get into after supper, has to do with your budgeting system. I 
suggested at the time the budget was brought down that the budget was cooked. It’s cooked in the sense that 
you pretend to be reducing the deficit, you pretend to be getting the province’s finances back on a better basis, 
and you’re not accomplishing that, Mr. Minister. I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that your budgeting process 
is getting, I think worse rather than better. If you had not dipped into these kitties, these tobacco cans such as 
the money from SaskTel, your deficit would have been relatively large. 



 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, as I say I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d care to comment on this perhaps after 
supper, its’ getting a little late. Perhaps you might care to comment on it after supper, and perhaps you might . 
. . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I’m not here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Oh I see, oh I see, I’m not aware of that. We’re going to adjourn and go back to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I see. Government House Leader, Mr. Chairman, has informed me that he 
intends to move a motion that we rise and report progress and go back to the Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – No. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, Gary won’t be here. 
An Hon. Member: -- Eric’s going to handle it again because he was doing so well before. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – My Heavens, I said partly in jest that we would come to understand the meaning of 
eternity when we start asking the member from Souris-Cannington questions on finance. The answers are 
really going to be eternal incoming. I think, Mr. Chairman, that this is going nowhere because if there’s going 
to be a different minister after supper, perhaps we should all it 5 o’clock and resume. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – It being 5 o’clock, this committee stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


