


















































May 25, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 25, 1989 
 

1369 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Criticism of the Provincial Auditor 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise here 
tonight, I would like to before addressing the substance of the 
motion before you, summarize for the people — constituents out 
in TV land out there — what they witnessed here today. They 
witnessed an unprecedented event in the history, in the annals of 
this legislature. They witnessed a government, Mr. Speaker, who 
voted against a motion put forward by one of their own ministers. 
They witnessed a government who in order to cover up, in order 
to suppress the truth regarding the events surrounding the reason 
this motion we are debating here tonight, went to take themselves 
on and they lost, Mr. Speaker. They lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Never before, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, never 
before has a government took itself on in debate, ended up voting 
against itself. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, what possible kind of government and political 
leadership are we witnessing here in the legislature of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it would be laughable if it wasn’t so 
serious. Here we had, Mr. Speaker, here we had a government 
minister, the minister of public privatization, who went and put 
forward a motion — and I’ll read it here, just to remind the 
members, the people of this province and yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
that the motion was put forward by the minister of privatization: 
 

That certain correspondence tabled by the Minister of 
Justice on May 19 and 23, 1989 and any associated 
circumstances be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges and Elections for their immediate investigation 
and report as to whether or not the privileges of the 
Legislative Assembly have been breached. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in other words we had the minister of privatization 
put forward a motion saying, let’s refer this matter, the matter 
which has gripped political events here in Saskatchewan over this 
last week or so; let’s refer this motion to a committee of the 
legislature. 
 
And what happened? When the vote came, when all members 
had an opportunity to debate that motion, the government 
members stood up and voted against their own minister of 
privatization, Mr. Speaker. Never before, never before have we 
seen a government gall to debate itself and then lose its own 
debate. Never before have we seen that happen, Mr. Speaker. 
And what is the reason? 
 
An Hon. Member: — And it was unanimous. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And it was unanimous, Mr. Speaker, it was 

unanimous. They voted against themselves unanimously — 
right? — to a man and woman. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe anyone in this province, 
whether it’s in the press gallery or members here in the 
legislature, have ever seen this, that a government voted a vote 
of non-confidence in their own minister. 
 
Because in terms of parliamentary tradition, Mr. Speaker, that is 
precisely what has occurred in this legislature. A minister of the 
Executive Council, a member of the Executive Council moves a 
motion which is not backed by members of his own caucus. And 
the tradition, Mr. Speaker, in every parliament in the British 
Commonwealth is when that occurs, it is the minister’s 
duty-bound to resign because he doesn’t have the confidence of 
his own caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, it is unprecedented, it is 
unprecedented to see what has occurred here. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it shows to the depths, the depths and out of control that 
that government has found itself in. Because, Mr. Speaker, what 
they did today, what they did where they ended up voting against 
themselves, is nothing more than a reflection of the kind of 
political mess that this government has found itself in, and is 
nothing more than a reflection of the kind of political motivation 
which has led to this debate in the first place. 
 
I want to read, Mr. Speaker, for you and for the people who are 
watching tonight the motion that we’re discussing. It says: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor, that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — 
 

and further, (Mr. Speaker), that this Assembly reaffirms the 
importance of the office of the Provincial Auditor as an 
officer of this Legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you, why are we debating that motion here? 
What is the reason that we are finding ourselves having to debate 
that kind of motion, which in itself is unprecedented in terms of 
the annals of this legislature, where a Minister of Justice stands 
before all members of the legislature, accused of an unjustified 
and unwarranted attack upon an officer of this legislature? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a little time, if I may, putting 
forward what I believe are the reasons we are spending this time 
debating this motion. And that is the question of the political 
motivation behind the actions of the Minister of Justice. 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1370 
 

Mr. Speaker, this attack on the auditor of the province of 
Saskatchewan was not a whim. This attack on the Provincial 
Auditor was not done in the heat of debate. This attack on the 
Provincial Auditor was not done out of some kind of angry 
response to an event that had happened. Mr. Speaker, this was a 
premeditated attack on the Provincial Auditor for strictly 
partisan, political reasons. Mr. Speaker, there can be no other 
explanation of what has occurred in this legislature and the 
actions and the motivations of the Minister of Justice in 
launching that attack on the minister . . . pardon me, on the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
And what would the political motivations be, Mr. Speaker? Why 
would it be that the Minister of Justice, who’s already been 
reprimanded by this legislature once for attacking another officer 
of the legislature, why would that Minister of Justice attack the 
Provincial Auditor in the way he did? 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I would submit the first reason is 
for short-term political gain. I sat in this House last Friday, May 
19, and I heard the Minister of Health — as question period 
unfolded, as people began to raise the question of the Provincial 
Auditor, and the Minister of Justice responded with his scurrilous 
accusations — I heard the Minister of Health say to one member 
of the front benches of our side, how is this for a little deflection, 
hey guys? How is this for a little deflection? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, first of all, that it’s not a little 
deflection. This has not become a question of politically 
deflecting the heat that that government was taking, based on the 
things which are written in the Provincial Auditor’s report. That 
little bit of political deflection has backfired on this government 
because, because of the scurrilous attacks of the Minister of 
Justice on the auditor of this province, there is not a person in 
Saskatchewan who does not know what the functions of the 
Provincial Auditor are, and who does not know that the 
Provincial Auditor is saying that he can’t do his job because of 
the interference and because of the kind of cover-ups that the 
government is engaged in. 
 
Some political deflection, Mr. Speaker, some political deflection. 
That little bit of political deflection that the Minister of Health 
talked about has backfired in a mighty big way on that particular 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — So, Mr. Speaker, the short-term political 
deflection, because that’s what it was all about, to attack the 
Provincial Auditor, to attract attention away from the auditor’s 
report, that little bit of political deflection has not worked. But 
there’s another part to the political strategy and the political 
motivation, Mr. Speaker, behind the activities of the Minister of 
Justice, and that is the long-range motivation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just as the Minister of Justice had attacked another officer of this 
legislature, that is to say the Legislative Counsel, that is that the 
Minister of Justice, at a time before this time, engaged in attack 
on the credibility and the integrity of the Legislative Counsel, in 
the hopes that not only 

would he do short-term damage to that particular person 
occupying that particular post, but that the Minister of Justice 
would in fact make it impossible for that person to carry out their 
activities as an officer of this legislature. 
 
That was the political motivation behind the minister’s attack, 
and he was forced to resign. He was forced to resign, Mr. 
Speaker, after making allegations, which by the way . . . Not 
forced to resign, he was forced to apologize to this legislature 
after making allegations, which I submit to you, sir, were in no 
way at all nearly as serious as the allegations he has made 
regarding the Provincial Auditor. 
 
That Minister of Justice attacked the former Legislative Counsel 
of this law clerk. And he was forced to apologize, after making 
what appeared to be some off the cuff remarks, even though they 
were intended to have a long-term political effect. 
 
The long-term political effect of the activities and actions and the 
statements of the Minister of Justice, in regards to the Auditor of 
this province, are this Mr. Speaker, I submit. The political 
motivation behind the Minister of Justice statements are: (1) is to 
permanently injure, permanently discredit, and permanently 
dishonour the integrity of the person that occupies the post of 
auditor of the province of Saskatchewan. The auditor — and I 
might say, Mr. Speaker, is a member of the Public Accounts 
Committee — when a member of the Executive Council says that 
the person who’s responsible for doing the books is willing to, 
for small change, throw out so many years of service to this 
province in exchange for a supposed pension package; when the 
minister makes that kind of charge to try to cast aspersions on the 
integrity of that person, what do you believe that I and any other 
member of the Public Accounts Committee has to do with that 
person? What do you think that the kind of opinion that we form 
of the character of this auditor would be? What do you think of 
the intent of the Minister of Justice’s statements in terms of 
moulding public opinion in regards to the integrity and character 
of the Provincial Auditor is? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to me there can be only one intent, and that is 
to do long-term political damage to the Provincial Auditor, 
because it says the Minister of Justice, as a member of the 
Executive Council of that government, is saying, we think that 
you can be bought. We think that you can be purchased for a 
pension plan. We think that you can be, for your own personal 
consideration, be persuaded to change your report in regards to 
the finances of this province, because that’s the impression that 
the Minister of Justice intended deliberately and premeditatedly 
to leave with the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the opinion that 
that person wants to leave with the people of this province as to 
the character of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
(1915) 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I say, Mr. Speaker, the refusal of the 
Minister of Justice to withdraw his statements, to apologize to 
the Provincial Auditor, to apologize to this Assembly, and to 
resign, proves — proves, proves — that he intends, and this 
government intends, to carry out long-term warfare against the 
Provincial Auditor. There   



 
May 25, 1989 

1371 
 

can be no other conclusion that people of this province can make. 
 
And how, Mr. Speaker, how can the Provincial Auditor then go 
ahead and perform his function if he does not enjoy the 
confidence of both sides of this House? Because that’s what the 
political ramifications of the actions of the Minister of Justice 
were. To say that because he will not apologize, neither will he 
resign, he is saying that the government of the day does not have 
confidence in the integrity of the Provincial Auditor. And that’s 
the long-term political motivation. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, why do they have that long-term political 
motivation? Because they want to be able to put in the place of 
the Provincial Auditor someone who is compliant, someone that 
will change the report, someone that will not be anywhere near 
as critical or as, quite frankly, as honest as the person who 
presently occupies the job. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the person that presently occupies the 
job of Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, has been a thorn in the side 
of every government which has occupied those benches. And I 
say for that, three cheers, because he as the watch-dog of the 
spending of the public of this province has that particular role to 
play. Now I’ll deal with that a little bit more, Mr. Speaker, a little 
later on. 
 
But I want to say to you that when we talk about the kind of 
political motivation which has set the Minister of Justice on the 
path that he has been set upon, I would like to ask members on 
the other side, how is it that they can support that particular 
course of action? 
 
It’s not a question . . . my friend and colleague from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake asks: what kind of moral character can they 
have? Well that’s a very good question. What kind of moral 
character can they have — right? — when they condone that kind 
of slander; when they condone that kind of scurrilous attack; 
when they condone that kind of unwarranted libel of the integrity 
and character of a person that has served this province well. 
 
How can they condone that? It is partly a question of moral 
character, but I submit, Mr. Speaker, that it is also a question of 
political smarts or the lack thereof — or the lack thereof. Because 
by condoning the actions of the Minister of Justice they’ve set a 
precedent. They have set a precedent. They say that it is okay for 
a government minister to attack officers of the legislature, and 
they’ve set that precedent. They say that it’s okay for a member 
of this legislature to, in this legislature, raise the issue of the 
character and integrity of any officer of this legislature. 
 
Anybody, Mr. Speaker, who for example occupies the Clerk’s 
position; anyone, Mr. Speaker, who occupies the position of the 
Legislative Counsel; anyone, Mr. Speaker, who occupies the 
position that you presently occupy — all become fair game for 
politically motivated attacks in order to engage in, as the Minister 
of Health said, a little bit of political deflection. 
 
And I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that if the members 
there are thinking more than two or three days 

ahead, if they put their mind to thinking maybe . . . Maybe if 
they’d put their minds to what it may be like in this legislature 
two or three years from now, whether they want to set that 
precedent — whether they want that precedent set. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if they reflect on this matter a 
little more deeply than feeling the tug on the neck of the members 
of cabinet; that if they reflect a little farther ahead in the future 
— which I know is a great deal of effort for a government which 
can’t plan on even finding out whether or not they’re going to 
end up voting for their own motions, right? — they can’t plan 
more than two days ahead. But if they reflect on this a little bit 
deeper than they obviously are doing now, that perhaps they 
don’t want that precedent set, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they won’t want it set for their own good. And they won’t 
want it set for their own good because when they occupy the 
opposition benches — which they will — will then they try to 
come to the defence of an officer of the legislature, should 
someone attack that officer? Not saying that it will happen, but 
they will be compromised, Mr. Speaker; they will be 
compromised because of their actions now. They will not have 
any grounds to stand on to say, you shouldn’t be able to criticize 
an officer of the legislature, because by their actions they have 
condoned, they have condoned an attack. And, Mr. Speaker, I say 
that shows the kind of lack of political smarts which has put this 
government into the hot water up to their necks that they’re 
presently in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It seems that there are 
several debates taking place, and let’s allow the member for 
Regina Rosemont to continue uninterrupted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you; 
I appreciate that. As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, it is a question of 
precedent; this question of privilege is a question of . . . 
ultimately one of precedent in the future operations of this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And you know, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, if I were — given the 
actions of the members opposite, given their support for the kind 
of unwarranted, scurrilous, slanderous, and libellous attacks, 
should those things have been repeated outside the legislature, 
should that, Mr. Speaker, if I were somebody applying for a job 
as an officer of this Legislative Assembly, I would think twice 
about applying for that job given the actions of those members 
opposite, quite frankly. Because it shows not only a lack of 
political smarts, but as my friend from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
says, a lack of moral integrity, a lack of an ability to reason things 
through to an end on the question of what is right and the question 
of what is wrong. 
 
I don’t want to pontificate, and I don’t want to act as a 
holier-than-thou or someone that stands morally superior to 
anybody else in this legislature. That’s not my intention, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not my intention. But it is my intention, as a 
member of this legislature, to point out   



 
May 25, 1989 

1372 
 

to those government members that there is a moral obligation on 
their part to protect the officers and offices of this Legislative 
Assembly. And that is not just a question of morals in the 
abstract, Mr. Speaker, that is a question of the oath that all of us 
took when we became members of this Legislative Assembly. 
And that oath was to uphold the institution that we stand in today 
and sit in today, and to stand up for those kind of principles which 
have evolved over the centuries, in terms of allowing questions 
of privilege to stand; allowing parliamentary immunity in terms 
of statements that people make; but also, Mr. Speaker, also 
making sure that those who make the statements are responsible 
for those statements, and are particularly those who occupy the 
Executive Council — those members who are members of 
Executive Council — the cabinet; those who have to have 
accountability to all us members in this Chamber. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that question of accountability, 
that question of responsibility rests on a number of things. When 
a member makes an allegation in the legislature, there is the 
supposition that there is some truth behind that allegation. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the question of truth, the question of 
allegations, and the making of tying the two together seems to 
have escaped the members opposite. But you know, and I know, 
and all members of this Assembly know, that in order to operate 
in a manner which the general public and the people of this 
province have to deal with, have to understand that when a 
minister of the Crown makes a statement there should be some 
semblance of truth to what that minister of the Crown says. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, does that test apply in the case of the 
Minister of Justice? Was there, and is there, or have there been, 
any statements of truth attached to the allegations made by the 
Minister of Justice? Was he telling the truth when he said that the 
Provincial Auditor would change his report in relation to the 
question of the Provincial Auditor’s retirement package? That 
was the allegation; that was the direct statement that the Minister 
of Justice made. 
 
In other words, was the question of the auditor’s retirement 
package linked to the question of changing the auditor’s 
retirement package linked to the question of changing the 
auditor’s report? You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s the case, that’s 
the case the Minister of Justice has tried to make since day one. 
He did so first of all by using selective quotations from a letter 
which said exactly opposite from what the Minister of Justice 
said it did . . . said he inferred. 
 
I want to read, Mr. Speaker, in support of that particular 
statement, a column in the Leader-Post of May 20, Mr. Petrie. I 
want to read you this, Mr. Speaker, because it explains, I think in 
words that outline the situation much more clearly, in a shorter 
period of time than many others have been able to do. I want to 
read this, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to quote: 
 

It wasn’t until Friday morning (and that’s Friday, May 19) 
that Saskatchewan truly discovered how distant from reality 
a government can become 

midway through its term. 
 
Under attack from all sides by what can only be described 
as a scathing provincial auditor’s report, the government set 
up its own world of make-believe to escape from allegations 
of secrecy in its spending habits. 
 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the opening paragraph of how the press of 
this province sees the actions of the Minister of Justice in regards 
to this question of privilege. 
 

Willard Lutz, the man who has double-checked government 
ledgers on behalf of taxpayers since 1971, all but included a 
letter of resignation in his annual report released 
Wednesday. The provincial auditor’s job, he said, has 
become next to impossible. Only about half the . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Quite frankly, I have to 
admit that I’m not sure of the ultimate intention of the individual 
in quoting. But let me just draw to his attention citation 328: 
 

A Member may read extracts from documents, books or 
other printed publications as part of his speech provided in 
so doing he does not infringe on any point of order. A speech 
should not, however, consist only of a single long quotation, 
or a series of quotations joined together with a few original 
sentences. 
 

(1930) 
 
So while quotes are allowed and generally acceptable, reading 
long statements are not generally acceptable according to citation 
328. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I intend to 
insert this as a very small part of my continuing remarks. 
 
As I said before, Mr. Speaker, the opinion I’m putting forward 
now is Mr. Petrie’s opinion, is not my opinion. Mr. Petrie says 
that; in this article he said: (a) that first of all that Saskatchewan 
woke up to find a government divorced from reality, and how far 
divorced from reality is. Then Mr. Petrie makes his next 
statement which is: 
 

Under attack from all sides (even themselves, because they 
even end up voting against themselves) . . . Under attack 
from all sides (what happens? and again I quote, partial 
quote) . . . the government set up its own world of 
make-believe to escape from the allegations of secrecy . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, what is that world of make-believe, what is a 
fantasy land? I mean, we all know from experience what 
make-believe things are. It’s obviously things like Alice in 
Wonderland, The Wizard of Oz, and now the Minister of Justice. 
Because it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Lutz almost 
submitted his letter of resignation — all but submitted his letter 
of resignation. Why? Because, it goes on to say, Mr. Lutz can’t 
do his job. That’s what it says in the auditor’s report — Mr. Lutz 
can’t do his job. Why? Well it goes on to say why: 
 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

1373 
 

If (Mr.) Lutz’s estimates are correct, the only auditor who 
must, by law, report to taxpayers, can’t get detailed 
information about almost $3.5 billion in spending by 
government and Crown corporations — or (Mr. Speaker, 
and this is what hit me in particular) approximately $3,500 
for every man, women and child in . . . (the province). 
 

So for those people who are watching on television I say, look 
around you tonight at the people who are watching the hockey 
game in your living rooms or doing what you’re doing; count the 
number of people and multiply by $3,500, and you will find the 
people in your household that the Provincial Auditor can’t 
account for in terms of the tax dollars that they represent — 
$3,500 for every man, woman, and child in this province that the 
Provincial Auditor, whose duty it is to account for, can’t 
represent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, more succinctly and to the point of the kind 
of make-believe fantasy land that the Minister of Justice is trying 
to draw up or trying to put forward, Mr. Petrie goes on to talk 
about that a bit: 
 

The reaction from the government Friday, or at least from 
Justice Minister Bob Andrew, was to shoot the messenger. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know . . . we’re familiar with that phrase 
“to shoot the messenger.” That is, that those who bring messages 
that the receiver doesn’t like, get shot. It was a practice, Mr. 
Speaker, it was a practice which arose from ancient times, ancient 
barbaric times, where when the messenger arrived with the 
messenger that the king or potentate did not agree with or like, 
the messenger was beheaded. Mr. Speaker, we look upon that as 
a kind of barbaric act that hopefully none of us would engage in 
here. 
 
Except, Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Justice did was engage 
in the same kind of barbarism on a political level because he 
beheaded the Provincial Auditor in a political sense. He, by 
attacking the character of the Provincial Auditor, is making it 
almost impossible for the Provincial Auditor to continue on as a 
servant of the province. And I know that was the intention of that 
Justice minister, Mr. Speaker. Every member in this legislature 
who are watching tonight knows that was the political intent . . . 
“was to shoot the messenger”. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, it’s the kind of political 
barbarism and the kind of political cowardice that we don’t 
believe should be operative in this legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it makes a comment, it makes a comment on 
the shooting of the messenger. It says, and I quote: 
 

And the Tories’ aim being what it is these days, Andrew 
naturally caught the bullet with his own foot. 
 

Well once again, Mr. Speaker, I say, after having a government 
voting against itself and losing, I think that that is an apt 
description of the kind of political mess 

that the Justice minister and that government is finding itself in. 
They’ve shot themselves in their own foot. Their own tactic of 
political deflection didn’t work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to go on a little further. Again I quote: 
 

Puzzled and startled observers of the legislative assembly 
listen as Andrew read selected passages from a letter Lutz’s 
lawyer wrote to the government’s legal counsel on April 20. 
Andrew’s abbreviated account of the correspondence left 
the impression Lutz had offered to resign, submit a palatable 
rewrite of his report and make no trouble for the government 
— but only if the price were right for a severance package. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly, that is exactly what the statement of 
the Minister of Justice attempted to do, was attempting to link the 
question of Mr. Lutz’s retirement, somehow link it to the 
question of a palatable report. That was the impression that that 
minister tried to leave with this Assembly. And that’s why we’re 
debating this motion here tonight. Because, sir, it was a prima 
facie case, a prima facie case of an attack on the integrity of an 
officer of this legislature. There can be no other doubt. And it’s 
not just us saying that, Mr. Speaker, it is members of the press 
gallery, it is member . . . and I can go on and read lots of lots of 
press clippings from newspapers all over Canada who have 
reached the same conclusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I quote, I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I must once again 
draw the following citation to the attention of the hon. member 
saying that a speech should not consist of a series of quotations 
joined together with a few original sentences. I’m sure the hon. 
member will agree that by and large that’s what he’s been doing 
for the past while, and indicates intention of doing so, and I must 
draw that to your attention again that you’ll have to change your 
method of delivering your speech. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your 
ruling. As I was saying very simply this, that the press across 
Canada realize the kind of political hatchet job that the Minister 
of Justice is attempting on the Provincial Auditor. And that’s 
exactly what it is. That’s exactly what it is, right? They created a 
fantasy land through selective quotations, through selective 
quotations from a letter which when tabled in this legislature 
proved exactly opposite from what the Minister of Justice was 
saying, a fact recognized by every responsible journalist all 
across Canada. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there is a special despicable quality to 
that kind of hatchet job. And that special despicable quality 
comes precisely from the person who occupies the position of 
Minister of Justice. And surely, Mr. Speaker, every person in this 
province knows that the fundamental tenets of justice allow every 
person charged with their day in court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is charging, he is trying, he 
has convicted the Provincial Auditor in this Chamber without 
allowing the Provincial Auditor his day in court. And that is 
unacceptable behaviour from   



 
May 25, 1989 

1374 
 

someone who claims to uphold not only the principles of this 
legislature, but someone who claims to uphold the principles of 
justice in this province. This is the Minister of Justice? This isn’t 
one of the back-benchers off on a wild rampage. This is the 
Minister of Justice who is supposed to uphold the principle of 
innocent until proven guilty. 
 
The Minister of Justice has turned this Legislative Assembly into 
the Court of Star Chamber. He has turned it into an institution 
worthy of the kind of institution known under the Spanish 
Inquisition. He has turned it into an institution where the 
principles of fair play, justice, decency, and democracy are 
trampled underfoot for his own narrow, partisan political 
interests, and he has done it with the reputation and the integrity 
of the Provincial Auditor. He and all those on that side of the 
House who support them have got to look at themselves in the 
mirror tomorrow morning and ask themselves: are they worthy 
of occupying their places in this Assembly if, in fact, they end up 
— as I suspect they will — if they end up supporting the actions 
and the activities of the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have to date. And don’t they realize what the 
seriousness of this particular activity is? Not one shred of proof, 
not one iota of evidence, not one shard of anything approaching 
material reality was put forward by the Minister of Justice; 
nothing more than a warped and twisted interpretation of a letter 
which every responsible journalist in North America, in Canada, 
who has looked at this thing has said, this is crazy, this is crazy. 
What the Minister of Justice is doing is not right. It is shabby. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the question of members of this side 
of the House saying this, judging that the activities of the 
Minister of Justice are a breach of privilege of this House; it’s 
not just us saying that. 
 
I refer, for example, to an article in the . . . an editorial in the 
Toronto Globe and Mail, who talked about, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The shameful outcome has been that Mr. Lutz is obliged to 
enter his own estimates of the amount of public spending in 
the province, for want of any summary financial 
(calculations). 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

The image that emerges is of a shabby, almost furtive 
government. 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in those few words I believe that the 
editorial writers for that particular journal have caught what we 
see before us — as we from this side of the House look across to 
that side of the House — those who are shabby and those who 
are furtive; a government which has lost its own self-respect; a 
government which has, by its finger-nails trying to cling to 
power, and in doing so is scratching the face and back and 
reputations of officers of this Legislative Assembly, in this 
particular case, the Provincial Auditor. 
 
“Shabby” and “furtive” were the words used in that editorial, Mr. 
Speaker, and I couldn’t agree more, because the treatment that 
Mr. Lutz is receiving at the 

hands of the Minister of Justice can be described as nothing less 
than shabby treatment — shabby, unjust, unfair, unwarranted, 
and quite frankly, characteristic of that minister who already has 
had to apologize to this House, and characteristic of that 
government that doesn’t even know enough to support its own 
minister and ends up voting against itself, trying to cover up what 
should be made public. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reason. That is the reason for 
why this thing has occurred the way it has, why it has sprung on 
the public, why it is part of the public domain, why it is part, now, 
of the political debate that is occurring in this province. It is a 
politically motivated — an attack in order to cover up the 
malfeasance of officials of this government who refuse to carry 
out their duties as required by law. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, any rating of the public of the auditor’s statement, 
in regards to why the government has done what it’s done, it 
doesn’t take a mental genius to figure out what the motivations 
were for that. We have an auditor who, page after page after page 
after page, documents the waste, the mismanagement, the 
disappeared money. Money which has . . . they cannot account 
for. Taxpayers’ dollars which have seemed to have gone out the 
window. Taxpayers’ dollars who have ended up in who knows 
who’s pockets. Taxpayers’ dollars which have been not 
accounted for. Taxpayers’ dollars which have disappeared into 
the mire represented by that government over there, and which 
the Provincial Auditor cannot account for. 
 
This government turns around and attacks the Provincial Auditor, 
trying to cover up the fact that it has lost control — that it has lost 
control over the finances of this province, or, if they have not lost 
control, are engaging in practices which a Provincial Auditor 
would find unacceptable, and hence are trying to remove the 
Provincial Auditor from trailing and tracking down where it is 
that taxpayers’ money have gone. 
 
That’s the only conclusion that can be reached in this affair, that 
the activities of the Minister of Justice have been political 
motivated, and they’ve been politically motivated in order to 
cover up what this government is doing with taxpayers’ money. 
Anybody that is looking at what has occurred in the last several 
weeks in this province knows that to be true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could refer to a number of things that have 
occurred very recently in regards to the government breaking the 
law; for example, the whole question of the auditor’s report itself. 
Here we have the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, May 18, “Tory 
actions break the law, auditor says.” That’s one headline. 
“Saskatchewan broke law, auditor says.” That’s from the Globe 
and Mail, May 16. On and on and on. 
 
We look at what happened with the securities exchange 
commission . . . Saskatchewan Securities Commission, that says 
that the government broke the law through its advertising 
campaign. 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1375 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, people may say, what has that got to do with 
the question we’re debating here? It has a lot to do with it 
because, Mr. Speaker, why else would the government want to 
cover up? Why else would the government want to hide what it’s 
doing with the taxpayers’ dollars of this province? Why else 
would the government want to keep hidden from the people of 
Saskatchewan, unless they’re engaged in activities that the 
Provincial Auditor will say breaks the law, as he did in his report? 
 
We’re not dealing here, Mr. Speaker, with what happened to this 
nickel or that dime. We’re dealing here with over $3 billion. 
That’s $3,000 million — more than $3,000 million of taxpayers’ 
money. And what happened to it? Where has it gone? What’s it 
used for? Who’s getting it, Mr. Speaker? Who’s getting it? 
Because we know that the people of Saskatchewan aren’t getting 
their taxpayers’ dollars back. 
 
The auditor’s report says that there are 2,000 fewer civil servants 
in this province than there were a year ago, yet spending by that 
government has increased by $100 million. And there has not 
been an increase of $100 million dollars in any services in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason that this government is trying to hide, to cover up, to 
conceal, to keep from view of the public of where their taxpayers’ 
dollars are going, is the reason we’re standing here debating. 
There can be no other rationale then why the Minister of Justice 
and that government wants to get rid of the Provincial Auditor. 
Because they know, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
are asking that question: where’s the money going, and who’s 
getting it? 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you, sir, with all due 
respect, is the bottom line, the bottom line of the politically 
motivated hatchet job carried out on the Provincial Auditor by 
the Minister of Justice. He wants, that Minister of Justice and that 
cabinet and the Premier and the front benches of that government 
want somebody in the place of the Provincial Auditor that will be 
compliant; that won’t poke into corners that they don’t want 
poked into; that won’t look into bank accounts and people’s 
pockets that they don’t want looked into. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the real motivation of the 
attack on the Provincial Auditor; that the long-range strategy of 
forcing him from his job in order to cover up, in order to hide 
where the money is going, is the real reason for that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you can look at the timetable. You can look at 
the timetable of events that surround here. You know, the 
auditor’s report was released by the auditor to this Assembly on 
May 17, 1989. Two days later, the Minister of Justice launches 
an attack on the Provincial Auditor in order, as the Minister of 
Health said, to deflect attention away from the contents of the 
Provincial Auditor’s report. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the next day, the Minister of Justice starts 
talking about: 
 

We demand all information be put to the legislature. We 
demand all relevant documents be tabled before the House 
by the Provincial Auditor. We demand it because . . . 
 

And I’m quoting from the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We demand it because I’ve been told the truth about what 
happened, and this is material (says the Minister of Justice, 
this is material) to why I made the allegations I did. 
 

What happened, Mr. Speaker? Well on May 23, I believe it was, 
the auditor submitted all the documentation relating to any 
negotiations that he may have had through his lawyer with the 
government. On May 23 the auditor tabled a special report 
outlining in detail, and including all correspondence, including 
the very material that the Minister of Justice asked for. And what 
do we find in that special report, Mr. Speaker? What do we find 
in that special report? Did it prove the allegations made by the 
Minister of Justice? Did it say that what the Minister of Justice 
was alleging . . . would it provide evidence that what he was 
saying was true? No, it did not. In fact it said the exact opposite. 
 
It said that the Provincial Auditor was concerned with one thing. 
When you read through all the documents, when you read all the 
letters, when you read all the communication, it said one thing. 
The message from the Provincial Auditor was clear. It said: I will 
leave provided that my office remains inviolate; that I will leave 
provided that my successor, who, according to custom, is the 
assistant auditor, is appointed. No demands for personal gain, as 
alleged by the Minister of Justice; no demands for a pension 
package; no demands for anything above and beyond to which 
the Provincial Auditor was entitled. But the demands he made on 
the government were the ones that the government found to be 
unacceptable. And those demands were that the Provincial 
Auditor’s department remain outside the grasp of those who 
would use it in order to cover up any kinds of malfeasance or any 
kinds of misuse of public funds. Mr. Speaker, that’s what the 
main demand of the Provincial Auditor was, and that’s why the 
Minister of Justice is performing a hatchet job on him. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is saying, I want my office independent 
of the Executive Council because I don’t trust Executive Council 
to do what the Provincial Auditor is supposed to do, and that is 
to provide a fair and accurate, and above all, honest rendering of 
the public accounts of the taxpayers’ dollars of the people of this 
province. That’s what his main demand was. And for making that 
demand and for refusing to knuckle under to the pressure being 
applied to him by members of Executive Council, we find the 
Minister of Justice engaging in a political hatchet job. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s my interpretation of the events, that’s 
my interpretation of the timetable. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not only my interpretation, it’s the conclusions which have been 
reached by responsible observers of this legislature clear across 
Canada. They’ve reached the same conclusion. They have 
said . . . 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. Well   



 
May 25, 1989 

1376 
 

we appreciate, on this side of the House, the member’s zeal for 
high drama and debate in this House. I would ask that perhaps 
you give consideration to the ruling on repetition in debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order, 
and indeed repetition is one of the rules that is contained in the 
rules of our House, and I bring that to the member’s attention. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 
wouldn’t want to be repetitive and bore the hon. members 
opposite. I know that they’re sitting there paying attention to 
what I have to say because they know very well, Mr. Speaker, 
that what I have to say will have a direct bearing on their future 
as members of the Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and their conduct in regards to this matter will 
provide a direct — and I may say, material, to quote the Minister 
of Justice — material effect on how long they remain members 
of this particular legislature. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, we dealt with the question of political 
motivation for the hatchet job. We dealt with the nature of the 
hatchet job. We dealt with the actual events and facts that took 
place in terms of what the hatchet job consisted of and how it ties 
together. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal, if I may, for a very few 
minutes on what are the potential outcomes? Well as I’ve said 
several times in the debate, but it bears worth repeating, I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, is this: this government is engaged in 
trench warfare against the Office of the Provincial Auditor 
department of Saskatchewan. And they will somehow, in some 
way, try to secure from Mr. Lutz his resignation. 
 
(2000) 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. Lutz, who although I know 
he is reaching retirement age — he’s a gentleman of 64 years of 
age, and he’s put in many years of distinguished service into this 
province — I want to say this to Mr. Lutz as an officer of this 
Assembly. Those of us on this side of the House have not always 
agreed with Mr. Lutz, but we have always respected his integrity; 
we’ve always respected his honesty. And as a member of the 
Public Accounts Committee, working close with Mr. Lutz, I want 
to say that I can say that without any hesitation or without any 
kind of qualification. 
 
In that regard, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to Mr. Lutz, 
publicly, here, that you have the confidence, sir, of this member, 
and, I believe, of this side of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
What I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that, don’t quit; don’t 
give in to the kind of political hatchet job being done on you. 
Stay in your post, stay in your post so that you can bring this 
government to task the way that you have been doing in the past 
and the way that you did with the previous government. Stay in 
your post in order to protect your own character, your own 
integrity, so that you leave with all the honours . . . when you 
leave, you leave with all the honours that you are due, sir. 
 

I think that that’s the message we want to send to Mr. Lutz here, 
Mr. Speaker. I know that’s the message that we on this side of 
the House . . . we don’t want Mr. Lutz to give into the kind of 
political pressure being exerted on him. We want him around to 
act as the watch-dog for as long as he thinks fit. 
 
And we think, Mr. Speaker, given the kind of political motivation 
of that government, that that should be at least until the next 
election when the people of Saskatchewan will have the 
opportunity to show their support for Mr. Lutz and for honesty in 
government and for fairness in financial reporting and for 
openness in the accounting of their tax dollars. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, when I say the members on this side of 
the House want Mr. Lutz to stay on, I believe, in the current 
political situation we find ourselves in Saskatchewan, that every 
right-thinking, responsible and fair-minded citizen of this 
province wants the person who is occupying the office of 
Provincial Auditor to stay on and to not knuckle under to the kind 
of scurrilous attack launched on him by the Minister of Justice. 
And I say justice, in this context, with a foul taste in my mouth. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, not only should, given the political aims 
of the government . . . I think that the people of Saskatchewan 
should be taking a very close and careful note of what the auditor 
has to say in his report and also to the financial position of the 
province of his government. 
 
So I would invite all members of the public who wish to see what 
it is that the Provincial Auditor has to say about the spending 
habits of this government, to write to me or any of my colleagues 
at Room 265 in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The government may want to hide the truth, Mr. Speaker. The 
government may want to hide what it is that the Provincial 
Auditor is saying by attacking his integrity. But the report exists, 
the report is available, and anyone that is interested in looking at 
the financial situation of this province and understanding what it 
is that is going on here in this legislature, in this province — write 
in, or phone collect. You can phone the chairman of the Public 
Accounts Committee at 787-1900. You can phone myself, 
787-1890, or any of my other colleagues, in order to get the report 
to find out why it is, to find out why it is that the minister, the 
Minister of Justice, has attacked what has been and is an 
honourable officer of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, finally the . . . I fail to see 
the humour in the situation that evidently the members opposite 
do. I don’t find a hatchet job done on an officer of the legislature 
a humorous situation. I don’t find covering up public spending 
humorous. And when I see it from people from my own home 
town and members who represent another district in my own 
home town, like the member from Regina South, finding the 
attack on the Provincial Auditor a humorous event, I think that 
speaks volumes to the people of Regina as to the kind of moral 
character that that member has, that he would condone that kind 
of libellous and slanderous attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1377 
 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, finally . . . I want to read, Mr. Speaker, 
very briefly, so as not to be ruled out of order, the introduction to 
the auditor’s remarks, and is to be found on page 1: 
 

Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative 
Assembly for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1988. 
Introduction: 
 
Saskatchewan’s parliamentary system of government is 
based on the principle of the rule of law. Compliance with 
the law is critical to the entire system. Because of the 
importance of this principle, much of this report is about 
instances where the laws have been contravened. 
 
The law requires the Provincial Auditor to report where, in 
his opinion, the management of public money was deficient. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the first . . . In light of the statements of the Minister 
of Justice, I find that the first several sentences of this report to 
be more than prophetic. Saskatchewan’s parliamentary system of 
government is based on the principle of the rule of law. Couldn’t 
agree more. The question is for you, Mr. Minister of Education, 
Madam Minister of Energy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Order. Order, order. The 
hon. member is referring to members in the House, and it’s a 
breach of the rules. Members are not to refer to other members. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to all those who are 
sitting on that side of the House here tonight, I say this: are you 
going to allow the Minister of Justice to engage in the kind of 
lawlessness which he has engaged in, in regards to the Provincial 
Auditor? That is the question when we vote on this motion that 
you will be faced with. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the motion, the 
question that they will be forced to deal with, not only in this 
House, not only in this legislative court, but before the court of 
public opinion as well. Are they going to condone the kind of 
activities that the Minister of Justice has carried out or not? 
That’s what the vote will be about. And if you condone it, if you 
condone that kind of activity, I say to you that you had better look 
at yourselves well in the mirror the morning after, because there 
will be something lost in each and every one of your character if 
you allow the Minister of Justice to get away with the kind of 
scurrilous attack that he does. 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, without any partisan attempt, without any 
partisan attempt, because if it was done by a member of my front 
bench, I would be on my feet — as I will be after we form the 
next government if the kind of slander, scurrilous activities are 
engaged in in any kind of members of our front benches; you can 
bet your bottom dollar on it. That, Mr. Speaker, is precisely the 
question that all those members who sit on that side have to face. 
 
It is time to take a stand for moral and political morality. It is time 
to take a stand in this legislature for truth and honesty versus 
cover-ups, slander, scurrilous attacks, hatchet jobs — the kind of 
things that the Minister of 

Justice engaged in. 
 
I’m asking the members opposite: are you going to allow it or 
not? If you do, your actions, as they are in politics, but in this 
case in particular, this case in particular, your actions will be on 
your heads, and you shall pay dearly — you can bet your bottom 
dollar on that — you shall pay. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s now been about two and a half years since I was first elected 
to serve the people of Regina Victoria in the Legislative 
Assembly. It’s been a very exciting and eventful two and a half 
years. And although it’s a short period of time, it’s nevertheless 
enough time to be able to form some opinions, form some 
opinions about this government in the context of the motion 
that’s before us. Because it’s not the first time that the question 
of privilege has been raised in this House, and I would suggest to 
you, sir, that this is not the first attack that we have seen on an 
officer of the Legislative Assembly, and the attacks by the 
Minister of Justice on the Provincial Auditor are attacks by a 
member of the House on an officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Two and a half years, again, is a short time, but nevertheless 
enough time to form some opinions, and one opinion that I’ve 
formed of this government, or the PC government — in speaking 
to the motion — one opinion that I’ve formed is that this 
government is anti-democratic. This is a government that seeks 
to limit the democratic institutions, gives rein and gives play to 
those who would stifle dissent, gives credence to those who 
would censor opinion, and helps those who would bury 
opposition. 
 
And this motion before us is very much one about democracy, 
about a democratic institution, the Legislative Assembly and one 
of its officers, and the conduct of one of its members. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, the PC Party — one has to wonder if it’s still the 
party of Diefenbaker. John Diefenbaker, as you know, and as the 
people of Saskatchewan know, was a one-time prime minister of 
Canada, a member of the Progressive Conservative Party, and a 
resident of Saskatchewan. He represented the constituency of 
Prince Albert for many years in parliament. He is a man — 
notwithstanding differences of opinion — he is a man who is 
cherished and loved, respected, I think by most people in 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s fair to say that. 
 
I have a great deal of admiration for John Diefenbaker, and I had 
that admiration, not because I agreed with him on everything; I 
disagreed strongly with him on some stands that he took in his 
lifetime, but I admired the man, and I admired him greatly 
because of his position on human rights and his love for 
democracy. 
 
Whatever else one might have said about John Diefenbaker, or 
still might say, no one would ever say that John Diefenbaker did 
not love democracy, did not love the institution of parliament, 
did not love the concept of human rights, did not love to see a 
country in which   



 
May 25, 1989 

1378 
 

everyone had basic, unalienable rights, and were strong and 
protected. That was John Diefenbaker. 
 
John Diefenbaker, who was a member of the Progressive 
Conservative Party, and I would think it’s fair to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that when one talks historically of the Progressive 
Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, one must of necessity talk 
about John Diefenbaker. And again, even though he was a 
member of that party, I think he represented the very best of that 
party. He represented a strong libertarian attitude, a strong sense 
of fair play, a strong sense of individual liberties that one finds 
from time to time in the Progressive Conservative Party — 
perhaps with the exception of these days. 
 
(2015) 
 
But certainly John Diefenbaker represented that, and represented 
that very strongly and very effectively, and I think is treasured 
and loved by the people of Saskatchewan for that. And we know 
he had a reputation that extended beyond Prince Albert and 
beyond Saskatchewan and extended across Canada and was very 
strong, especially in western Canada. 
 
And I have to ask myself that when I look at that tradition and 
that pillar of strength in the Progressive Conservative Party, and 
when I look at that sense of adherence to concepts of liberty and 
of rights, and then I look at this government before us and the 
fact that we’re dealing with this motion, I say, are we talking 
about the same party? Are we talking about the party of John 
George Diefenbaker, or are we talking about the party of Joe 
Stalin? Joe Stalin, Joseph Stalin also ran a government, Mr. 
Speaker, a government supposedly based on laws, but had very 
different ideas about how you deal with rights and how you deal 
with opposition and how you deal with dissent. John George 
Diefenbaker, Mr. Speaker, would not want to associate himself 
with the actions of the Minister of Justice, with the actions of this 
government since it was first elected in 1982. He would not be 
proud, he would not be proud of their actions. 
 
I want to review, Mr. Speaker, I want to review for you some of 
the record of this government when it comes to their adherence 
to traditions of democratic fair play in Saskatchewan. I want to 
point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that the motion before us is not an 
isolated example of where a member of the government has gone 
to attack those who by anyone’s definition should be allowed the 
freedom to express their opinions. And in some cases of 
necessity, we ask for their opinions. 
 
I want to make it very clear to you, Mr. Speaker, and for those 
who might be watching, that this matter, the matter of the Justice 
Minister attacking the Provincial Auditor, is not an isolated case. 
And it’s part of the reason that I make the claim that this 
government is anti-democratic, and I make the claim that John 
Diefenbaker would not recognize the party today or this 
government. 
 
It wasn’t very long after the Progressive Conservative 
government was elected in 1982, Mr. Speaker, that it set out to 
stifle, to bury, to discourage any legitimate opposition. It had an 
opposition in the House, to be sure, it had eight or nine members 
of the New Democratic 

Party; but any opposition to the government that it perceived to 
be there outside of the Legislative Chamber, it went out to 
destroy that opposition; it went out to do away with that 
opposition. The very first inkling we had of that, or one of the 
first inklings we had of that, had to do with the Ombudsman of 
the day. And the Ombudsman, like the Provincial Auditor, is a 
servant of the Assembly. The auditor is there to take the 
complaints of citizens about government, to investigate them, to 
make sure that individual citizens have not been wronged by 
government. That is his job. 
 
In 1983, Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman of the day, David Tickell, 
condemned proposed cuts in the budget to his office. Rather than 
dealing with the question of what an adequate level of funding 
might be for the Ombudsman, the inclination of that government 
was to attack the Ombudsman. The Premier said that his remarks 
were improper — and when have we heard that word before, Mr. 
Speaker? — and unproductive. And he stopped short of calling 
Tickell unprofessional. 
 
And I’m referring here to an article in the Star-Phoenix, Mr. 
Speaker, March 23, 1983. He said that the Ombudsman had no 
right to comment on budget bureau proposals. He said it was 
inappropriate for the Ombudsman to speculate on what the 
budget might hold for his office. The Premier was asked 
repeatedly whether he shares the views of, at that time, the 
Minister of Finance, the member from Kindersley, the current 
Minister of Justice. That minister of Finance, the same individual 
who is at the centre of the controversy and at the centre of the 
privilege motion before us, said that Tickell, the Ombudsman, 
the servant of the Assembly, that his remarks were chintzy and 
unprofessional. 
 
Rather that deal with the question of what was an adequate level 
of funding for the Ombudsman’s office, that member from 
Kindersley, at that time, one year after being elected — less than 
one year — attacks an officer of the Assembly. 
 
Now apparently the . . . It says here in the newspaper article that: 
 

Andrew made his comments to the media shortly after the 
Ombudsman’s annual report was tabled in the legislature 
Monday. 
 

And he said, Mr. Speaker, according to these press reports — and 
I have no reason to doubt them — that the Ombudsman was 
chintzy and unprofessional. And of course we raised concerns 
about it at that time. 
 
My colleague, the member for Regina Centre, accused the 
government of that time of trying to shackle and muzzle, trying 
to shackle and muzzle David Tickell, the Ombudsman, a servant 
of the legislature, an officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
My colleague went on to say that: 
 

Not only does the anticipated budget cut threaten his ability 
to fulfil his obligation as a mediator and investigator, but the 
attack by Andrew compounds that. 
 
 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

1379 
 

And he went on to say in an article in the Leader-Post, the 
member for Regina Centre said: 
 

Attacks against the Ombudsman by Devine and Andrew 
impair Tickell’s ability to fulfil his role as a mediator. 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I appreciate that hon. members 
wish to draw issues into their remarks that are relevant to the 
motion under question. However, I must say that while the 
member is somehow relating these arguments, that he is kind of 
drawing a long bow, a long bow, and he’s spending a great deal 
of time on these other issues but very little on the motion itself, 
and therefore I’d like to deal with the issue in a more direct 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion 
that’s before us, Mr. Speaker, is the motion that was moved by 
the member from Quill Lakes, and that motion says: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice (the 
member from Kindersley) for having breached the 
privileges of this legislature by his unacceptable and 
unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial Auditor, that this 
Assembly calls on the Premier to require that the minister 
apologize publicly and resign from the Executive Council, 
and further, that this Assembly reaffirms the importance of 
the office of the Provincial Auditor as an officer of this 
legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time, this is not the first time that 
that member and that minister has been a subject of a motion of 
privilege — not the first time. And I think that a member and a 
government cannot continue along to criticize officers of the 
Assembly; cannot do that without the public being made aware 
of that, without the House being made aware of that, and without 
that being taken into consideration as we consider the motion. 
 
I think it’s very important to understand the history, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s very important to understand that this is a very severe motion 
of censure. And the reason that it’s so severe is because it’s not 
the first time that this minister has been involved in actions of 
this nature. 
 
And as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, he attacked a previous officer 
of the Legislative Assembly, a former servant of the Legislative 
Assembly, and it was that same member . . . And I would say that 
he’s not the only one; the member for Melville also has attacked 
officers of the Assembly. What this Minister does is not 
unrepresentative of the government, the member for Melville as 
well. 
 
When the Ombudsman, an officer of the Assembly, raised 
criticism about government and its handling of child welfare, that 
Minister, rather than dealing with the substance of the comments, 
made remarks like, “Saskatchewan may be better off in doing 
away with the Ombudsman’s office,” and at the initial reaction 
of his department to a report by Ombudsman David Tickell 
 

Condemning the government for failing to deal with the 
crisis in the child welfare system was to 

question its validity. 
 

And that has been drawn to the public’s attention before in 
editorial, both his conduct and that of the member from 
Kindersley. In 1983 the Leader-Post said that: 
 

. . . actions on these fronts by the government would be 
more productive than sniping at the glare of publicity that is 
the Ombudsman’s one channel to air his grievances. And 
they take exception to the approach by Finance Minister 
Bob Andrew. 
 

They refer, or the Star-Phoenix does, they refer in 1987 to the 
Minister of Social Services, the member from Melville. They say 
that: 
 

. . . confronted with a report from Saskatchewan 
Ombudsman, David Tickell, calling for significant changes 
in the way his department handles the care of foster children 
. . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I must once more draw to the member’s 
attention that the motion under discussion deals with the motion 
concerning the Minister of Justice and alleged criticisms he made 
against the Provincial Auditor, and therefore breached the rules 
of the Assembly. 
 
It sounds to me, sir, like you’re discussing in a long, long fashion 
the case against the Ombudsman, not this motion. And as I’ve 
said earlier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. Order, order. 
As I said earlier, examples are permitted, but I’m afraid you’re 
going off the topic quite a long way, and I would like you to come 
back to it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I perhaps didn’t 
make myself clear that what I was addressing myself to, and I 
appreciate the comments from the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, and I invite them, I invite them to get up off their seats, 
to stand in their place and to explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan just what it is that you’re planning to do with the 
Provincial Auditor. What it is that you’re planning to do with the 
taxpayers’ money, to explain your actions in this regard to the 
people. Rather than sitting there in your seats and criticizing, get 
up from your seats, explain yourselves, defend your actions, 
defend your minister. Defend his gutless attacks. Do that if you 
would. Do that if you would. Stand up! Stand up! Stand up, 
defend him — defend his gutless attacks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Defend his gutless attacks. I ask you to 
do that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
Order. I must once more intervene. I realize in the heat of the 
moment sometimes one says things, and I know that the word 
“gutless” has been used prior by members. However, I don’t 
believe it’s a word that we should become accustomed to using 
in describing other members in the House, and I ask the hon. 
member to refrain from that term. In the future I’ll have to rule it 
out of order, in an unparliamentary manner, so I’m just bringing 
that to your attention. 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1380 
 

(2030) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for 
the use of that word. It’s been used before in debate, and I took 
my cue from that. What I meant to refer to was the Minister of 
Justice, the Acting Minister of Finance, the member for Rosthern, 
to my mind, and I think to members on our side and to the public 
generally, to the media, displayed a distinct lack of intestinal 
fortitude in his attacks on the Provincial Auditor which are the 
subject of the motion before us. 
 
Many others would say that he had a yellow stripe a mile wide 
down his back. Many others would say that he’s a chicken. Many 
others would say that he’s too afraid to say outside the Assembly 
the things that he said in here. 
 
But no, the members opposite continue their discussion from 
their seats, Mr. Speaker. They don’t defend the cowardly actions 
of the Minister of Justice. They don’t defend one of their own 
who’s got a yellow stripe a mile wide down his back. They don’t 
defend the bully from Kindersley. Boy, they must be proud in 
that town tonight. They must be proud there. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think that hon. members just 
take a deep breath and allowed the member for Regina Victoria 
to speak. And the House will just calm down and proceed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I always 
appreciate your interventions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that I wanted to make is that the motion 
before us, the motion that’s before us is very severe — very 
severe in what it calls for. This is not a motion that simply asked 
that the minister apologize, but this motion also asks that the 
minister resign from the Executive Council. 
 
That is an important distinction, and it’s a very severe indictment 
of the minister and there are reasons for that, sir. There are 
reasons for that, and those reasons go back to the previous antics 
of this minister. They go back to the government generally in its 
attitude as it seems to us, to those who have a legitimate role to 
play in our society and who have a legitimate right to express 
their opinions, as does the auditor. 
 
I want to remind the members and the public of the case of the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk in 1987, who was also 
attacked by the Minister of Justice. And this is another reason 
that the motion before us is very severe. In 1987 — I want to 
explain this, Mr. Speaker — in 1987, you will recall, the setting 
was one of a government which chose not to call the House into 
session but chose to try to govern outside of the Legislative 
Assembly and to spend money until mid-June of 1987. 
 
Many concerns were raised. Many concerns were raised, not only 
by the opposition but by others in our province and outside the 
province, about the constitutionality of a government spending 
money without legislative approval. 
 

We asked, as we normally do in these cases, we asked for an 
opinion from the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, an officer 
of this Assembly, the same as the Provincial Auditor, an officer 
of this Assembly. 
 
That Law Clerk proffered an opinion and basically questioned 
the right of the government in the constitutionality of the 
government being able to spend money by warrant without 
having called the Legislative Assembly into session and having 
tabled a budget. 
 
That was a fair, legitimate opinion. And I grant you, it was not 
the only opinion that was ever offered. Members on the 
government side offered opinions about the constitutionality and 
the legitimacy of their actions. But we asked an officer of the 
Assembly for her opinion and that lets go to council . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. The member for 
Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The motion 
before us is very specific. It has nothing to do with 1987 and what 
events possibly took place in 1987 or 1988. The motion is very 
specific on the Minister of Justice now, today, and I would ask 
that you rule on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order and 
the point of order that she has raised is one that we should all 
adhere to. It is correct in the sense that the motion does deal 
specifically with the Minister of Justice. 
 
As I have said earlier, I have allowed brief examples to be used 
which are relevant, but not to use an example and to talk on it for 
an inordinate long time because that’s getting away from the 
motion. So I’m bringing this back to the member’s attention. His 
examples must be brief and relevant to the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
your intervention and I appreciate your comments and I want to 
adhere to what you say. But I do think it’s important, I do think 
it’s important to put this motion into an historical context so it 
can be understood by you and members of the Assembly and by 
the public and as to why the motion is so severe, that in addition 
to calling for a public apology it is calling for a minister’s 
resignation. 
 
And I want to go on to point out that this is not the first time that 
it’s happened, and I want to lay before you and the public some 
examples. And as brief as I can try to be, I will be, but the 
examples will have no meaning if I’m not allowed to explain 
them. And my job here tonight, sir, is not to filibuster, but to 
explain, and I want to explain the case of the Legislative Counsel 
and Law Clerk, Merrilee Rasmussen, briefly, succinctly, if I can. 
 
And as I was saying, sir, this is a case of an officer of the 
Legislative Assembly, a Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk who 
was asked for an opinion, did her job, proffered an opinion. It 
was a fair opinion, not necessarily   



 
May 25, 1989 

1381 
 

an opinion that everyone should necessarily agree with, but gave 
the opinion — gave the opinion. What was the reaction of the 
Minister of Justice at the time? What was the reaction of the 
member from Kindersley? Was it to say, well, she has her job to 
do; we appreciate her opinion. No, he said, she works for the 
NDP; she’s not an impartial officer of the House. 
 
His first reaction, as it was with the Ombudsman, was not to say, 
there’s a role for officers of the Assembly to proffer, to proffer, 
to put forward opinions, and to take those opinions and deal with 
them accordingly and appropriately. No, his first reaction in the 
case of the Legislative Counsel, in the case of the Ombudsman, 
and in the case of the auditor now, is to attack the messenger. 
 
And that’s the point that I wanted to make, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would simply point out that there are other examples of that, 
other examples of where not just this minister but the 
government, too . . . I don’t think that anyone will forget that this 
is the government that put gag orders on non-governmental 
organizations, organizations that are supposedly to deliver 
programs and services on behalf of the taxpayers. One of the 
conditions of fundings that they had was that you can’t say 
anything about government policy — you can’t criticize us. You 
can deliver the programs, you can deliver the services on behalf 
of the taxpayers, but you can never say anything about the 
government. You can’t criticize. And that’s what the Minister of 
Justice is saying about the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Speak up, speak up at your own peril. That’s what the Minister 
of Justice, the member for Kindersley, is saying: speak up, speak 
up at your own peril. To you, the Ombudsman, you speak up — 
you speak up at your own peril. To you, the Legislative Counsel, 
you speak up — you speak up at your own peril. And it’s no 
accident that the Ombudsman is gone and the Legislative 
Counsel is gone. 
 
And now he’s saying to the auditor, you speak up — you speak 
up at your own peril. I’ll attack you. I won’t deal with the 
substance of your remarks. I won’t do that. No, I’ll attack you. 
I’ll attack your credibility. I’ll indulge in an attack that’s 
completely lacking in any guts. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the hon. member 
will want to just withdraw that remark and carry on. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I certainly withdraw that remark, Mr. 
Speaker, and I . . . And again the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
makes comments from his chair and encourages us, on our side, 
notwithstanding constant interruption, to address the motion as 
we’re trying to do here. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve always been one who 
believed that debate should be a two-way street, and that all 
opinions should be offered in a debate for those who are watching 
the debate to form a fair and good and solid opinion and to make 
a good decision in the matter. The more opinions that are offered 
the better it is. 
 
And we’re met with a wall of silence. We’re met with a 

wall of silence from those members over there, the government 
members. They support this member from Kindersley. They 
support this PC member with a yellow stripe a mile wide down 
his back. They support him. They won’t get up to defend him. 
What a crew they are! 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Provincial Auditor tabled his report, he 
made extremely strong criticism of the government, and that’s 
one thing. He made very strong criticism. And the government 
didn’t say, well we accept, in part, some of the criticism, but we 
don’t accept others, and there’s moves afoot to try and correct 
this. The very first reaction of the member from Kindersley, the 
Minister of Justice, was to say that, and I quote here, and he’s 
referring to the Provincial Auditor. He says, quote: 
 

“He’s a hard guy to complain about working together,” 
Andrew told reporters Wednesday, “Jesus Christ, he can’t 
work with anybody.” 
 

So his first reaction to an auditor saying that I can’t get access to 
government books, I can’t get access to the information, I’m not 
being provided with the information — his first reaction is not to 
say, how could that be possible, how can we improve it, or here 
are my reasons why we’re not doing it. He attacks, he attacks the 
auditor. 
 
And if he had left it at that, and if he had tried to do some damage 
control in the sense of, well, we don’t agree with the auditor on 
this one, or we agree with him on that one and he’s not quite 
portraying the picture quite the way we would do it, and tried that 
method of damage control, you know, they might have gotten 
away with it to some extent. It still wouldn’t erase the headlines 
of The Globe and Mail and the headlines that have made 
Saskatchewan just a laughing-stock in Canada. They’re laughing 
at you people; they’re laughing at the Minister of Justice. 
 
This is like some southern state, some banana republic of a bunch 
of tin dictators gone wild, trying to have it their own way. 
They’re laughing at you, and I guess that’s one of the more 
shameful aspects of this, and the discouraging aspects of this 
whole question, Mr. Speaker, that we would become the 
laughing-stock of Canada; that this government would put us on 
a level with the fiscal foibles of a Newfoundland or other 
provinces of less than sterling repute. To take the reputation of 
Saskatchewan and besmirch it the way they have, it’s not 
something that the people of Saskatchewan can forget. 
 
(2045) 
 
Again, it’s not the first time, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the first time 
that the member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, has 
attacked an officer of the House. He attacked the Ombudsman, 
he attacked the Legislative Counsel, and he also attacked last 
year the auditor — last year, last year in 1988 — shortly after the 
auditor’s report was tabled for that year. And I want to quote 
from The Kindersley Clarion, where it says: 
 

“But Andrew doesn’t think the Provincial Auditor’s report 
can hold the wet stuff.” 
 

Andrew doubts the credibility of the auditor. It’s a quote.   



 
May 25, 1989 

1382 
 

He said: 
 

Auditors are people who bump against reality once a year. 
They live in that jungle zoo and call themselves bureaucrats. 
They wear thick glasses because they are looking at the fine 
print to see if every “i” is dotted. 
 

Now the question that was raised, Mr. Speaker, was concerning 
Saskatchewan home program and whether there was proper 
legislative authority. Now here’s a lawyer, a minister of Justice, 
and he could have taken the approach that, well I would disagree 
with the auditor — after all, he’s not a lawyer, and we feel we 
had the legislative authority — and certainly if the legislative 
authority wasn’t there, if the de jure authority wasn’t there, 
certainly the de facto authority was there and we will correct it 
after the fact and make it good, because the people wanted that 
program and that’s all the authority that we felt we needed. But 
if he says that we need a legitimate authority, a de jure authority, 
then we’ll correct that. 
 
He could have said that, or he could have said, I’ve had opinions 
from other lawyers, from our own lawyers, who disagree with the 
auditor. They hold an entirely different opinion of the 
Saskatchewan home program and its legislative underpinnings. 
He could have said that. No, instead he doubted the credibility of 
the auditor and said: 
 

Auditors are people who bump against reality once a year. 
They live in that jungle zoo and call themselves bureaucrats. 
 

That was in 1988. And in 1989 I think the story is all too familiar 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to basically sum up, Mr. Speaker, by . . . I want to sum up 
by saying that the government members, the government 
members can defeat the motion. They can defeat the motion but 
they cannot rid themselves of the damage that they’ve done 
themselves. They cannot rid us, Saskatchewan, of the damage 
that they’ve done this institution by allowing a member of the 
cabinet, of the executive government, to make an unwarranted, 
scurrilous attack against an officer of the Assembly. 
 
This Assembly is all that there is and stands between a 
government who would be inclined to exercise the theorem that 
might is right. This Assembly has certain rights and 
responsibilities and duties and obligations, and we need at all 
times to make sure that this institution remains strong. And part 
of remaining strong is for the officers of the Assembly to be 
protected at all times against cowardly attacks, against 
unwarranted attacks, whether it’s in the House or outside the 
House. 
 
That’s an approach that this Assembly has always taken. And 
again, the government members can, without explanation and 
silently, without explanation to their constituents and to the 
people of Saskatchewan, they can choose to vote down the 
motion, but they can’t rid this Legislative Assembly of the stench 
that they create by their actions, by the stench that they create by 
this smear attack on the Provincial Auditor. They can’t rid us of 
the sense that we’re losing something of our democratic 

traditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset of my remarks I talked about John 
Diefenbaker. I don’t think John Diefenbaker would have been 
very proud of the actions of the member from Kindersley. I don’t 
think that he would be very proud of the attack by the Minister 
of Justice on an officer of the Assembly. John Diefenbaker had 
too much love and too much respect for democratic institutions, 
for parliamentary authority. He believed in the House, he loved 
the House, and he would be the first one to attack those who, by 
the nature of their jobs, are to criticize and to offer opinions. 
That’s why he advocated a Bill of Rights many years ago, and he 
was very strong on that, and I don’t think that John Diefenbaker 
would recognize this government, much less support this PC 
government today. And certainly they don’t deserve the respect 
and support of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage and ask some of the government 
members, the back-benchers, to look at the motion and, if they’re 
not satisfied with the specific wording, to come back to us with 
some amendment, some resolution, but at least acknowledge that 
an attack has been made on an officer of the Assembly; that we 
should not be attacking officers of the Assembly; that we should 
do more than simply laugh, that we should do more than simply 
laugh from our seats about a cabinet minister attacking an officer 
of the Assembly, as members will do — as government members 
will do. This is not funny. 
 
Where did you ever in your wildest imagination think that this 
was somehow funny, that this was a humorous situation, that this 
is something that deserved laughter? How could you ever think 
that? 
 
It’s just simply incredible, Mr. Speaker, simply incredible! 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I don’t think John Diefenbaker would support 
this party. I think John Diefenbaker would be the first to vote for 
this motion. I hope that some government members might see 
their way clear to finding some resolution on this issue, finding 
some way to make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan that we 
will not countenance attacks on officers of the Assembly, and 
make it clear to future legislatures, and make it clear to . . . and 
to build that tradition that we will at all times support, respect, 
and defend the officers of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I for one, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of any resolution being 
offered by the members opposite, will vote for the motion before 
us. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter this important debate this evening, Mr. Speaker, 
a debate that gets right to the heart of the questions of democracy 
versus partisan politics in this province, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, so that those watching the debate this evening on 
television will understand the issue that’s being discussed, what’s 
in question here, Mr. Speaker, is the May 19 remarks of the 
Minister of Justice, which in effect, Mr. Speaker, constitutes . . . 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1383 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the point of order I want to 
make: that this issue before us is so serious and it deserves the 
attention and the silence of all those who are not speaking and 
should be listening, and that members should not be speaking 
from their seats the way they are. That is my point. 
 
The Speaker: — Well the point of order makes a valid point, but 
I would just like to point out that certainly interruptions from the 
floor are not acceptable. I would like to point out that this 
moment, that in reality this evening members from both sides 
have been guilty — from both sides. And therefore I ask 
members from both sides to adhere to not interrupting us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, it is a standard rule of this 
Assembly that the member who is speaking is to address Mr. 
Speaker and the hon. members here, and since we have television 
live in the House, the member was clearly addressing the 
television camera in the far corner over there, and that is why he 
was not getting the due respect of the members. I bring it to the 
attention of, Mr. Speaker, that the member should be called to 
order to speak to the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member does not have 
a point of order. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling. I 
appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is at issue here is the May 19 remarks of the 
Minister of Justice in which, Mr. Speaker, he clearly alleged 
impropriety on the part of the Provincial Auditor. Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Justice, on May 19 alleged that the Provincial 
Auditor had been prepared, Mr. Speaker, in exchange for pension 
benefits and an improved benefit package, and in exchange for 
having a say over who the next Provincial Auditor would be in 
the event of his retirement . . . the Minister of Justice alleged that 
the Provincial Auditor traded these matters, Mr. Speaker, and 
was willing to trade these matters for, in exchange, removing 
criticisms of this government and of this government’s illegal 
activities from his annual report. That is what the Minister of 
Justice alleged, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason why this debate on privilege this 
evening is taking place is because it was clear, after reading the 
correspondence that the Minister of Justice tabled from the 
solicitor who wrote on behalf of the Provincial Auditor, that the 
accusations of the Minister of Justice had made were totally 
unfounded, totally misleading, and bore no resemblance to the 
text of the correspondence at all, Mr. Speaker. And that is why, 
Mr. Speaker, among other issues, privilege deals with the matter 
of libel against officers of the legislature or members of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
such an instance before us now. 
 
I want to also cite, Mr. Speaker, some of the other matters 

that privilege deals with: 
 

It may be stated generally (and I quote here from Erskine 
May, Parliamentary Practice) that any act or omission 
which obstructs or impedes (the Assembly) in the 
performance of its functions, or which obstructs or impedes 
any Member or officer of (the Assembly) in the discharge 
of his duty, or which has (the) tendency, directly or 
indirectly, to produce such results may be treated as a 
contempt . . . 
 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have such an example here 
in the comments that were made by the Minister of Justice about 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
He alleged, Mr. Speaker, he alleged, as I said, that the Provincial 
Auditor was prepared to remove from his report criticisms about 
the government of Saskatchewan in exchange for a personal 
benefit for himself. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no evidence at all that that 
took place. 
 
I want to specifically address the two matters that the Minister of 
Justice raised in his comments pertaining to the supposedly 
improper activities of the Provincial Auditor — activities that he 
can, I believe, Mr. Speaker, in reality have absolutely no 
justification at all in calling improper. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, he alleged that the Provincial Auditor was 
seeking personal benefit by way of special pension privileges 
upon his retirement. And, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the 
Provincial Auditor was doing no such thing. 
 
The pension benefits of the Provincial Auditor, in the event that 
he chooses to retire, Mr. Speaker, are clearly established by way 
of legislation that governs all deputy ministers and the Provincial 
Auditor. And specifically, Mr. Speaker, The Provincial Auditor 
Act states that the Provincial Auditor, upon retirement, will be 
entitled to the same pension benefits as any deputy minister. So 
that’s not a subject for negotiation, that is a matter that is 
established in statute. 
 
It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor was making 
no attempt whatsoever to negotiate or transfer additional benefits 
to himself. All he was seeking to do was to remind the 
government of what the statutes of Saskatchewan said, and that 
the appropriate pension benefits would have to be allocated for 
in the future budget of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the question of the auditor’s right to 
have a say in who his successor might be, and the negotiations 
that took place around that, clearly, Mr. Speaker, once again we 
have precedents set down both by way of the traditions of this 
Assembly and also by way of The Provincial Auditor Act that 
clearly suggests that the successor to the Provincial Auditor will 
be someone who is already working on the Provincial Auditor’s 
staff and that has experience in working with the finances of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1384 
 

And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor 
had good reason to be worried about the motives of the 
government in appointing someone from outside of the 
Provincial Auditor’s office, a hand-picked appointment, no 
doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the government of the day could control, 
and who in the future would not be so critical of the government’s 
efforts. 
 
I suspect that that is what the government was concerned about, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is why the government is trying to paint a 
picture of improper activity by the Provincial Auditor in 
suggesting that one of the other senior people in his office should 
assume his position. There is nothing improper in the Provincial 
Auditor suggesting that that prospect should be examined by the 
government of the day. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
concern of the Provincial Auditor would be that a hand-picked 
auditor by the PC cabinet would cease and desist from the 
criticisms that this government should be rightly subjected to 
with respect to their illegal activities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, when the full text of the letter 
that the Minister of Justice was reading from was tabled before 
this Assembly, and when the Special Report by the Provincial 
Auditor was also tabled before this Assembly, it became clear, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of Justice had totally 
misconstrued the points that the Provincial Auditor was trying to 
make. 
 
And I want to continue to discuss this question of the succession 
of the Provincial Auditor by simply quoting from page 3 of the 
Provincial Auditor’s special report to the legislature, in which he 
points out that the proposal that he put before the PC government 
with respect to the question of his successor was a proposal that 
was made because he was asked by the solicitor writing on behalf 
of the PC cabinet to address the issue in the first place. 
 
He was asked by the government’s solicitor to address the issue 
of a successor. He does that, and then the PC Minister of Justice 
accuses him of impropriety with respect to making a proposal 
about who his successor should be. And I say, how hypocritical 
of the government that they would attack the Provincial Auditor 
for responding to a subject matter that they asked him to address 
in the first place, and it’s right here in his report and right here in 
the correspondence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the reality is, is that the correspondence 
shows that the real concern of the Provincial Auditor, his 
overriding concern, was to maintain the independence of his 
office and to negotiate an arrangement with the government 
under which his successor, a future Provincial Auditor, would 
have access to all the details with respect to the spending of the 
cabinet and of the Government of Saskatchewan irrespective of 
which government is in office in this province, Mr. Speaker. That 
was the real concern of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The correspondence demonstrates that the Provincial Auditor 
sought again and again and again to negotiate an arrangement in 
which he and his successor would have access to all the spending 
of government instead of the current arrangement, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in which the 

Provincial Auditor now has access to only the detailed spending 
information of half, only 50 per cent of all the tax dollars that are 
spent in this province. That was the concern of the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He was also concerned — and the correspondence clearly shows 
this, Mr. Speaker — his other major concern was that his office 
would remain independent, that he would not be subjected to the 
constant budget cuts which this PC cabinet has subjected him to, 
cutting his staff, Mr. Speaker, to the point where he was unable 
to do his job of monitoring the spending of this government on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. He wanted, Mr. Speaker 
— and the correspondence clearly shows this — the Provincial 
Auditor was concerned that because he is an officer of this 
Assembly, his budget should be set by this Assembly, not just by 
the Minister of Finance, but by this Assembly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that only when his budget is set by this Assembly, 
can he be accountable to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That was the concern of the Provincial Auditor. Clearly he saw, 
Mr. Speaker, that the PC agenda was to continue to erode the 
independence of his office. The evidence for that is everywhere, 
Mr. Speaker. It is demonstrated by the fact that the Provincial 
Auditor has been continuously under attack by this government 
for the last two years. He has been the subject of continuous 
criticism by the Minister of Justice and by other members of the 
front bench of this government, Mr. Speaker, and this continuous 
criticism has reached a high point with this motion of privilege 
and the debate that we have before us now. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to specifically address the question of 
why the Minister of Justice should resign, because, Mr. Speaker, 
I believe that the evidence in support of the Minister of Justice’s 
immediate resignation is now overwhelming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I say first that the Minister of 
Justice should resign because the remarks that he made in this 
Assembly and his attack on the Provincial Auditor was clearly 
intentional and it was premeditated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was 
an attack designed for use in question period. It was an attack 
launched for the benefit of the television cameras who come into 
this Assembly for the 25 minutes that question period is on. And 
it was clearly designed with a view to discrediting the Provincial 
Auditor and discrediting the criticisms that the Provincial 
Auditor was making about the state of finances of the current 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that the Minister of Justice should resign 
because he made no attempt to apologize after making his highly 
inappropriate remarks. Instead, Mr. Speaker, the government has 
attempted to create a phoney rationale for what the Minister of 
Justice did. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say first of all that the Minister of Justice 
should resign because his attack on the auditor, an officer of this 
Assembly, was intentional, it was premeditated, and there was no 
apology. 
 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1385 
 

Mr. Speaker, secondly I say that the Minister of Justice should 
resign because this is not the first time that the Minister of Justice 
has conducted himself in such an inappropriate manner. My 
colleagues have made reference earlier in this debate to the attack 
that the Minister of Justice made on the law clerk of this 
Assembly, and he had to apologize for that attack. He knew, Mr. 
Speaker, that attacking an officer of the Assembly was a clear 
breach of the privilege of this Assembly, and yet he clearly and 
intentionally proceeded to do it again a year later; to do it not 
once but to do it twice, Mr. Speaker, on two separate days. And 
that is inexcusable from a senior member of the cabinet benches 
who clearly knows better and who clearly shows no remorse at 
all for his actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say that a third reason that the Minister of 
Justice should resign is because he has shown himself to be a 
coward instead of a gentleman, Mr. Speaker. He has shown 
himself to be a coward because he refused to allow the Provincial 
Auditor to come before the bar of this Assembly and to defend 
himself, and that was a cowardly action, Mr. Speaker, in my 
judgement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice’s action was also shown to 
be cowardly because he refused to repeat his remarks about the 
Provincial Auditor in his attack on the Provincial Auditor outside 
the Assembly, where court charges could have been laid by the 
Provincial Auditor had he repeated his highly improper remarks 
outside this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe also that the Minister of Justice’s remarks 
were shown to be cowardly because he continued to quote from 
the correspondence between the solicitor of the Provincial 
Auditor and the cabinet in a highly selective manner that was 
blatantly misleading. He was not prepared, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the government, to accept the criticisms that the 
Provincial Auditor rightly made in his report, and to indicate that 
corrective measures would be taken. Instead, Mr. Speaker, he 
chose to attack the auditor directly in an attempt to discredit the 
comments that the auditor had made about the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why was the Minister of Justice so intent on 
attempting to discredit the Provincial Auditor and in so doing to 
discredit the criticisms that he made in the latest annual report 
that he filed with this Assembly? Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
that he wanted to discredit the charges that were being made by 
the Provincial Auditor about the many illegal acts that this 
government has been guilty of over the last year. And we have 
seen illegality after illegality documented in the report of the 
Provincial Auditor that has been recently filed with this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Illegalities with respect to the failure of 
this government to file annual reports about the activities in 
spending of departments in a timely manner; illegalities with 
respect to the fact that time after time Crown corporations in this 
province have refused to give the Provincial Auditor access to 
basic information about their spending, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
many, many other illegalities that are documented in this report. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is the fact that the Minister of 
Justice wanted to divert public attention from the 

auditor’s criticisms of the government, and the auditor’s concern 
about the fact that the people of Saskatchewan could now only 
get answers to the detailed spending about half their tax dollars 
instead of all of their tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, that led the 
Minister of Justice to take this cowardly way out. Instead of 
addressing the issue squarely that the Provincial Auditor was 
raising in his report, he chose to duck the issues and to launch a 
chief attack on the Provincial Auditor. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
kind of cowardly action has no place in this Assembly. And on 
that basis alone the Minister of Justice should resign, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I say that the man who has 
demonstrated real courage in this debate is the Provincial Auditor 
himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Because, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
knew that for the last two years he has been the subject of 
constant attack from members of the government. And we saw 
it, Mr. Speaker, in Public Accounts, of which I was a member 
last year, in which we had a whole week of Public Accounts in 
February of 1989 looking, I might add, Mr. Speaker, at a report 
that was two years old — two years old at the time. 
 
The Provincial Auditor rightly pointed out, Mr. Speaker, at that 
point in time, that the members of this Assembly and the public 
were no longer getting information that was terribly useful to 
them, because it was two years old when it had been filed in this 
House and when it was being reviewed by members of the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
But putting that aside, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor during that week was subject to a barrage of attack from 
government members of the Public Accounts Committee, and the 
purpose of that attack, Mr. Speaker, was very clear. It was 
obvious that the members of the government were attempting to 
silence the Provincial Auditor. They were attempting to ensure, 
Mr. Speaker, that he would not come forward with another 
annual report that was critical of the government. They, Mr. 
Speaker, were intent on making sure that the Provincial Auditor 
either shut up or retired. And, Mr. Speaker, they failed in their 
attempt to silence the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — The Provincial Auditor, despite that barrage day 
after day that he was subjected to in Public Accounts Committee 
by members of the PC government opposite, came forward in this 
report with another annual report to this Assembly that told the 
truth about the illegalities and the improper activities and the 
mishandling of public money that this government has been 
guilty of, day in and day out during the fiscal year under review, 
by that report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor, despite the   



 
May 25, 1989 

1386 
 

attempt by this government to cover up its illegalities has come 
forward and he has stood his ground. And for that act he deserves 
the respect and the thanks of all members of this Assembly, and 
above all, the thanks of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to review the 
motion that is before us now. And that motion says: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor, that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council, and further, that this Assembly reaffirms 
the importance of the office of the Provincial Auditor as an 
officer of this legislature. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to address the question of what the 
fundamental purpose of this motion is, what this motion really 
gets at, over and above the issues that I have already addressed 
this evening. And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what this 
motion really gets at, what this motion is all about, is an attempt 
to protect democracy in this province. The Provincial Auditor is 
an integral part of our democratic system. He is non-partisan, Mr. 
Speaker, he is the watch-dog for the people of Saskatchewan over 
the government spending of taxpayers’ dollars. And I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that if the Minister of Justice gets away with 
this attack on the Provincial Auditor, then that is another step 
back for democratic rights in this province, rights which have 
been steadily eroded since this government was elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never before in the history of this province have we 
had a government that has so much disregard for democratic 
practice; everything, Mr. Speaker, from its failure to call the 
Assembly for periods as long as nine months at a time so that it’s 
not subject to questioning by members of the official opposition, 
all the way through to its failure to table documents on time; for 
its failure to bring before the Public Accounts Committee, until 
months after the appropriate date, the detailed information on the 
spending of taxpayers’ money in this province; the clear attempt 
to dismantle the independent boundaries commission in this 
province. All of those are examples of the clear attack that his 
government has launched on democracy. 
 
And what we see this evening in this debate, Mr. Speaker, with 
this motion, is an attempt to address the continued attack by the 
PC cabinet and the PC government in this province on the 
democratic institutions of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, the real issue before us is whether 
the democratic rights of the people of Saskatchewan will win out 
in this debate or whether the partisan political motives of the PC 
cabinet will win out in this debate, Mr. Speaker. That is clearly 
the fundamental issue that is before us, because what this 
government is obviously hoping to do by using its majority, Mr. 
Speaker, 

is to ensure that the motion before us will be defeated. 
 
And in the defeat of this motion, Mr. Speaker, will mean that the 
rights of the Provincial Auditor, the rights of all officers of this 
Assembly, the rights of all members of this Assembly will no 
longer be protected, that this government will be free to launch 
an attack whenever it wants to on the officers of this Assembly, 
and though it will be subject to public criticism, it will inevitably 
use its majority to protect itself. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that in the short term that is 
what will happen with this motion. In the short term, I have no 
doubt that the government’s desire to protect itself and to protect 
its own Minister of Justice will win out over the rights of the 
Provincial Auditor and other members of this Assembly to be 
protected by this Assembly. In the short term that may happen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I also have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan now understand clearly the real motives behind 
this government’s operation, its attempts to cover up corruption, 
its attempts to cover up dishonesty. Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt 
that this government’s attempt to discredit the Provincial Auditor 
and to cover up the illegalities that the Provincial Auditor has 
documented in his report that has been filed with this Assembly 
will be a major issue in the next election. 
 
One of the major issues in the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will be the rights of the people of Saskatchewan to have the 
government of Saskatchewan conduct itself in a democratic way 
and in such a way that it is accountable to all taxpayers in this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when that day comes, I have no doubt that this 
government will be defeated because of its record of breaking the 
law on a weekly basis and of attempting to undermine the 
democratic institutions of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no doubt that in the 
next election the government will pay dearly for what it is 
attempting to do today. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I close by saying that I will be proud 
to stand up in support of this motion, in support of the democratic 
rights of the people of Saskatchewan, and in opposition to the 
tyranny that the PC cabinet and the Minister of Justice have 
displayed in the Assembly in their attack on the Provincial 
Auditor. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s with a good deal of 
sadness that I stand today to speak to this motion that’s been 
moved by my colleague: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this Legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor, that this   



 
May 25, 1989 

1387 
 

Assembly calls on the Premier to require that the minister 
apologize publicly and resign from the Executive Council, 
and further, that this Assembly reaffirms the importance of 
the office of the Provincial Auditor as an officer of this 
legislature. 
 

There are three points to this motion, Mr. Speaker, which I will 
be addressing separately. I say it’s with sadness that I rise to 
speak to this because I hold very dear the procedures of this 
Legislative Assembly which, as a rookie MLA, I am just 
beginning over the last few years to work with and to appreciate 
and to understand some of the limitations that we have in this 
parliamentary system to obtain the information that we need as 
members of the opposition. And all these issues are related in this 
motion that I want to speak to. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the first thing I want to talk about, when we 
put in this point of privilege condemning the Minister of Justice, 
I want to just express to you not only my sadness but my absolute 
horror at watching the performance of the Minister of Justice in 
this Assembly the day that he used the letter from the auditor’s 
lawyer to deflect the questions from the Leader of the Opposition 
relating to the auditor’s report, and to instead put terrible 
innuendoes on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I have rarely seen an adult person behave in such a devious 
manner. Although what is said in Hansard and when he came in 
again the other day to justify his actions, he used what was 
written in Hansard and said, oh, I didn’t say very much, didn’t 
say very much. And he tried to imply that he was just calling it 
improper. 
 
But what we saw in the Legislative Assembly on the Friday that 
he introduced that letter was a performance, a way of acting and 
speaking that had all sorts of innuendoes in it which the printed 
word may not have. But the performance was there and the 
performance was shocking, Mr. Speaker, just shocking. And I 
think it was unacceptable behaviour for a Minister of Justice; it 
was totally unacceptable to condemn the Provincial Auditor in 
the way that he did, and to malign the auditor. 
 
I find it, as a rookie MLA, offensive to think that members who 
have the trust of their constituency, and who are here to represent 
an issue with the Minister of Justice, an issue as important and as 
fundamental as justice itself, would have come into this 
Assembly and presented a letter so dishonestly and so 
reprehensibly. 
 
I mean, my reaction was that I was looking at a minister of 
injustice, Mr. Speaker, not a Minister of Justice. A person who 
has been in this Legislative Assembly for many years, a person 
who is a minister of the executive, a cabinet minister in this 
government. To do that to an officer of this Assembly, to malign 
that person, to use the letter in a way that was dishonest to us in 
this House because it did not reflect the total content of the letter, 
and which also referred to other material that we didn’t have. 
 
It was, as this motion says “. . . unacceptable and unjustifiable 
criticism of the Provincial Auditor . . .” It breached the privileges 
of this Assembly, this legislature, because in this legislature we 
are to answer questions and to debate issues as thoughtfully and 
as responsibly as we 

can possibly do. 
 
We have to do this as legislators, Mr. Speaker, and the members 
of the cabinet opposite, the executive, have a tremendous 
responsibility to conduct themselves in as fine a manner as 
possible. And instead we had a Minister of Justice who 
conducted himself very much like a schoolboy, Mr. Speaker, 
very much like a schoolboy trying to get out of a difficult 
situation; trying to be smart about it, Mr. Speaker; trying to 
suggest that he had some information that there was something 
wrong that had gone on with the Auditor and it wasn’t his 
responsibility to address the question of the Auditor’s report. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have said already that I find it really quite 
frightening. 
 
I’ve been looking through the Auditor’s report, and there’s some 
comments here that I would like to share with the Assembly 
because they mean a great deal to me, and I think they reflect on 
this debate. 
 
We’ve called on this Premier to require that the Minister 
apologize publicly and resign from the Executive Council, and I 
think that any Minister of Justice who behaves in such an unjust 
manner, should apologize publicly and should resign from the 
Executive Council. I don’t see what other action the Minister can 
take that would restore the credibility of the government 
opposite. The government opposite has lost almost all its 
credibility, if not all its credibility, in this particular action, 
because what they’ve been trying to do through the Minister of 
Justice is cover up the content of the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
They’ve been trying to deflect attention from the report itself and 
put the attention onto the messenger. And that’s a silly and 
juvenile trick, Mr. Speaker, one that will not in the long run hold 
up. 
 
We have spent this week putting this issue forward to the public. 
We have done well, I think, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to see the 
editorial in the Star-Phoenix on May 23, that said, and I quote: 
 

Devine must act. It’s time for Premier Grant Devine to step 
forward and tell government ministers and officials to 
co-operate with provincial auditor Willard Lutz. 
 
Devine should make it clear that if they don’t comply and 
provide the auditor with the information to which he’s 
legally entitled, salaried officials may risk losing their jobs, 
and elected officials may face losing their portfolios. 
 

(2130) 
 

In his 1988 report, Lutz says that he can no longer 
effectively do his job because the government isn’t obeying 
its own laws. It is denying him access to information he has 
a right to see. 
 
He is particularly upset at some Crown corporations, which 
hire private auditors to produce their reports. Once a private 
audit is completed, Lutz has found corporations throw 
numerous roadblocks in his path if he attempts to obtain 
further relevant information. 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

1388 
 

His warning that the accountability process is breaking 
down should cause concern to all taxpayers in this province. 
If information about government spending is hidden from 
his scrutiny, it’s hidden from the taxpayer. 
 
Lutz is accountable to the legislature, which is accountable 
to the voters. It is vital that he, as the taxpayers’ watchdog 
on government spending, is able to obtain all the 
information necessary to provide a complete picture of 
public expenditures. 
 
The auditor’s concerns about crumbling accountability, 
access to information and co-operation from officials are not 
new ones. He has voiced them before, but it seems the 
government hasn’t bothered to listen. Justice Minister Bob 
Andrew’s inane comments that Lutz is a difficult man 
complaining about an auditors’ turf war does not present the 
image of a government genuinely worried about 
accountability. 
 
The premier will have to make some attempt to temper the 
arrogance of government ministers and Crown officials. 
Otherwise, the public may well ask, “What has the 
government got to hide?” 
 

That’s the end of the quotation from the editorial, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it’s a good one. I think it puts the finger right on the 
problems that we have here and certainly raises the very 
fundamental question: what has the government got to hide? 
 
But before I move to that issue, which is one that I want to talk 
about in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the 
Minister of Justice — the man that I call now, the minister of 
injustice because of his terrible behaviour towards the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
This editorial says that the minister should be held accountable 
for his inane comments, and they are inane. And I was shocked 
myself to read in the paper, in the Regina Leader-Post, that the 
Minister of Justice not only behaved in a very poor way here in 
this Assembly in the use of the letter, but that he also speaks 
outside of the legislature condemning the auditor in words — and 
this is a quote which the Minister of Justice has not denied 
saying. He says about the auditor: 
 

He’s a hard guy to complain about working together. Jesus 
Christ, he can’t work with anybody. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it unacceptable for a minister of the 
Crown, a minister of this government, a Minister of Justice in the 
cabinet opposite to swear about the Provincial Auditor in public 
like that. And I’m sure that there are a lot of constituents that I 
represent that would find that offensive too. 
 
I know this government . . . the Premier has said that he wants to 
put God first and the family second, but I don’t know whether he 
actually gives his ministers the permission to take the Lord’s 
name in vain, as he has in 

this condemnation of the Provincial Auditor. If that’s what he 
means by putting God first, I suggest that it just reflects even 
more the kind of schoolboy behaviour that I stand in my place 
here to condemn from the Minister of Justice. 
 
And to say that a man and a Minister of Justice who would speak 
like that publicly is not a person deserving of the respect and the 
loyalty of the constituents. That is a person who is reduced to the 
very lowest common denominator of name-calling in the school 
yard, Mr. Speaker. That is a minister who does not deserve the 
respect of the people of Saskatchewan, and that is why that is a 
minister that should publicly apologize and should resign from 
the Executive Council. 
 
We have used many words in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, which 
you have ruled unparliamentary — words such as “sleazy” — 
and I must admit that I find those words somewhat limiting, but 
also, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately very descriptive at times of the 
kind of behaviour that I’ve seen in this Assembly, especially 
from the Minister of Justice, especially around this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Having ruled those words 
out of order, I must also bring to the member’s attention that the 
other part of the rule is that we cannot impute directly to a 
member that which the rules do not allow for directly. I’d like to 
bring that to your attention. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point I was going 
to make is that with words ruled as unparliamentary language, it 
becomes difficult to express very clearly and concisely the way 
in which I feel offended and concerned about the Minster of 
Justice’s behaviour and the implications that, if the Minister of 
Justice can do this to the Provincial Auditor in this Assembly, 
can bring in the letter in that way that he did, to divert attention 
from the auditor’s report and put it on to what Mr. Lutz said or 
didn’t say in the letter, and to insinuate almost criminal liability 
on the part of the Provincial Auditor — if the Minister of Justice 
can do that, I have limited vocabulary to express my outrage at 
that behaviour, but I do want to express it as clearly as I can. To 
me, the Minister of Justice has got to be a person respected, in a 
position that’s respected by the total Legislative Assembly, and 
this Minister of Justice has lost that, Mr. Speaker. This Minister 
of Justice has lost all credibility with this Assembly. 
 
There is, in effect, no Minister of Justice in control in this 
province, and that is the reason for calling for his resignation 
from the Executive Council. 
 
There are so many issues that the Minister of Justice has to deal 
with, and if he is functioning in this way, that he can come into 
this Assembly and use a piece of material, quoting it 
inappropriately — and my colleagues have gone over in detail 
what the letter said, and what was left out, and what the final 
report of the auditor has revealed to us in the fine compilation of 
documents that the auditor brought in later — all that has been 
spoken about in this House many times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point I want to make is, the Minister of Justice does this to 
the Provincial Auditor. The Minister of Justice has no right to be 
continuing to be the Minister of Justice, and that’s why the call 
for his resignation is so terribly   



 
May 25, 1989 

1389 
 

important. 
 
The motion says that the criticism was unacceptable and 
unjustifiable, and the evidence that we’ve had since the attack on 
Friday that prompted this motion demonstrates completely and 
clearly to people across this province that the attack was 
unacceptable and unjustified; that the Provincial Auditor has 
made some very good points in his report which need to be 
looked at; and that the Minister of Justice has no reason to have 
gone forward at all with his innuendoes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the situation of a Minister of 
Justice has become a minister of injustice and should resign. 
We’ve got the issue of the Premier . . . the call on the Premier to 
do this, to require that the minister apologize publicly and resign. 
And unfortunately, it doesn’t look as if the Premier is going to 
take this issue seriously. 
 
But I can tell you, if the Premier does not take this issue seriously, 
certainly the people of Saskatchewan are going to take is 
seriously. And I for one am going to do everything in my power 
to see that the people of Saskatchewan clearly understand the 
issues here and clearly understand that the Premier has ducked 
responsibility for an issue that he should have shown great 
leadership on, and he should have taken action immediately 
against this Minister of Justice. He has not chosen to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is very serious. 
 
But the important thing as well is for us to turn our attention to 
this auditor’s report. And I find it important that the auditor in his 
report spells out some principles that I think it’s important for us 
to remind ourselves of as we debate this motion of privilege 
condemning the Minister of Justice. Because he says in the 
introduction to the report, “Saskatchewan’s parliamentary 
system of government is based on the principle of the rule of 
law.” And it’s that rule of law that the Minister of Justice 
particularly is mandated to see that we uphold. Compliance with 
the law is critical to the entire system. Because of the importance 
of this principle, much of this report is about instances where the 
laws have been contravened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor, our Provincial Auditor, is saying that 
the laws have been contravened, and it’s the Minister of Justice 
who has stood up and condemned this auditor instead of taking a 
serious stand in support of the auditor and in support of the 
principle of the rule of law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor is an officer of this Legislative 
Assembly, as people have pointed out already, and the law is 
absolutely clear on that point. The law is equally clear that the 
Provincial Auditor is required by statute to audit the accounts of 
the government of the day, to note any matters that in his 
professional view warrant significant attention, and to report 
those matters to this Legislative Assembly and thus to the public. 
And that is the auditor’s job. 
 
The auditor also, Mr. Speaker . . . I wanted to share with you 
another comment that was particularly important to me regarding 
the auditor’s work . . . And I seem to have misplaced it here in 
this pile of notes because over the last 

few days there have been a number of pieces of paper related to 
this issue that have come to our attention. 
 
Perhaps I can just share with you the comments in his account 
itself, because in this report he says: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. I 
recommend the process be repaired to require that appointed 
auditors and the Provincial Auditor work together on crown 
corporation audits as joint auditors or with some similar 
arrangement. 
 
. . . there were a number of cases where I could not get 
information that, by law, I was entitled to receive. 
 
The public accounts are not complete, (they’re not) correct 
or timely. 
 
There were a number of cases where the tabling of annual 
reports and financial statements did not comply with the 
law. 
 

Those are very serious charges, Mr. Speaker. They are charges 
by an officer of the Legislative Assembly to us here, both the 
opposition and the members opposite in the government side of 
the House. 
 
The members opposite on the government side are also 
responsible for these accounts, and these accounts reflect the 
spending of the taxpayers’ money. This accountability process is 
also spelled out in the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. And I was 
moved when I read these words, and want to share them with you 
because they are important in this debate. The Provincial Auditor 
says, The Accountability Process: 
 

Accountability is the cornerstone of all financial reporting 
in government . . . Accountability requires governments to 
answer to the citizenry—to justify the raising of public 
resources and the purposes for which they are used. 
Governmental accountability is based on the belief that the 
citizenry has a ‘right to know’, a right to receive openly 
declared facts that may lead to public debate by the citizens 
and their elected representatives (and that’s us, here). 
Financial reporting plays a major (an important) role in 
fulfilling government’s duty to be publicly accountable 
(accounted) in a democratic society.” 
 

Because so much public money is spent in this province, of 
course the taxpayers want to know what the financial reporting 
says. I was surprised to see here in the public purse, in the 
auditor’s report, the amount of money that he is trying to account 
for. 
 
To March 31st of 1988, the Crown corporations expenses were 
$4 billion, the government departments were 2.9 billion, for a 
total of $6.9 billion. That’s what we’re talking about. We’re 
talking about where that money has gone. That is the hard-earned 
money of the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker. The Crown 
corporations have   



 
May 25, 1989 

1390 
 

acquired physical assets of $13.1 billion, but for the government 
departments the information is not available. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is our watch-dog over that much money, 
and that much money does not belong to us, it belongs to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It has been collected in trust that we 
would spend it wisely. And we in the opposition are charged with 
the tremendous responsibility of trying to find out how the 
government is spending the money and what is happening that 
will show that that money has been spent in good trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says: 
 

The Assembly’s ability to question the Executive’s actions 
is affected by the information the Executive gives to the 
Assembly. 
 
There can be a conflict of interest between the Executive 
and the Assembly with regard to information. 
 

In other words, information that the cabinet wants to keep from 
this Assembly is information that the Assembly may need to 
know. 
 

(and) The Assembly (all the elected representatives here) 
needs information from the Executive to question the 
Executive’s actions. The Executive may be reluctant to 
provide complete, timely, and meaningful information to 
the Assembly. 
 

And obviously they have been very reluctant. In this instance, 
they have been so reluctant they have been willing to let the 
Minister of Justice behave in a most unjust manner to try to cover 
up the contents of this report and to try to malign the man that is 
hired by all of us to do a job in looking after that public purse. 
That is a very serious issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why we have made it a motion of privilege, and that’s why 
we have spent this entire week discussing it. We have been 
shocked and horrified by the Minister of Justice’s behaviour a 
week ago Friday, or Friday last, and we have been even more 
horrified by his behaviour since then, by his willingness to 
defend his position here in the House and refuse to speak to the 
media outside the House, refuse to repeat himself in public 
outside the House. 
 
We have been horrified by the Premier not standing up to answer, 
in a position of leadership, to our questions regarding the 
Minister of Justice’s actions and this auditor’s report. And the 
people of Saskatchewan are horrified, Mr. Speaker. They read 
these editorials and they read the comments in the papers and 
they watch television and they’re informed and they know what’s 
been happening. 
 
And what has been happening is that this government has sunk 
further and further into a lack of credibility and a total lack of 
responsibility and of power here in this legislature; in fact, that 
the government has shown by its refusal to deal with this issue of 
the Provincial Auditor, who is talking about the public purse and 
the taxpayers’ 

money, by refusing to deal with it, the government has lost the 
total respect of the population and certainly does not deserve to 
be the government of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — The people of Saskatchewan deserve much better 
than this, Mr. Speaker. They deserve much better than this. They 
deserve a Minister of Justice who, if he’s going to malign the 
Provincial Auditor in this Assembly, should malign him outside 
of the House and say those words elsewhere as well, so that this 
issue can be dealt with properly; or they should bring the 
Provincial Auditor to the floor of this Assembly to question him 
and to get an explanation out. 
 
It’s obvious that they were not doing that, that the Minister of 
Justice has no intention of standing behind his allegations. He 
just did it, as I say, like a schoolboy trying to get out of a difficult 
situation. He did not do it in a responsible and adult way. 
 
And so what we have here is the Assembly pleading with the 
government to deal with this situation of a Minister of Justice 
who is responsible for the laws being broken, who is responsible 
for this auditor’s report not being able to be complete and the 
auditor being very worried about what’s been happening. We 
have this Minister of Justice doing a cover-up. 
 
The Provincial Auditor apparently now only sees 50 per cent of 
the expenditures from the public purse, whereas in 1987 he saw 
about 90 per cent of the public purse. So he’s only been able to 
look at 50 per cent of that $6.9 billion — only half of that — and 
the rest of it, Mr. Speaker, has gone we don’t know where. But 
I’ll tell you some of the questions that people in my constituency 
are asking, and some of the questions that the people I’m in touch 
with are asking. 
 
We’ve seen what’s happened here in the auditor’s report. They’re 
saying that over $2 million worth of the dental equipment has 
disappeared. We don’t know where the money is that may have 
been collected from the sale of that dental equipment. We don’t 
know what has happened to it — gone. 
 
We see here that the auditor is saying that the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation has refused to give him 
information about ministerial travel expenses, and that the 
property management corporation has also been signing leases, 
or has been putting public money into the paying of rental and 
leases that are not documented. 
 
I know that in Saskatoon, constituents would like to know how 
much the government is paying for the rental of the office of the 
Premier, which moved out of the government building in 
Saskatoon Centre into an office space across the street, into 
private office space. We don’t know how much money is going 
into that particular rental. 
 
We don’t know how much the government is paying, for 
example, to rent the space that’s used by the provincial archives. 
I asked that question at one point and was told that I had to go to 
the property management corporation,   



 
May 25, 1989 

1391 
 

and then the property management corporation says they won’t 
answer those questions. So we can’t find out what’s happening. 
 
We’ve all of us, on this side of the House, got examples of public 
money, of rumours of public money spent in different directions 
and wondering where that money has been spent. And when we 
ask the questions here — as members of the opposition we ask 
the government members opposite questions in question period 
— they very often don’t answer our questions. In fact, if they do 
answer our questions directly, it’s a source of surprise and 
amazement because most of the time those questions are not 
answered. 
 
And Justice . . . when the Leader of the Opposition when asking 
the Minister of Justice questions about the Auditor’s report that 
Friday, and the Minister of Justice did this slick sleight of hand 
by bringing in the letter and reading little bits of it and insinuating 
things about the Provincial Auditor that are not true, the 
questions were not answered. And we in the opposition have to 
depend on people like the Provincial Auditor to ferret out more 
information that we need and which is denied to us. 
 
I was shocked, Mr. Speaker, when I first became an MLA, to go 
to government offices, like the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, which I was the critic of, and to be told by 
staff there that they had been told not to speak to the MLAs. They 
had been told not to give us information, Mr. Speaker. And we 
in opposition, in this parliamentary system, have only certain 
avenues that are open to us in terms of getting information and in 
terms of holding the government accountable. It’s our job in the 
parliamentary system to be able to hold the government 
accountable, but we are limited in what we can do. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has a very important function in 
providing us with the information, especially regarding the 
taxpayers’ money, because obviously the way in which money is 
spent is a key and crucial issue to the government of the province. 
 
And we have a situation now where the province is in terrible 
economic shape, where people are hurting badly, where the 
Minister of Social Services will not increase the minimum wage, 
where people are hungry and don’t have enough money to live 
on. And now we have an auditor’s report that can’t account for 
half the money of the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Keep going, Anne. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I’m going to keep going because this is a serious 
issue. I just stopped because there is a lot of noise going on in the 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the issue 
of the Provincial Auditor’s report focuses partly on the question 
of the private auditors, the private sector auditors that have been 
hired by the government to look after particularly the Crown 
corporations, and the 

relationship between the Provincial Auditor and the private 
auditors. 
 
And the Provincial Auditor points out in his report, very clearly, 
that when the private auditors are hired by the Crown 
corporations, the boards of the Crown corporations are their 
clients, and those are the people that those auditors report to. The 
Provincial Auditor reports to this Assembly through this report 
and through the public accounts documents. And if he’s only able 
to see 50 per cent of the reports and he’s not able to question the 
private auditors, then he’s obviously hamstrung in his ability to 
be accountable to us and to let us know what’s happened to the 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
The private auditors, Mr. Speaker, were brought in particularly 
in 1987 when there was changes made to The Provincial Auditor 
Act, and I found it interesting to read what the Minister of 
Finance said when he was questioned about this change in The 
Provincial Auditor Act on October 26, 1987, in Hansard on page 
3514. And the minister said this: 
 

. . . what the objective of the legislation is, is to have the 
private sector audit that (Crown corporations), and the 
Provincial Auditor in the case where the private sector 
auditors are used, to have an override. If he’s not satisfied, 
then he can go through and do an audit. There’s nothing to 
stop him if he’s not satisfied and if he gives reasons. 
 

That is what the Minister of Finance said to us here in this House 
in 1987 when we questioned the changes in The Provincial 
Auditor Act. He said, when we said these private auditors will be 
accountable only to their Crown corporations and not to this 
Assembly, the Minister of Finance said clearly in Hansard, that 
the Provincial Auditor would have an override and that he would 
be able to get the information he needed. And now in 1989 we 
have an auditor’s report that says that that information is being 
denied to him. 
 
So here, Mr. Speaker, we have an example of the Minister of 
Justice behaving very badly and in an unjust manner and 
becoming, as I say, the minister of injustice. And we have the 
Minister of Finance saying one thing in 1987 and supporting and 
being part of a government that does totally the opposite in terms 
of its relationship to the Provincial Auditor, refusing to give the 
Provincial Auditor the information that that person needs in order 
to be accountable to the people in this province. 
 
So the issue of the appointed auditors is an important one. And 
the Provincial Auditor says it very nicely here. The Provincial 
Auditor says: 
 

No professional person wants to get himself (and I would 
say or herself), in a position of any sort of conflict of 
interest. 
 

And he’s talking . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It being 10 o’clock the House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


