


















































March 29, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 29, 1989 
 

391 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7), the petition 
presented yesterday by the member from Moose Jaw North has 
been reviewed. The petition has been found to be irregular as to 
form and cannot therefore be received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, a group of students from the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency who are here on a tour that’s 
sponsored by the Kelvington-Wadena Progressive Conservative 
Association. The students are age 14 to 18 years; there’s about 
45, I believe. They are in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 
accompanied by their chaperons, Delores Zelinski, Elaine 
Patenaude, Dwayne Kapeluck, Lorraine Petersen, Diane 
Hnatuik, and their bus driver is Leo Patenaude. I’d ask all 
members to welcome them here today and to join me in wishing 
them a good stay. We’ll be joining you at 2:30 for pictures, I 
believe. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with my 
friend and colleague from the Kelvington-Wadena constituency. 
I’d like to add to that, words of welcome to the students from 
all over north-eastern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and in 
particular I’m especially proud of a large group of students 
from the Melfort constituency. They, as well, are age 14 to 18 
years. They are seated in the west gallery. They have some 
chaperons and a bus driver by the name of Fred Burlock, Todd 
Naber, Dale McMunn. We also have Roger and Carol Pedersen 
and Robert Stewart. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the legislature 
to warmly welcome all of these students from all over 
north-east Saskatchewan, and to give the message to all of them 
how delighted we are that young people from the north 
_east take such an interest in the legislative proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, Wes Robbins, who was a former member of the 
legislature for Saskatoon Nutana, the constituency that I now 
represent. And I note that the Minister of Health, while 
kibitzing with us before we began today’s proceedings, 
suggested that Mr. Robbins was visiting the legislature to 
straighten out this side of the House. And I want to assure the 
members opposite that Mr. Robbins, as a former minister of 
Finance, would love to straighten out their Minister of Finance 
who will be delivering his budget tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
to introduce to the Assembly a group of 48 Progressive 
Conservative youths from the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency who 
are here this afternoon to watch the procedures of the 
legislature. 
 
I’d like to welcome and extend my best wishes and thanks to all 
the students who took the time to come into Regina to our 
Legislative Assembly to see the workings of this legislature, to 
see how laws are passed and how the proceedings and the 
money is spent in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to also acknowledge that with them they have their 
chaperons, Leonard Kehrig, Doug Mahussier, and their bus 
driver Chuck Mason. 
 
I wish them a safe journey home and I will be meeting with 
them at 2:30 for pictures and refreshments in room 218 
afterwards. And I wish all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It took a little while. 
 
I too would like to introduce some guests to you, Mr. Speaker, 
and through you to the Assembly. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
we have about 45 people from the town of Unity. In among that 
group is a hockey team, midget junior B. They’re here today 
playing in the Optimist tournament. They are in the finals 
tonight at 8 o’clock. They are here with their coaches and 
trainers and several of their families. 
 
I would like to extend personal congratulations, Mr. Speaker, 
because in a small town, as you know, we all knew everyone’s 
first name. And also, Mr. Speaker, in that hockey team is a 
grandson of mine, and it makes me doubly proud to recognize 
them today. 
 
Their coaches are Jim Gordon and Jim Holowachuk. They’re 
there, and several of the family with them. And I would like the 
Assembly to join with me wishing them good luck tonight in 
the finals, and good game and good luck. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Handling of Oats by Wheat Board 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with 
the federal government’s plan to privatize the Canadian Wheat 
Board and your government’s support of it. 
 
I have here a summary of the wheat board district meetings that 
were held across western Canada in the past month or so. And 
of those meetings, the 24 board meetings that were held in the 
three prairie provinces, 22 passed motions to have oats 
reinstated under the Canadian Wheat Board, and 10 passed 
motions  
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

392 
 

demanding the head of Charlie Mayer for taking oats out of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
In light of those facts, Mr. Minister, have you reconsidered your 
position of support for privatizing the Canadian Wheat Board? 
Are you continuing on in this madness to get rid of one of the 
most fortunate and suitable committees, and the Canadian 
Wheat Board, in dealing with handling the wheat and the grains 
of the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I appreciate the question from the hon. 
member. As he probably knows, it was a Progressive 
Conservative Government in 1935 that established the Canadian 
Wheat Board, and, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Canadian 
Wheat Board does an excellent job of marketing wheat and 
barley, particularly in large country-to-country sales. 
 
With respect to oats, Mr. Speaker, we are all aware, and 
certainly the public is aware, that about 1 or less than 1 per cent 
of the wheat board’s export sales were associated with oats. 
Over 90 per cent of the oats are marketed domestically in 
Saskatchewan or across Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the producers of livestock in particular, if I 
could use the example, Mr. Speaker, the United Grain Growers, 
a co-operative elevator corporation that is represented by 
farmers throughout the prairie provinces, as well as the 
livestock associations, the feeder associations, the 
Saskatchewan hog board, Mr. Speaker, have all said, why don’t 
you try to allocate the oats on the domestic market so that 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, can have the access to that feed grain 
when in fact only . . . or less than 1 per cent is sold 
internationally by the Canadian Wheat board. 
 
Now I said I’m prepared to try that and see how it goes. Some 
forecasted, Mr. Speaker, to say that if it’s taken out of the wheat 
board, Mr. Speaker, the price will collapse. Well we’ve noticed, 
Mr. Speaker, that the price has increased, for all grains, granted, 
but for seed oats I think you’d see now it’s gone from $2 a 
bushel to over $4 a bushel, and it’s because it’s . . . and it’s in a 
domestic market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we set it up. We’re quite prepared to defend the Canadian 
Wheat Board when it comes to the big international sales 
country to country on wheat and barley. If the domestic industry 
wants to try the domestic market for oats, then I’m prepared to 
look at it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that at the 
meetings that were held in Saskatchewan, at the 11 that were 
held in Saskatchewan — I want to list them out so you know 
the spectrum of places that are concerned about this issue — but 
Weyburn and Wapella and Wadena and Melville and Porcupine 
Plain and Wakaw and Kerrobert and Perdue and Gull Lake and 
Herbert and Meadow Lake — in each of these towns, in each of 
these communities, motions were passed asking that you  

would support and that the federal government would reinstate 
oats in the Canadian Wheat Board, at every one of those 
meetings. In fact 1,576 people voted in favour and only 51 
voted against the motions at those meetings, at those 11 
meetings. 
 
I want to ask you: in light of the fact, Mr. Minister, that only 3 
per cent of the farmers are favouring your view, only 3 per cent, 
can you tell me why you are defending the Cargills of the world 
who want to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board, and why you 
refuse to stand up for Saskatchewan farmers? Why are you 
doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I again make the point, it 
was a Progressive Conservative government that established the 
Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, so if we want to go back 
and look at the history of it, and it’s Progressive Conservative 
governments that have supported the co-operative system, they 
still support it, Mr. Speaker, with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier can’t answer the 
question if people interrupt him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And I therefore . . . I ask the people who 
interrupt him to give the Premier the courtesy of allowing him 
to answer it without interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
respect that ruling. 
 
I’ll say again, Mr. Speaker, that it was a Progressive 
Conservative government that started the Canadian Wheat 
Board. It was a Progressive Conservative minister, Mr. Alvin 
Hamilton, Mr. Speaker, that first sold wheat to China, country 
to country. 
 
It was a Conservative minister that initiated some of the largest 
co-operative movements we’ve seen here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, like the new upgrader in the city of Regina, built 
with a co-operative; like the new health care card that has been 
initiated in Saskatchewan, built by co-operatives, Mr. Speaker. I 
make the point, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the 
hon. member doesn’t like to hear that. He doesn’t like to hear 
the Progressive Conservative government is progressive and 
conservative — initiated the Canadian Wheat Board — works 
with co-operatives. 
 
And he can have all the meetings that he wants, Mr. Speaker, 
but I’ll tell you, you can have meetings now and there still will 
be farmers who want rape-seed and canola under the Canadian 
Wheat Board, and maybe he supports that. I’ve talked to 
farmers all across the province and they’re split on that. But I 
don’t see a consensus to put rape-seed or canola or flax-seed 
under the Canadian Wheat Board. So when the farmers come to 
me and say: well 90 per cent of the oats is traded domestically 
and it’s only 1 per cent of international sales, could we try it on 
the domestic market? I’d say, look, if the feeder associations 
want it, the hog producers want it, if United Grain Growers 
co-operative wants it, then at least we  
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

393 
 

should take a look at it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the same minister. Mr. Minister, last year there 
was nearly $9 million worth of final payment went to farmers 
on oats. Under your scheme, any potential for final payments 
will be skimmed off by the large multinational grain traders. So 
what you’re doing is supporting the grain companies’ pockets 
as opposed to supporting the bottom line of farmers. Will you, 
Mr. Minister, stand in your place, show your support for the 
farmers of this province who are telling you, who are pleading 
with you, who you are saying are wrong. Reverse your decision. 
Show your support for them instead of the large multinational 
grain trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think the whole province 
will be interested to know that classically there’s a big 
difference between the agricultural policy of the NDP that only 
looks at marketing boards and our policy that respects all the 
industry, including the livestock industry. 
 
Did you notice, Mr. Speaker, not one mention of the livestock 
industry by the members opposite? The hog producers, the 
livestock producers, the beef producers, the poultry producers, 
what are they saying? 
 
He also talks about a final payment. One of the fastest-growing 
industries in Saskatchewan, in western Canada, and North 
America is the meat business. If you’re growing grain for the 
meat business, the beef, the packing plants, the increase in 
mutton, the increase in the pork, the increase in the poultry, you 
want a large and strong and healthy domestic grain business, 
Mr. Speaker. And if only 1 per cent of the sales are going 
offshore through the Canadian Wheat Board, what is that doing 
for the local domestic meat industry? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have said to me and they’ve said to members 
of this Legislative Assembly, protect the cattlemen, protect the 
hog producer, protect the poultry producer, make sure we have 
access to domestic grains. If the wheat board is only selling 1 
per cent internationally, then build that market here so we can 
have a balanced agriculture, fair for the livestock industry and 
fair for the grain men, and let the farmers decide that. If they’re 
prepared to grow oats because of this, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
prepared to defend it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I realize the hon. minister has a wealth of 
knowledge to respond to these questions, but I ask the answers 
to be a bit shorter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I take note of how 
you are again trying to pit one group against the other. What 
you’re saying is, you’re pitting the grain producer against the 
livestock producer. How can you do  

that? I know how you can do it. It’s by doing things like taking 
oats, supporting oats coming out from under the wheat board. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, is this. The wheat board has long 
been a mainstay in the province of Saskatchewan and western 
Canada, providing the biggest, highest possible price. What’s 
happening now is you are going to open that up. First it’s oats, 
then it’ll be barley, and then it’ll be the demise of the whole 
wheat board, and you’re supporting that despite the fact the 
farmers are against you, Mr. Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Will you again — you did not answer my question; you didn’t 
even evade to it last time. Will you stand in your place and tell 
the people of this province that you support the Canadian 
Wheat Board, and if you say that, will you table your 
recommendations to the federal government showing how you 
support the board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, just so that the students and 
indeed the media understand, over 90 per cent of the oats is sold 
farmer to farmer. If it’s sold farmer to farmer, particularly 
because of the livestock industry, there’s no final payments. It 
has nothing to do with the Canadian Wheat Board, and the 
wheat board on its export sales has less than one-half of one per 
cent, I believe, associated with oats. 
 
Now the livestock industry says, if nobody is marketing it 
through the board to speak of, it’s only a small percentage, and 
it’s all going farmer to farmer or the livestock industry, feedlot, 
poultry operations and so forth, why don’t we let them establish 
a domestic market because there is no final payment? 
 
He talks about a final payment. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 90-some 
per cent of it is sold farmer to farmer, there is no final payment 
at all. So don’t let anybody be misled by that hon. member who 
says there’s this huge final payment in oats. There wouldn’t be 
enough final payments in oats, Mr. Speaker, to buy an 
average-sized group of farms, or let alone one farm, here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, because only 1 per cent, or less than 
that, is export volume for the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Adjustments under Free Trade Agreement 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the same minister, and this concerns the report of the advisory 
committee on adjustments under the free trade agreement which 
released its report in Ottawa earlier this afternoon. And it seems 
that the recommendations in this report, as they pertain to 
agriculture, are heavily weighted in favour of food processors, 
and against producers. 
 
And I’m particularly concerned with the recommendations 
concerning the wheat board that we’ve been talking about 
earlier this afternoon. If adopted, these recommendations would 
call for the wheat board to sell for domestic use at the U.S. spot  
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

394 
 

market price for the day of the sale, and would allow farmers to 
sell to the wheat board on the basis of commodity futures 
contracts, again based on the U.S. commodity exchange prices. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, a simple question: are you in agreement 
with the thrust of that kind of recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we had debate in this 
legislature with respect to two-priced wheat before, and I’ll go 
over the argument for the hon. member so he understands it. By 
not charging consumers higher than the world price for grains 
and feed grains and therefore for bread, Mr. Speaker, and 
putting it on the income tax side, we can support agriculture 
without hurting Canadian consumers. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as we allow the processors to buy the 
grain at world price here, it encourages the processing of grain 
so that in fact we just don’t market grain, we can market pasta, 
we can market noodles, we can manufacture bread, we can 
manufacture doughnuts and put Canadian food manufacturers, 
where the real money is for farmers, on a competitive basis in 
North America and, indeed, the world. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, at the same time you can sell it at the 
initial world price and you have the final payment that the 
member from Humboldt was talking about, because the board 
markets it on a pooled basis so it has the initial price right now 
as we see in crop insurance — almost $5 a bushel guaranteed 
by the Canadian Wheat Board and by crop insurance that you 
can buy at right now — and the final payment may be a dollar 
and a half or $2 or $3 for all I know. 
 
What this allows is the taxpayers’ money to come out of those 
that have income, not the consumers, and allow us to encourage 
processing and manufacturing in the meat business and in the 
food business, which is good for us in creating of jobs; and 
third, the final payment can be from the Canadian Wheat Board 
as it’s supposed to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — You’ll notice, Mr. Minister, that there is no 
mention in the adjustment committee’s report about the 
maintenance of the $280 million a year which western Canadian 
farmers are going to be out as a result of the loss of the 
two-price system. I’d like to know where in the world that idea 
went to, and I want to carry on and just ask this question. These 
changes would mean that the free trade agreement would be 
used to further undermine the ability of the wheat board to 
control the grains market, and your answer just confirmed that, 
and would move towards the eventual destruction of the orderly 
marketing system, and that, it’s been said earlier in this House, 
is part and parcel of the privatization of the board, which is 
what the grain farmers are so adamantly opposed to. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have to decide whose side you’re on 
here. You can’t be on both sides of this question. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Again, a simple question. I’d like a simple 
answer this time. Will you stand up for Saskatchewan farmers 
and for our wheat board, or will you go along with the 
American producers and the big multinational food processors 
and the demands of the so-called free market? On whose side 
are you, Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will just quite simply say 
that it was the Progressive Conservative government that 
established the wheat board. I support the wheat board, Mr. 
Speaker, and I support it in the marketing of wheat, in the 
marketing of barley, on the two-price system. Let me make it 
very clear again for the students and for the media, that was on 
domestic sales and domestic sales grown for Canadian wheat. 
Over 65 per cent of that money was going to Ontario because 
they were converting to spring wheat to sow on the domestic 
market, because western Canadian producers sell on the 
international market, Mr. Speaker. And every single, solitary 
farmer in western Canada that knows anything about 
international sales says, get out from under that two-price 
system or else Ontario is going to grow all the domestic market 
and they will get all the two-price benefit. 
 
Now you ask me whose side I’m on: the western Canadian 
wheat grower’s side, that’s whose, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 
to two-price wheat, when it comes to marketing for the wheat 
board. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m all for processing that wheat here, 
not just exporting it, processing it here in Saskatchewan to 
make the fine quality flour, to make the noodles, to make the 
pasta, to make the bread, and all those kinds of things that we 
need internationally and that we can make money on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Foreclosures 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a 
question to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Premier, you should be proud because your government, in 
conjunction with the federal government, brought something to 
Saskatchewan that we have never seen before, and that is the 
auctioning off of family farms. That took place in Weyburn, 
auctioning off land that was seized by an agency of the federal 
government, the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, at the present time, what the 
federal government is doing is seizing the land, and your 
government are in the process of seizing the equipment from 
the farmers. I ask you, Mr. Premier, why are you taking and 
being a part of this vicious attack on farm families? Why are 
you rejecting the suggestions to put a moratorium on 
foreclosures until at least they get the drought payment? Can 
you answer that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

395 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the students 
must be wondering what he’s . . . the hon. member is talking 
about when he’s saying that I’m a part of this, Mr. Speaker. 
This legislature has passed legislation, and all members here, 
I’m sure, can take credit for asking for support for farmers in 
Saskatchewan. And never in the history of our province have 
we seen as much money go to farmers in the province. 
 
Even this last year, and the hon. knows, if you have crop 
insurance plus a drought payment plus western grain plus green 
feed programs, you could be looking at near $100 an acre and 
never started your combine. Now that’s never happened in the 
history of Saskatchewan. A thousand acres — that’s a hundred 
thousand dollars in benefits that go to Saskatchewan farmer, per 
farm, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have $1.2 billion out at 6 per cent money; over $1 billion in 
cash paid to Saskatchewan farmers that never had to be paid 
back, Mr. Speaker, and he’s asking me, Mr. Speaker, if we’re 
going to defend agriculture. 
 
Let me just turn it around. When interest rates were 20 and 21 
per cent, that hurt these farms, Mr. Speaker, and the parents of 
these children that are in this room, when interest rates were 21 
per cent, that member opposite was a cabinet minister and he 
never did one solitary thing to help farmers, and that’s one of 
the reason they’re closing farms today, because he didn’t have 
the courage to step in and take on the banks. We did, Mr. 
Speaker, and I will defend farmers as long as I’m sitting on this 
side of the House or that side of the House, or any place else in 
Saskatchewan, more than he ever did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a supplement for the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. You’re pretty sensitive, Mr. Premier, and well you 
should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are you aware that in the judicial centre of 
Saskatoon in the calendar year of 1988 that your agriculture 
corporation of Saskatchewan launched 458 legal actions of 
foreclosure against the farmers? In the first three months of this 
year alone, there have been 201 such actions launched in 
Saskatoon — 70 in one week, Mr. Premier. 
 
I ask you: how can you possibly face the farmers when you and 
your counterparts have deceived the farmers in respect to the 
amount of the drought payment? I ask you: why don’t you stand 
up for the farmers who are losing their land, instead of the 
rhetoric which you’re giving us here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s two points I’d like to 
make, Mr. Speaker. Of the 50,000 farmers that we have through 
agriculture credit corporation, you’ll find it’s less than one-tenth 
of one per cent that there’s been foreclosures on. I believe it’s 
28 farms, 26 farms, of the total 50,000 that there’s been an 
actual foreclosure on, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to also make the point . . . It’s interesting that the hon. 
member raises the city of Saskatoon. And I think again I’ll 
remind the public, and the media certainly has been helping us 
remind them, that there’s one particular law firm in Saskatoon 
that has been profiting by foreclosing on farmers. And I won’t 
mention the name because I’m not allowed to mention it, but 
there’s a couple of members in the legislature that have been 
associated with that law firm, and they’re NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
Imagine, the NDP profiting from foreclosing on farmers. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’d just like to 
once more remind hon. members that unparliamentary language 
is not acceptable from your seats, and I’m just telling you that if 
you persist in using it I’ll have to call you to order on it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, we have checked most of the 
judicial centres in the province, and we have ascertained that 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), of 
which you are the head of, are one of the biggest foreclosers in 
the history of this province. We find that a total of 620 legal 
actions were taken in 1988 against the farmers of Saskatchewan 
by your corporation. We find that 297 have been taken so far in 
1989. 
 
When, Mr. Premier, will you take action on behalf of the 
farmers rather than legal actions to take them off their farms? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can reiterate the point, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have programs to protect farmers, and the 
farmers know that. We have literally billions of dollars out 
there, Mr. Speaker. Out of over 50,000 farmers there’s been 27, 
28 foreclosures; that’s it. The hon. member talks about legal 
action. We talk to the farmers and we recommend that any 
farmer that’s having a difficulty making a payment to talk, and 
to come in and we’ll work out some sort of agreement with 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, I just remind the hon. member, because of 20 and 
21 per cent interest rates when the NDP were in, farmers lost 
their farms and have been in trouble ever since, Mr. Speaker, 
and I hold them responsible for that. And the other thing that I 
hold them responsible for is the hypocrisy of foreclosing on 
farmers for profit because the NDP members are in law firms, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that is a pathetic indication of their 
support for agriculture in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
are you aware that the Agricultural Credit Corporation, of 
which you are the chief officer, has now referred an additional 
2,000 — 2,000 delinquent production loans to your lawyers to 
attack the farmers? I ask you, Mr. Premier, do you know what 
the farmers out there are referring to you as? They’re calling 
you the Judas of agriculture, the Judas of agriculture. You’ve 
betrayed them. I ask you, how long are you going to allow the  
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

396 
 

destruction of the family farm to go on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can call 
me names, and he can try to be fancy so that the media might 
have something to print. I just point out, Mr. Speaker, the 
persons and the people that betrayed agriculture are sitting right 
over there, Mr. Speaker. They’re the very people that brought in 
land bank, they’re the very people that let 21 per cent interest 
rate take their farm, and they never raised a cent to help them — 
not one cent, not one penny. 
 
And when they were defeated, Mr. Speaker, including the 
member from Riversdale, he starts a land bank corporation and 
he works with the bank and he makes profit taking their farms, 
Mr. Speaker. I will defend the taxpayers’ money at any time, 
Mr. Speaker, but they’re hurting on this one, and I’m not going 
to let them off the hook. They’re the people who have let down 
agriculture, and the rest of the country knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed, but I’m going to have to 
remind the members once more that the hollering “liar” from 
your desks is certainly not in keeping with the traditions of this 
House or to the courtesies extended other members. And it’s 
true, it’s true that when members say it from their seat the 
Speaker can’t always tell who the actual individual is, but that 
also is not an excuse for hon. members to use unparliamentary 
language. And I bring that to your attention one more time. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Establishment of Saskatchewan’s Round Table on 
Environment and Economy 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to 
announce the appointment of Saskatchewan’s Round Table on 
Environment and Economy. This group of 18 senior public and 
private decision makers will undertake the task of advising the 
Premier on the ways to implement the recommendations of the 
National Task Force on Environment and Economy. 
 
The round table will bring together people of many 
backgrounds and interests to explore ways in which we can 
develop a plan to achieve an environmentally sound approach to 
economic development. By promoting a dialogue among 
Saskatchewan people, industry, government, and environmental 
interest groups, we can integrate environmental and economic 
planning and decision making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the round table will be the 
following. I will be chairing that round table. 
 
We have Frank Arnie, past president of Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Association, past president and past director of the Canadian 
Wildlife Federation. 
 
Beverly Brennan, vice-president, finance and administration 
with Philom Bios Inc. in Saskatoon. 

Doug Chekay, provincial manager, Ducks Unlimited 
Canada-Saskatchewan, member of the Canadian Association of 
Resource Managers, director of Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation Habitat Trust. 
 
Roland Crowe, chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations. 
 
Bill Duke, past president, Western Canadian Grain Growers 
Association. 
 
Hon. Joan Duncan, Minister of Economic Development and 
Tourism. 
 
Bill Gayner, vice-president and general manager, Saskatchewan 
division of Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. 
 
Jon Gilles, associate professor of agricultural engineering, 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. David Henry, associate professor of science, Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College, Regina. 
 
Dr. Steuart Houston, professor of radiology, University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Darla Hunter, lawyer, MacPherson, Leslie and Tyerman, from 
Regina. 
 
Rev. Austin Jagoe, minister, Meewasin Valley United Church, 
Saskatoon. 
 
Sister Phyllis Kapuscinski, professor of education, University of 
Regina. 
 
The Hon. Colin Maxwell, Minister of Parks, Recreation and 
Culture. 
 
Lindsay Milne, vice-president, exploration and production, 
western Canada, Husky Oil Operations Ltd. 
 
Ken Naber, president of Focus on Inputs Association, past 
president of the Canola Growers Association, reeve of R.M. 
428 from Star City. 
 
John Nightingale, president of Key Lake Mining Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that this group of distinguished people will 
have very valuable input to the round table for Saskatchewan. 
Formation of the Saskatchewan round table is consistent with 
the government’s endorsement of the report of the National 
Task Force on Environment and Economy at the first ministers’ 
conference in November of 1988. This report was presented . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. I’m 
having great difficulty in hearing the minister, and I’m sure 
other members are too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As our country’s response to the World 
Commission on Environment and Development, which was 
headed by Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway, 
the commission found that environmental problems are global 
in proportion and  
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

397 
 

each nation must work toward protecting the environment. 
 
The findings are included in the report, Our Common Future. 
The national task force report contains some 40 
recommendations directed to promoting environmentally sound 
economic growth and development. As the report . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I must remind the hon. member 
that ministerial statements, we have tried to keep them rather 
brief, and I’m just reminding him. He’s getting to the point now 
where he’s perhaps getting a little too long, and if possible I’d 
like to ask him to wrap up his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, this report directs 
government, industry, business, educators, and each citizen in 
initiating actions to achieve the goal that we have intended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is determined to conserve the 
environment for future generations. The protection of our 
natural heritage represents the highest calling of political 
leadership and one of the most difficult challenges facing the 
human race. 
 
I believe that this group will do a good job for Saskatchewan, 
and I look forward to the report that they will prepare and 
present to our Premier for the future of our environment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me, if I can, just make an 
observation at the beginning that I am surprised the minister did 
not provide the opposition with the text of his remarks today. 
Rather he provided us with a copy of a news release, and I am 
frankly surprised that we did not have the full text. 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, as one of many who have lobbied the 
minister for the formation of the round table, I and we welcome 
this long overdue announcement. I’d want to point out to the 
House that the National Task Force on Environment and 
Economy, which called for the establishment of the round 
tables, said that they should be established and fully functional 
by September of last year, September 1988. 
 
These many, many, many months later, Mr. Speaker, we finally 
have the announcement in Saskatchewan. But we welcome the 
announcement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly both the use and the effect in this of the 
round table in the Saskatchewan context is going to depend on 
two things. It’s going to depend on the make-up of the round 
table, the people who are there, and it’s going to depend on the 
political will of the government to see that it is useful and 
effective. 
 
Now on the first point, Mr. Speaker, on the make-up, as I have 
seen it today, I note with some surprise and almost disbelief, 
that there is no one on this round table who is  

clearly identified as representing the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Society. That group in our province that’s 
probably the most well versed, well educated, the group that has 
been most vocal in environmental protection is not represented 
on this round table. I find that appalling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that the national task force called for a 
representative of labour on the round table. Mr. Speaker, I do 
not see in this list of individuals anyone who is there 
specifically to represent the interests of labour on this round 
table. I do see some of the friends of the government. I see 
Weyerhaeuser and Husky Oil and others. I do not see a 
representative of labour. 
 
In the context of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, surely this round 
table should have involved someone from municipal 
government, rural and urban. Not clearly represented. Not 
clearly represented. It’s urban and rural municipalities who very 
often have to deal with the consequences of environmental 
disaster and economic developments, and we’ve had the 
example of the upgrader spill here in Regina. There’s no 
representation that I can see, Mr. Speaker. I see little or no 
representation of small industry on this list. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to give those who have let their 
name stand on this round table, I want to give them our 
encouragement and support. I point out there are gaps and there 
are holes in this round table. That’s point one. 
 
Point two, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the political will of a 
government to make this kind of round table useful and 
effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must all be committed now to the concept of 
sustainable development. Mr. Speaker, I question the political 
will of this group of men and women to strive after that goal in 
our province. When we’ve seen the evidence of things like the 
Rafferty, the boondoggle in the south-east corner of our 
province, Mr. Speaker, I question the political will of this 
government. And so these two points then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the negative side, this round table I think has 
some holes in its make-up, and I encourage the minister to 
expand the round table, some of those areas. I question also the 
political will of this government. But on the positive side, Mr. 
Speaker, I am happy to see that the round table is established 
and that that mechanism will be in place when government 
changes in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Public Trustee Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

398 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting Regulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Regulations. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 

Regulations Act, 1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting 
from the enactment of The Regulations Act, 1989. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act respecting Consequential 
Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Municipal Board Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Consequential Amendments to certain Acts resulting 
from the enactment of The Municipal Board Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise to 
inform members of the passing earlier this morning of a former 
member of this Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning in Victoria, B.C., Mr. Bob Walker, the former member 
for Hanley for 19 years from 1948 till 1967, passed away in that 
city. Mr. Walker also served the people of Saskatchewan as 
attorney general and provincial secretary under the Douglas and 
Lloyd governments for eight years from 1956 to 1964. 
 
This will be a particularly tragic piece of information, Mr. 
Speaker, for a couple of people from Moose Jaw. Mr. Walker 
has both a brother and a sister who currently reside in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
I simply want to advise members of the Assembly that funeral 
arrangements have not been confirmed definitely, but the family 
anticipates that the funeral will be held in Victoria this 
Saturday. And I recognize as well, Mr. Speaker, that formal 
motion of condolence will come before the House at a later 
time, and simply rise today to advise members of the Assembly 
of the passing of a former colleague. 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Gordon Barnhart as Honorary Officer  
of Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
rise to ask leave to move a motion which would designate 
Gordon Barnhart as an honorary officer of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — From what I have been led to understand, Mr. 
Premier, I believe the House wishes to conduct some other 
business first. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Table Officer 
 
The Speaker: — However, before orders of the day, I wish to 
introduce to the hon. members, Mr. Charles Robert, a Table 
Officer who is on secondment from the House of Commons in 
Ottawa. He will be assisting our Clerks-at-the-Table for the 
remainder of this session. 
 
On your behalf, I wish to welcome Mr. Robert to our Assembly. 
Please welcome him along with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Gordon Barnhart as Honorary Officer  
of Legislative Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m standing in for the 
Deputy House Leader as House Leader today, and my 
understanding of today’s agenda is that we move immediately 
to the motion offered by the Premier for the Clerk of the House, 
and following that we adjourn to the tea. I may be mistaken, but 
that’s my understanding of it. If that’s the understanding of 
everyone here, I don’t know why we wouldn’t get on with the 
very pleasant task of honouring our friend, the Clerk. 
 
The Speaker: — Of course the Speaker always follows the 
wishes of the House, so we will carry on as you wish unless 
there’s some objection. Agreed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
express my appreciation to Mr. Gordon Barnhart, and I will be 
making a motion at the end of my remarks. 
 
For 20 years Gordon Barnhart has served the people of 
Saskatchewan as Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, and at the 
end of this month, as all members know, he leaves to become 
Clerk of the Senate and Parliament of Canada. 
 
He has provided very wise and impartial counsel to three 
premiers and five speakers over his long tenure, and his 
professionalism and dedication continues to be appreciated by 
both sides of the House. 
 
As only the sixth Clerk since the legislature was  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

399 
 

established in 1905, Gordon has seen a lot of important changes 
which have altered the business of this House, changes which 
include the introduction of question period, televising the 
proceedings, Mr. Speaker, and three revisions of procedural 
rules. His guidance and professional advice has facilitated these 
major transitions over the years. 
 
As an historian and writer, Gordon Barnhart has an impressive 
list of publications to his credit, and he’s been on the editorial 
board of the Canadian Parliamentary Review for many years. 
He is well respected by his professional associates and 
counterparts across Canada and indeed across the 
Commonwealth through his active participation in the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 
 
He once described himself as a lifelong student of history, and 
it’s not often that a student of history also has the opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, to have an influence on the makers of history as 
Gordon has done for the last 20 years in this Assembly. 
 
We are sorry to be losing the benefit of his wisdom, but we are 
proud to be sending such a distinguished native son to serve the 
people of Canada in Ottawa. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues in the legislature, I personally wish 
Gordon well as he takes up his new challenges, and I thank him 
for his excellent service to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I had the opportunity to talk to some senators, Mr. 
Speaker, who seek my advice, I could only say I would hate to 
see the member leave, but I would highly recommend him as 
the best in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by 
the House Leader, the member from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

 That the members of this House, desiring to record the 
respectful appreciation for the 20 years of distinguished 
service rendered by Mr. Gordon Barnhart, M.A., to this 
legislature as Clerk, and acknowledging the dedication and 
dignity he brought to that office, designates him as an 
honorary officer of this Legislative Assembly with an 
entry to the Chamber and a seat at the Table on all 
ceremonial occasions. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased, on behalf of 
my colleagues, to second the motion which acknowledges the 
dedication and the distinguished service of Mr. Gordon 
Barnhart and designates him as an honorary officer of this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Gordon Barnhart has made a very worthy contribution 
throughout the last 20 years in which he has maintained the 
records of this Legislative Assembly and been the careful 
custodian of the parliamentary procedure. 
 
Our legislature has evolved during Mr. Barnhart’s tenure as 
Clerk. Perhaps most notably, there have been revisions  

of the procedural rules of the Assembly, the introduction of 
television cameras in the House, and the creation of an 
independent body to oversee the affairs of the Clerk’s office. 
 
Mr. Barnhart’s guidance and contribution is well recognized 
throughout the province, not only in this Assembly, but many 
people have come to know Gordon well and respect his ideas, 
not only here but throughout the community. I know that on 
both sides of the House he has been respected for his scrupulous 
fairness in dealing with members of the House and giving them 
advice, whether they were in government or in opposition. And 
I think that’s a proud tradition, not only in this House but in 
others, and by honouring Mr. Barnhart today we honour his 
colleagues and successor who will serve at the Table. 
 
I believe that by continuing the tradition of service to the 
Legislative Assembly embodied in the career of Gordon 
Barnhart, we serve the cause of the democratic government. 
And so I’m pleased to add my words of commendation for the 
distinguished service of Mr. Gordon Barnhart, his contribution 
to this legislature and to the parliamentary government, and I 
congratulate him on his appointment in Ottawa. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question, I would ask for 
the House’s indulgence to also say a few words on behalf of our 
Clerk. 
 
Thank you. I would like to add my words to the Premier and to 
the member for Regina Elphinstone, to honour our Clerk who 
has served the legislature for the past 20 years. Almost all of 
these years were served as Clerk. It has been recognized from 
the earliest beginnings of parliamentary democracy that in order 
for a legislature to function efficiently, it required a clerk to be 
the custodian of its records and to be intimately involved in the 
formation and interpretation of the legislative rules and 
procedures. 
 
Mr. Barnhart began his career in this area some 20 years ago, 
after having taught high school in North Battleford. In January 
1969 he was appointed to the position of Assistant Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly, apprenticing under another distinguished 
Clerk, Dr. Koester. Soon after, in September 1969, he was 
appointed Clerk, a position which he has continuously filled. 
 
During that time he has fulfilled a number of important 
functions, among which some of the following are: he is a 
founding member of the Association of Clerks-at-the-Table and 
served as its president in 1971 and 1972; he is a member and 
past councillor of the Study of Parliament Group. Mr. Barnhart 
has taken an avid interest in the Saskatchewan Youth 
Parliament by serving as its chief returning officer. He was 
responsible for implementation of a daily Hansard in 1977. 
Also he helped usher in the first fully automated television 
system in the world, which serves this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He helped in the creation of the Board of Internal Economy 
which has enhanced the independence of the legislature. 
  



 
March 29, 1989 

 

400 
 

 
Mr. Barnhart has been involved in three revisions of rules and 
procedures of our Legislative Assembly. He has also been an 
enthusiastic proponent of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association which allowed him to travel widely in the 
Commonwealth, thus playing an important role in enhancing 
the status of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly 
throughout the Commonwealth nations. Mr. Barnhart, it might 
be added, has served three administrations, representing each 
major political party and five Speakers. 
 
In closing, I would like to congratulate Mr. Barnhart on his new 
appointment as Clerk of the Senate in Ottawa. I personally wish 
to thank him for the assistance he has given me in my role as 
Speaker. Saskatchewan’s loss will be the Senate’s gain. 
 
Finally, my best wishes to his wife and family as they make 
their new home in the nation’s capital. Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that we would 
all want to afford to Mr. Barnhart an opportunity to say a few 
words, and my understanding is that we have to adjourn before 
we can do that, and so I will move that this House do now 
adjourn. And before you put the question, according to my 
schedule we have a tea at the library at 3:30, and I think that 
this particular occasion is deserving of the celebration that 
would require more than just a few minutes, so when I move 
that this House do now adjourn, I suggest that it remain 
adjourned until 2 o’clock tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:05 p.m. 
 
 


