


















































April 19, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 19, 1989 
 

891 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming 21 
students from grades 3 and 4 at Connaught School. They have 
gone on a tour of the building, will be here for question period, 
and I look forward to meeting with them. They’re accompanied 
by their teacher, Mike Hubick, and Dawn Holzer. I know all 
members will want to join with me in welcoming these students 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to members of the Assembly, Brian 
Walton, who is a United Church clergyman and constituent in 
Saskatoon Sutherland, who is in Regina on a return trip from 
Vancouver. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to introduce to you this afternoon, and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, 60 students seated in 
your gallery. They attend school at the R.J. Davidson Centre in 
the wonderful constituency of Regina North West, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Erna Wiebe, Grace 
Korchinski, Judy Krause, Donna O’Shea, Karen Winsor, and 
their bus driver, Jake — I don’t have Jake’s last name, but I 
welcome Jake as well. I look forward to, Mr. Speaker, meeting 
with them after question period for a very brief moment. 
Hopefully we’ll have an opportunity to discuss one or two 
major issues of the day in our province. I’d like to ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming this fine group from my 
constituency. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Electoral Boundaries Decision in British Columbia 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Premier. The Premier is no doubt aware of 
yesterday’s decision in the British Columbia courts by 
soon-to-be Supreme Court Justice McLachlin pertaining there 
to the British Columbia Electoral Boundaries Bill, which 
decision struck down the B.C. Bill because it violated the 
principle of one person, one vote. In fact, according to the 
newspaper story, the judge ruled that British Columbia must 
redraw its electoral boundaries because the laws governing 
them are unconstitutional. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is: have you looked at this 
B.C. ruling which orders that all B.C. boundaries be redrawn in 
the terms of your own government’s  

gerrymander Bill so as to avoid a similar result here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as back-up minister to the 
Minister of Justice, we’re certainly aware of the press reports on 
the report. I must say, having gone through several elections . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Several gerrymanders. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s right, several gerrymanders by the 
opposition — several gerrymanders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . that I take some offence, I take some 
offence at the remarks made by the hon. member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale who went through on a boundary 
commission established by himself representing half as many 
people as the hon. member from Saskatoon — half as many, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me indicate to the hon. member that the range in British 
Columbia, to the best of my information, was somewhere 
around 86 per cent between the high and the low. And in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we use exactly the same criterion 
that the federal electoral boundaries do, which is at plus or 
minus 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker. If the courts were to rule that 
the national electoral boundaries is wrong, then perhaps it 
would affect Saskatchewan. We believe that the courts will 
uphold the federal criteria, Mr. Speaker, which is the same as 
Saskatchewan’s. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I guess 
it’s directed to the Minister of Finance. When the Minister of 
Finance talks about gerrymanders and points over to this side, I 
think he’s greatly confused because the hon. Minister of 
Finance will remember that when he was a Liberal, all these 
many years ago, he was himself responsible for the most 
infamous gerrymander in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, which brought down the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, he’s up to his old tricks 
in 1989 again with this gerrymandering Bill that’s before this 
House. Now my question to you, sir, is this: the British 
Columbia decision clearly says, one person, one vote. It’s an 
equality provision. In this Bill we’ve got a situation where 
Morse constituency, rural, held by one of your members, has 
got 4,000 fewer votes than a rural constituency held by one of 
our members, Humboldt — 4,000 less. How does the hon. 
minister say that complies with the B.C. decision of equality of 
opportunity? Why don’t you take a look at this gerrymander 
Bill that you’re introducing and reinstitute the principle of one 
person, one vote — fairness for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Because I’m going to stand here and with a 
great deal of reluctance, accuse the Leader of the Opposition of 
blatantly distorting and misleading this House as to what was 
said by the justice who ruled on the  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

892 
 

case. Mr. Speaker, here’s what the justice said: 
 

The apportionment scheme proposed in the final report of 
the commission before the legislature in British Columbia 
says the maximum deviation from the electoral quota, plus 
or minus 25 per cent from the norm, appears to be within 
the tolerable limit. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is the norm that has been established by this 
government and this Legislative Assembly in the recent 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. I have no doubt, not only will it be 
constitutionally upheld, Mr. Speaker, it is a lot more fair than 
the one that let the member from Riversdale have a situation 
where he represents half as many people as Saskatoon for 
Mayfair in the same city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Finance. If I represented half the number of some 
other member over there that he’s identified, I’ve got him to 
thank for that because he’s the one who fixed the boundaries to 
that disproportionate sense when he was the operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Oh no, you did. You did. And I want to say 
this, Mr. Speaker, by way of a question . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, no . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. I 
believe it could be said of both hon. members that we’re once 
more entering the realm of debate, and I’d like to bring this to 
their attention. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand why the Minister of Finance is getting so antsy 
about this whole operation. I just beg the Minister of Finance, 
please don’t slam the table like the Deputy Premier and the 
Premier because we’re very worried about the status of the front 
bench there, given the slapping of the table. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this. Take a look at that judgement in 
some careful detail, the B.C. decision. The B.C. decision talks 
about the equality of votes. It talks about regional differences 
and variations. We all understand the necessity for that. In this 
case, however, under the current boundaries Bill in 
Saskatchewan, you have wide variations, wide variations which 
at first blush seem to violate the B.C. law. 
 
My question to you is this: why in the world don’t you take 
another look at it? My question is: why is it that this 
government is so dug in, so arrogant, so lost touch with the 
people that you force everybody to go to court whether it’s on 
Rafferty, whether it’s to get the legislature to convene in 1987, 
whether it’s on social services? Why is it that you’re so 
insensitive to the people? Are we reduced to going to court? 
Come on, how about taking a look at this thing from a fairness 
point of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I want the people of this province, and I 
want the press to see what has just happened from the Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to remind our guests in the galleries 
that they are not to participate in the proceedings of the House. 
Order, order, order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want the public 
and the press to recognize what started out saying that this 
decision in British Columbia is going to throw out 
Saskatchewan. That’s how he started today. Now he’s backed 
away; he’s saying, at first blush. This man has backtracked on 
three different things since the start of question period, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, he didn’t read the decision, because it turns 
out that the new justice of the Supreme Court of Canada 
accepted the 25 per cent deviation which is in the Saskatchewan 
legislation. He obviously hadn’t read it. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, he was . . . and I don’t know whether it 
was deliberate or not when he said that the last election was 
fought on boundaries that was designed by this government. 
That is not true. They were done in 1978, 1979, by the previous 
administration, Mr. Speaker, and they applied in the 1982 
election, the 1986 election, and he was the attorney general of 
the time that brought that legislation. I don’t believe he forgot, 
Mr. Speaker. I believe he tried to deceive this House, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what we’re seeing. That’s what we’re seeing 
from a desperate man, Mr. Speaker, from a desperate man that 
is afraid of a fair legislative electoral boundaries commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Privatization of PCS and the Free Trade Agreement 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier, and it regards the policy of the government in 
proposing the foreign ownership provisions that are included in 
the potash legislation, and the policy of the government that lies 
behind those provisions. My question to you, Mr. Premier, is: 
have you considered the impact of article 16 of the free trade 
agreement on the foreign ownership provisions in the Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The answer is yes. Well, if you could get 
your members to calm down over there, the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you for that answer, Minister. No 
doubt then you’ve considered the provisions of article 1605 of 
the agreement which make it clear that your provisions or your 
rules respecting the degree of foreign ownership can be enacted 
as you wish, once, but having enacted them, they then remain in 
effect and you can never change them to the detriment of 
foreign investors. Now the effect of that, Minister, is to 
permanently entrench the rights of American investors 
regarding the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
April 19, 1989 

893 
 

Now, Minister, if that isn’t a permanent abandonment of this 
province’s right to control its own resources and to control its 
resource development in the future, what else would you call it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, under the free trade 
agreement, although we certainly have no intention of doing it, 
as recommended by the member from Regina Rosemont, we 
could nationalize the potash industry. Mr. Speaker, we can take 
means to control the potash corporation and the potash industry 
under the free trade agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might advise to the hon. member as well that 
there were very restrictive limitations on Air Canada passed by 
the Parliament of Canada, Mr. Speaker. We are very confident 
that the proposals that we have, which have been criticized by 
the eastern media as being too restrictive to protect 
Saskatchewan’s interests, Mr. Speaker, are . . . not only are they 
constitutional, Mr. Speaker, they will be accepted and seen as 
reasonable within the international investment community to 
protect Saskatchewan’s interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister. That 
wasn’t the question I was asking you. The point I was making is 
that under article 1605 of the free trade agreement, having 
prescribed the limits on foreign ownership, those become the 
limits for as long as the free trade agreement is in existence, and 
Saskatchewan loses its right to enact any different provisions or 
make them less restrictive. So once you pass these restrictions, 
you can’t change them in the future. 
 
That’s the question I’m asking you. How does that make sense, 
Mr. Minister? How dare you lock us into these provisions for 
ever? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t think the hon. member is asking us 
to throw it wide open, but I do suggest to the hon. member that 
we are extremely confident that the restrictions that we have put 
in are not only, Mr. Speaker, in the best interest of the people of 
this province and protect their interests, but secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, they are received as necessary and desirable in the 
international investment community. And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, 
that we are very much of the view that the legislation which we 
will pass will not be challenged in any way, shape, or form. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve considered the free trade agreement, 
and we’re satisfied that the legislation does not contravene the 
free trade agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier which I hope the Premier will take and not pass off to 
the Minister of Finance because, judging by that last answer, we 
get no answer. 
 

I want the Premier to understand what’s being said here. At 45 
per cent foreign ownership under the free trade deal, your deal, 
you can’t ever increase that. You can’t increase it. You can 
decrease it; you can lower the level of foreign ownership 
making it even more wide-open, but you can’t increase it. 
That’s the free trade deal; that’s our interpretation of the free 
trade deal. And a member gets up and simply says he has all 
kinds of good hopes and expectations, but the free trade deal 
says otherwise. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this. It is widely reported that the 
annual report for 1988 Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
which has a profit, it is widely reported, of $108 million in 
1988, is to be tabled. The Deputy Premier says I’m wrong. If 
I’m wrong, I want to know that I’m wrong, or right. I ask the 
Premier: will he get up and give us a simple yes or no; will he 
table the annual report for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan today? Will he table it before we continue on in 
the debate of this important Bill 20 legislation he’s introduced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, let me first of all congratulate, 
and I had neglected to do that earlier, the Leader of the 
Opposition for his courage today in standing up today with his 
back to his own members. I understand the meetings in Regina 
are getting quite vicious. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I thought it was somewhat 
appropriate then that they started on free trade and ended up on 
the annual report, so I thought that my congratulations to the 
hon. member were somewhat appropriate as well. The annual 
report will be tabled at the appropriate time by the minister 
responsible for the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Obviously you’ve established your position. You’ve said you’re 
going to fight this on ideological grounds, Mr. Speaker — that’s 
what the privatization critic has said, Mr. Speaker. You’ve 
given your estimates to the Leader of the Opposition of what 
the income will be. It hasn’t stopped them from setting out their 
position, Mr. Speaker. We’ll table it at the appropriate time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not good enough. Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
Minister of Finance; that’s not good enough. 
 
We are debating Bill 20 sooner or later — apparently, according 
to House business, today. The annual report for 1988 is an 
integral part of that debate, whatever the numbers are. That’s 
not good enough, in due course. We want that 1988 annual 
report now before we debate it. What are you hiding? Get that 
annual report tabled, that’s what I’m asking you to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve repeated it. I  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

894 
 

don’t believe that the tabling of the annual report will, or lack 
thereof, will hinder the opposition from its position. Its position 
has been made clear that, notwithstanding any evidence out 
there, the opposition is going to oppose this Bill for ideological 
reasons. That’s what they’ve said. So, Mr. Speaker, yes, we will 
be proceeding with second reading today, and the annual report 
will be tabled at the appropriate time by the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants to Universities 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education. Minister, I’m sure that you are aware, in the 
Leader-Post the other day, that the president of the University 
of Regina has said that he has to go begging to the community 
at large now for moneys in order to fund the University of 
Regina. In fact, he stated that the debt at the university is going 
to increase by $1 million to $6.5 million because of lack of 
operating funds received in this last budget from your 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: why are you not 
making adequate funds available to the University of Regina so 
that the president doesn’t have to go out and beg for money 
from the community in order to keep that institution afloat? 
Why don’t you give it a higher priority for our young people for 
their future so that they can have accessibility to the University 
of Regina and in order for them to have a guaranteed future in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, because our 
government does view the opportunity to have a post-secondary 
education, including at universities, important, that is why in 
this last budget not only was there an increase in the operating 
grant but as well the establishment of a $10 million 
enhancement fund for our universities and our institutes. 
 
And I know the hon. members opposite continue to ignore that 
fund, but the reality is, Mr. Speaker, it is there, and it is there so 
that our young people have opportunities to a high quality, 
continued high quality university and technical institute training 
— high quality, and as accessible as possible to as many as 
possible, Mr. Speaker. That’s too why, Mr. Speaker, this 
government, this government has put in place the SCAN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network) proposal 
and distance education and regional colleges, so we can have 
standardized first and second year university delivered across 
the province, Mr. Speaker, across the province, very well 
accepted across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as it relates specifically to the university and any fund 
raising initiatives, whether it’s the University of Regina or the 
University of Saskatchewan, that they might like to undertake, I 
would never discourage that, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I would 
congratulate them for doing it. I look at the several millions of 
dollars that the University of Saskatchewan 
is . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to the 
minister. 
 
Let me remind the minister, let me remind the minister that the 
increase in operating grants for the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan has been 1 per cent annually for the 
last four budgets — 1 per cent annually. 
 
Mr. Minister, the university . . . the president of the University 
of Saskatchewan has clearly indicated that he needed an $11 
million increase in operating grants in order to maintain the 
status quo. He has indicated that they are in a crisis situation at 
the U of S. They will have to cancel programs. They will have 
to cancel classes. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: are 
you so preoccupied with privatization and selling off of our 
resources of the province of Saskatchewan that you don’t have 
sufficient time and moneys to allocate to the University of 
Saskatchewan in order to maintain a high quality education for 
our young people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
referred to the University of Saskatchewan and what the 
University of Saskatchewan’s response was to this last budget. 
He used the word “crises”, and for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, 
as I read the news release that was put out by the university, by 
Dr. Kristjanson the day after the budget, I cannot find the word 
“crisis” in there. What I can find are sentences like this: 
 

Dr. Leo Kristjanson, president of the University of 
Saskatchewan, says the provincial budget reflects a 
response to the concern that the university faced in 
financing crisis in 1989-90. 
 

And he went on to say further: 
 

He stated that the operating grant increase, plus the U of S 
share of the new fund, should enable the university to 
maintain programs and services at near current levels. 
 

Now does that sound like a crisis, Mr. Speaker? I suggest not, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education for Native Students 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister is clearly 
indicating, that he’s quite happy to allow another 1,000 or 1,100 
students to leave this province in order to seek education 
somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, you are aware that today about 200 native people 
demonstrated in Saskatoon. They’re very concerned about the 
E-12 guide-lines that have been established by the federal 
government. My question to you today is this: have you, or any 
member on that side of the House of the executive branch, have 
you made representation to the federal government on behalf of  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

895 
 

native people in this province, so that the moratorium and the 
ceiling be taken off and the future for native people in this 
province be guaranteed so that they can have access to quality 
post-secondary education in this province? Have you made 
those representations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, it is very important to us 
that all Saskatchewan young people have an opportunity to have 
post-secondary education, including our native population. And 
to that end, Mr. Speaker, some two or three or four weeks ago 
now, I met with the Hon. Pierre Cadieux, raising this very issue 
with him. Prior to that, Mr. Speaker, at the annual meeting of 
the ministers of Education for all of Canada, the matter was 
discussed. 
 
So in answer to the hon. member, have we raised the issue with 
the federal government? — individually and collectively as 
ministers across this country we have raised the issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I am certain that 
since the minister says that he has made representation to the 
federal government, I was wondering whether he today would 
table the documents that he has presented to the federal 
government so that our native people can be assured of what 
your position was. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this government 
has recommended to the federal government that the ceiling be 
taken off and the moratorium be lifted in order to ensure a 
bright future for our native people here in Saskatchewan. Will 
you table those documents today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of tabling 
documents, in my personal meeting with the minister there were 
no documents exchanged. It was eyeball to eyeball, if you like. 
And what the delegation from the Canadian minister has 
advanced, I don’t have, quite frankly, in my hands, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I think because we are all interested in making sure that 
there is as much opportunity as possible, I think it’s worth 
noting that some several years ago there was a $9 million 
expenditure by the federal government, because it is a federal 
government responsibility. And today that same expenditure is 
130 millions of dollars. But more importantly, we’ve seen 3,000 
native young people have the opportunity, and today we have 
15,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Would we like to see it 16 or 17,000? You bet, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why we’re into distance education; that’s why we’re 
into Northlands Career College; that’s why we’re into building 
a new technical institute campus, or why we built a new 
technical institute campus in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. This is 
a  

government that delivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting the Reorganization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of An Act Respecting the Reorganization 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
This Act provides for public participation in the potash industry 
in Saskatchewan. It will permit the assets of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to be transferred to a share capital 
corporation. In exchange for those assets, the government will 
receive 100 per cent of the shares in that corporation. A portion 
of these shares will then be sold to the public. 
 
In recognition of our confidence in the positive implications of 
this action over the long term and in the importance of the 
potash resource and the potash corporation to our province, the 
legislation providing for public participation in PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) contains eight safeguards that 
will protect Saskatchewan’s people’s overall interest in this 
initiative. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, the headquarters of the corporation will 
always remain in Saskatchewan. At least three of the directors 
must be Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Thirdly, a majority of the members of the board of directors 
must always be Canadian residents. 
 
Fourthly, residents of Canada will always own at least 55 per 
cent of the shares of the corporation. 
 
The total level of foreign ownership cannot exceed 45 per cent 
of the shares of the corporation, and the voting rights of 
non-Canadian shareholders, as a group, are limited to not more 
than 25 per cent of the votes cast at a meeting. 
 
No person or group of persons or companies may own more 
than 5 per cent of the shares of the corporation, and there can be 
no significant disposition of the assets as a whole or of the 
current mining assets of the potash corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these eight safeguards are not just for the initial 
public offering, but are enshrined in law in perpetuity and will 
be strictly enforced. 
 
The rules of association set out in this Bill do not permit 
persons to combine their share holdings to vote as a block and 
thereby circumvent the restrictions. If any shareholders violate 
these rules, the board of directors may declare those persons to 
be associated and collectively disenfranchise them. 
 
  



 
April 19, 1989 

896 
 

The government will continue to regulate the potash industry 
through such legislative measures as those which set taxation 
and royalties. There will be absolutely no tax breaks to induce 
people outside of Saskatchewan to purchase shares in the new 
corporation. 
 
In addition to these provisions that I have outlined, the 
employees of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Saskatchewan will be given preference in the share 
offering. The government will retain a portion of the shares. 
Prior to the initial public offering and after passage of this 
legislation, the size of the share issue and its price will be 
announced. 
 
All of these provisions, Mr. Speaker, and the known enthusiasm 
of Saskatchewan people for all things Saskatchewan will ensure 
that the majority of shares will be held in Saskatchewan hands. 
 
The principal benefits of this initiative to the people of 
Saskatchewan are: firstly, to provide Saskatchewan people and 
the potash corporation employees, among others, with another 
new Saskatchewan-based opportunity in which to invest. To 
secure, secondly, a productive, broadly-based diversified 
partnership with our people that will create a more stable 
corporation and allow it to increase its contribution to 
Saskatchewan. Thirdly, to allow for the targeting of more 
taxpayers’ dollar to such priority programs as health care, 
education, agriculture and economic diversification. 
 
This public participation initiative can be seen from an 
historical perspective. Saskatchewan people have a history of 
working together to build and develop their province. And that 
kind of partnership brought about the credit unions and the 
co-ops, such as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. People got 
together and worked together, and they worked with each other 
to build and diversify this province. This was not imposed by 
government. 
 
In the 1970s, this concept was changed to one of government 
ownership and government participation. And we want to 
reinstall in the people of this province a way of life where 
people themselves, Mr. Speaker, work together and with the 
government to set economic priorities, to participate in our 
province’s growth, and to create the enterprises which meet the 
people’s needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that history is on our 
side in public participation initiative, and history will not be 
denied. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Through public participation initiatives 
such as this Act to Reorganize the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, our government is taking a lead role in creating 
a new economic direction. Our strategy is to build in 
Saskatchewan, diversify here, and allow our companies to build 
and expand and compete nationally and internationally, and to 
invest in our province to strengthen our economic and social 
foundations. 
 

And public participation, Mr. Speaker, is the way that we are 
going to achieve our goals. This legislation that we are 
considering is consistent with the high priority of this 
government since 1982 of strengthening the Saskatchewan 
economy through economic diversification. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The policy is aimed at achieving economic 
growth through the direct personal involvement of the people of 
this province committed to this province. It also is and has been 
central to our economic plan for this province. It is through our 
commitment to public participation initiatives such as this that 
we as a government are able to provide exciting new 
opportunities based here in Saskatchewan in which the people 
of Saskatchewan can invest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Public participation is designed to increase 
economic growth. It’s designed to create new investment and 
new jobs, and public participation is designed to help diversify 
Saskatchewan’s economy. And public participation is working, 
Mr. Speaker. To understand how public participation in the 
potash corporation will benefit our economy, we need only to 
look at how other similar initiatives have worked. 
 
The public bond and share offerings in Saskoil generated $125 
million in new capital for the provincial oil company to expand 
and compete. Planned gas development activities resulting from 
the purchase of unutilized SaskPower reserves for $325 million 
in 1988 will create new economic activity for Saskoil with 
1,000 jobs projected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — A forerunner of public participation in the 
potash corporation, Saskoil is now the eighth largest oil and gas 
company in Canada. It has now become a major distributor of 
natural gas in North America with its recent acquisitions of ICG 
Resources Ltd. and Metro Gaz Marketing Inc., both of Calgary. 
In 1985 when Saskoil became a private company, it’s asset 
value, Mr. Speaker, was some $236 million. This year Saskoil’s 
asset value will exceed $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And another public participation initiative 
which preceded the potash corporation legislation before us 
today was the formation of WESTBRIDGE Computer 
Corporation, with 97 per cent participation in its ownership by 
its employees. And that’s resulted already in 50 new jobs being 
created. Continued expansion is expected to mean another 200 
jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. And WESTBRIDGE has 
since earned $6 million in out-of-province contracts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Public participation programs like the one we are considering in 
the legislation before this Assembly, can take other forms. In 
1986 our government sold the Prince  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

897 
 

Albert Pulp Company to Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. for $236 
million. Weyerhaeuser has since added a $250 million world 
class paper mill which is now in operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That created 700 construction jobs and 169 permanent jobs for 
Saskatchewan men and women. As well, Weyerhaeuser has 
announced another $22 million expansion to its paper 
manufacturing operation. 
 
Another public participation measure was the sale of Sask 
Minerals to Kam-Kotia Mines for 12.1 million. That brought an 
additional $3 million investment in new marketing and 
technological expertise to the province. Kam-Kotia’s 
profit-sharing plan resulted in over $100,000 being given back 
to the employees at Chaplin and Fox Valley. 
 
Employee participation through shares in the company, as 
planned in this Act before the Assembly, is a key part of our 
program, Mr. Speaker. The Meadow Lake saw mill was sold to 
its employees and 10 local Indian bands. That has now attracted 
a $236 million investment by Millar Western Ltd. for a pulp 
mill in the Meadow Lake area, and an $11 million chopstick 
factory. Over 400 jobs for Saskatchewan men and women are 
projected from this project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other employee ownership initiatives carried out by our 
government include the take-over of Saskatchewan government 
printing services which became Printco services, and the 
formation of a new company, DirectWEST, to publish 
SaskTel’s yellow pages and telephone directories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government firmly believes that the people of 
this province want the opportunity to put their money into 
enterprises such as the potash corporation to help build the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And they have already demonstrated that in 
various ways, Mr. Speaker. Over 42,000 men and women in 
Saskatchewan have invested $343 million in the provincial 
economy through the purchase of SaskPower bonds, and more 
than 33,000 provincial residents purchased over $106 million of 
SaskTel TeleBonds. These initiatives I have outlined add up to 
2,900 new and projected jobs, and over $600 million in new 
investment here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that public 
participation is very important to the economic diversification 
of our province. Through preference provisions in the share and 
bond offerings we have undertaken, and in the PCS issue which 
is about to take place, our government is encouraging the 
people of Saskatchewan to join together and to join with us in 
new ways to set new economic priorities, and to further 
participate in our province’s growth, and better, Mr. Speaker, to 
secure the Saskatchewan way of life. 
 

Public participation and PCS have been measured against the 
same criteria we apply to all initiatives, regardless of their 
scope. The first and most important of these criteria is that the 
initiative must directly benefit the people of Saskatchewan. It 
must enhance the overall diversification and opportunities for 
growth and development. Service levels must remain the same 
or improve; existing jobs must not be threatened; and there 
must be potential for new job creation. Widespread public 
participation initiatives must also be affordable and accessible 
for all Saskatchewan people, and public participation in the 
potash corporation meets and exceeds these criteria. 
 
The decision to invite public participation in the potash 
corporation was based on its future needs rather than on its past, 
and public participation in the potash corporation, subject to the 
safeguards that I’ve outlined, is the next step in the 
corporation’s evolution. In fact, public participation in the 
corporation is critical if PCS is to vigorously pursue all of the 
opportunities available to it as a world leader and a major 
contributor to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The new corporation will be able to 
compete strongly in the private sector from its Saskatchewan 
base, and the province will benefit from having the largest 
private sector potash company in the world as one of its 
corporate citizens. 
 
And with a broad shareholder base, the potash corporation will 
be free to pursue business opportunities both within and without 
Saskatchewan, without risking taxpayers’ dollars; nor will it 
have to compete with such important priorities for our people as 
health care, agriculture, education, social services, and 
economic diversification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This public participation initiative will give PCS . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — I beg leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll be finished in two minutes. 
 
The Speaker: — Two minutes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you. The public participation 
initiative will give PCS the freedom to grow and to diversify, 
and it represents an opportunity for the people of this province, 
the employees of the potash corporation, one, an opportunity 
that everyone in Saskatchewan will be a part of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, therefore to move second reading of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Again, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

898 
 

to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe you’ve been given leave. You may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and hon. 
colleagues. I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and 
through you to members of the legislature, a guest seated in 
your gallery, Tony Sydor. Tony was originally from Foam 
Lake, and indeed you may recall a tragic fire, about four years 
ago I believe it was, where a number of businesses were burned. 
Mr. Sydor’s was one of those. Since then he has moved to 
Saskatoon, but is currently in Regina where he is undergoing 
some relatively minor surgery tomorrow at the Plains Health 
Centre. I ask all members to join me in welcoming Tony Sydor. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter this debate. I will have some rather extensive remarks to 
make today before I adjourn the debate. 
 
I would like to begin, however, by making an observation or 
two about the Minister of Finance’s introductory remarks in 
second reading; to observe, as a general point, that not 
necessarily does longevity make for a great speech, but the 
brevity of the hon. minister’s explanation of this very important 
Bill certainly raises some doubts about the commitment of 
himself and his government to what they’re doing. 
 
I don’t know whether that commitment is wavering 
considerably because of the public reaction in Saskatchewan in 
opposition to the belief that they really are going too far in 
privatization, that they’re really selling off our heritage, that 
they’re really practising what has been described to me, Mr. 
Speaker, as a scorched earth policy, or whether it’s because of 
their friends in the Toronto Globe and Mail who object very 
much to the Bill, describing it neither as a potash privatization 
Bill nor as a Bill of pablum. They’re not quite sure which it is. 
For whatever reason, the minister was disappointingly short, 
and disappointingly short on a number of very important 
details. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, to you, and I say to the people of the press 
gallery and to those who may be watching the debate of this 
important issue, with the greatest of respect to the Minister of 
Finance, it is the job of every government on major legislation 
— for that matter any legislation — but major legislation, to 
articulate the details of what the Bill does. It’s the job of the 
government to articulate the details of the legislation. It’s the 
job of the government to outline how this legislation is going to 
be fleshed out into the blood and the guts and the bones of an 
actual policy which will affect Saskatchewan families and the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s their job to try to 
explain to the House and to the people in the province exactly 
what the end result is likely to be, as  

much as one can foresee. 
 
But we have here a speech of less than 20 minutes, delivered by 
the minister on what probably is the most important 
privatization in North America in terms of dollars — perhaps 
important, from my point of view, in other regards as well — 
carried out in a very cursory, very polemic, very rhetorical, very 
generalized address, which I say, frankly, is a disappointment to 
this legislature — and I might say, Mr. Speaker, will raise 
considerably more questions as the debate progresses as to 
exactly what the hidden agenda of this government is on this 
project — more questions, which the minister could have 
answered, should have answered at this time, more questions 
than it solved or answered in his initial remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Instead the minister talked about 
privatization. I want to recast the discussion of privatization . . . 
I’m deviating yet from my written remarks, Mr. Speaker, with 
your permission, for just a few moments. I want to cast the 
debate of privatization in slightly different terms. I think the 
debate really has to be asked in these questions, in these terms. 
 
The government opposite, the PC Party opposite, tied in as we 
know to their big-business corporation friends from all over the 
world and a certain philosophy, tells us that privatization is a 
good social objective. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people watching this 
debate, how has privatization proven to be a success? I ask you, 
sir, and I ask the public, has the public debt of the province 
gone up or down since privatization was implemented by the 
current administration? We know that it has gone 
astronomically high. 
 
I ask anybody watching this, I ask you, sir, if you haven’t filled 
out your income tax form, whether your taxes have gone up or 
down. And the taxes have gone disastrously high because of 
privatization. 
 
I ask the 10,000 people who are waiting for a hospital bed in 
Saskatoon, and the 4,000, approximately, waiting for a hospital 
bed in Regina, I ask them, how has this major government 
economic policy helped them? Have they got better access to 
hospitals, or are the waiting lists going up? Has the cancer 
clinic got better access to treatment on this dreaded disease of 
cancer, or is the waiting list the same? 
 
I ask the government and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, how has privatization helped the farmers who 
are facing the complex range of difficulties, whether it’s a 
drought situation, whether it’s a question of a debt situation, 
whatever the current crisis of farm gate problems are — and 
there are many — how has privatization helped that person? 
Has it helped them in the highways, for example, when they 
privatized? Has it helped them when they privatized the dental 
workers’ program, a rural program? Has it helped them in terms 
of staving the threat of demise in this current year? Not at all, 
Mr. Speaker. Not whatsoever. 
 
And finally, the acid test, the acid test of any government:  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

899 
 

is this province growing, or is it decreasing in its population? 
Are we getting people to come here because there are jobs and 
hope and opportunity for the future? Has privatization provided 
that kind of diversification? Or have we faced, as we know we 
have faced, massive jobs lost, massive outflow and exodus by 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan — 6,300 in 
February alone, this year; 1,600 in March of this year, just last 
month. 
 
We have had nearly 8,000 people in out-migration. We’ll have 
13,000, if the record continues. This is an unparalleled outflow 
of young men and women. Since the Dirty Thirties, we’ve not 
seen something like it. Mr. Speaker, I say privatization by any 
one of those yardsticks is a disaster, and this government ought 
to pony up to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I say, Mr. Speaker, there’s another 
dimension to this as well, and that is to take a look at the 
legislative work-load before this legislature now. Mr. Speaker, 
we have now been in day 28 in this Legislative Assembly. And 
I want to remind you, sir, and those who may be watching this 
debate that we have not been in this House since June of 1988, 
and for about nine months, for nine months the government has 
not had the task of preparing the day-to-day question period and 
preparing for the legislature to meet. For nine months it’s got 
the job of preparing its legislative work-load. 
 
Now we know, it knows, it says that it knows that there is 
farming crisis of major proportions. We know that 
small-business people are facing bankruptcies. We know that 
young men and women — 40 per cent of the out-migration I’ve 
referred to — have fled the province of Saskatchewan because 
there are no other alternatives. We know all of these pressing 
economic challenges that are before us, and here we are on day 
28, Mr. Speaker, we have 20 pieces of legislation. Bill No. 1 
was the Bill to privatize, generally, everything the government 
has. I call it the scorched earth policy. Bill 20, which we’re 
debating today, is the potash privatization as part of Bill No. 1. 
 
And we don’t have one single piece of legislation to help the 
farmer who’s facing his legal problems or his seeding problems. 
We don’t have anything to help him or her. We have nothing 
for small-business people, we have nothing for our young 
people except quotas on universities. They can’t get into 
post-secondary educations. 
 
There is no legislation, and moreover, Mr. Speaker, the 
government has told the opposition, and I report this to the 
members of the press, they have told the opposition that they 
are going to stick with this potash privatization Bill — I call it 
the privatization sell-off Bill — they’re going to stick with this 
potash Bill until this opposition finally gives up before it 
introduces any other legislation. They think they can browbeat 
us into agreeing to this early passage of the Bill. They might be 
able to, Mr. Speaker, because after all, we’re only a minority. 
 
But they’re penalizing hundreds of thousands of families and 
young men and women and farmers and workers who are 
desperately looking for action by this government. They’re 
holding them up to ransom because of this ideological 
commitment to Maggie Thatcher’s  

privatization. And I say that is an outrage, and this government 
is going to pay a big price for it when the next election comes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to go back 
into the 1976 debates about this potash Bill. I have got copies of 
the 1976 debate that the member who introduced this legislation 
took part in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’d ask the Minister 
from Urban Affairs, please, to calm down and to . . . he may not 
like truth, and I know he reacts kind of negatively and badly to 
it, but please try to listen to this aspect of the truth of this debate 
for a moment. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the debates of 1976, when the potash 
corporation were introduced, are interesting debates. They’re 
interesting not only for what we said, because I was the 
proponent and the mover of the Bill, but it’s very interesting for 
what they said, Mr. Deputy Speaker — those in opposition. 
 
And today’s speaker, the minister in charge of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, at that time was a very prominent 
member of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. I’ll say a word 
about this at length. Not only was he a member of the Liberal 
Party, but he dug in as the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan did. 
They dug in in opposition to what we were doing with respect 
to the potash crisis. And there were some Conservatives there. I 
think maybe the member from Swift Current was also a 
member of the Conservative Party at the time, and they too dug 
in. 
 
(1500) 
 
The Liberals and the Conservatives, the two old line, free 
enterprise parties dug in, Mr. Speaker, because they were 
determined that what we were doing for the people of this 
province they were going to stop. They had decided that their 
role was to be, not the role for the farmer or for the business 
men, their role was to be the mouthpiece for the big 
multinational potash corporations. That member was the leader 
and one of the leaders of that debate. I’ll say a word or two 
about that in a moment. 
 
But I want to begin now about a discussion of this legislation 
because, Mr. Speaker, in my judgement the debate on this Bill 
truly is a debate about the kind of future for our great province 
— the future for ourselves, our families, and our children and 
our children’s children. I say this because the legislation will 
determine how our province will manage, develop, and sell an 
important, non-renewable resource, potash, well into the 21st 
century, after long . . . many of us are gone from this political 
scene. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation offers 
Saskatchewan people is a future of economic servitude to 
outside investors, as we see the Bill. It does not offer 
Saskatchewan people control of their own future but a future 
controlled by others, Mr. Speaker. This Bill will long be 
remembered by the people of this province as an Act which sold 
out the future of the province of Saskatchewan, and we’re going 
to fight this Bill precisely because it does that. 
 
  



 
April 19, 1989 

900 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I want to take a moment to explain why 
potash is so important as a part of our future. This is what we’re 
talking about — the future, not 1976. We’re talking about the 
1990s. It’s a part of our future, Mr. Speaker, because potash is a 
very special kind of resource for Saskatchewan — very unique. 
Unlike our non-renewable resources such as coal or oil, we 
know that we’re not going to run out of potash for many, many 
years. In fact at current rates we have about 4,000 years of 
reserve, according to all estimates. That makes our province 
rich in this resource. 
 
And because potash is a product vital to world agriculture, we 
can count — there may be ups and downs, but we can count, 
over the long haul, a long-term, steady demand for potash with 
prices and sales going up. And the question is: who’s going to 
get the benefit of those prices and sales? whether it’s those to 
whom this company, this corporation, this government opposite 
is selling out, or . . . we, right here — you, me, our children, and 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In simple terms, potash is a non-renewable resource which 
offers this province the hope of a sound base for economic 
development and true diversification, not words, PC-style, but 
hope for economic development, a sound base for growth, hope, 
and opportunity. One only has to look at the world sales figures 
for potash to grasp the size of the opportunity: in 1990 world 
potash sales are expected to top 31 million metric tonnes; at 
current prices, that makes potash a $3.5 billion industry a year, 
Mr. Speaker — $3.5 billion industry. 
 
Saskatchewan today supplies about a quarter of that market, but 
the potential for growth is exceptional, and we are the free 
world’s largest single producer. Only the Soviet Union is larger. 
And our potash mines are the most productive and efficient in 
the world. In fact, PCS is the most efficient in the world. 
 
This gives our province and our corporation an unmatched 
ability to influence the world market-place, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— to influence the world. Just take a look of all the things that 
we do and we produce. In how many areas can we actually 
influence the world? We can’t do it, unfortunately, in 
agriculture. We can’t do it in so many things that we produce. 
But right here in potash we can influence the world 
market-place, and to take on all the competitors and beat the 
world market-place. That’s the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the hard work and the vision of thousands of 
Saskatchewan people in the 1970s, potash industry in this 
province truly now is a world class corporation. 
 
Now that’s why this Bill and this debate are so important to the 
future of our province. We’re discussing here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, how best as Saskatchewan people to manage, to 
develop, to sell a resource — for what purpose? To do so to 
bring in millions of dollars in profits  

for our treasury — to do what? To build schools and roads and 
hospitals, and to provide quality education, to create jobs for 
people to stay here, young men and women not to flee this 
province as they’re doing, but to stay here and to raise their 
homes and their families and to provide undreamt of economic 
spin-offs and research and development and economic research, 
unheard of dreams, perhaps beyond our fondest imaginations to 
do so. 
 
We are debating here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how best to 
increase Saskatchewan’s share of the world potash market. We 
are also debating how to turn that bigger share into the 
maximum number of jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill presents the people of this 
House and the people of all Saskatchewan with a vital, critical 
choice, a choice which can be boiled down to a single question, 
and that question I put to this legislature as follows: should we, 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, manage, develop, 
and sell our potash ourselves, for our own benefit, and make 
those decisions, for our own benefit, or should we let others do 
it for us, for their benefit? That’s the key question. It’s as 
simple and as complex as that. 
 
And with this Bill, the member from Qu’Appelle, the Minister 
of Finance, and the Premier, they’re telling the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan that they don’t believe that we can 
do the job right here at home. They say that they have lost faith 
in the people of the province of Saskatchewan to do the job. I 
say shame on that approach. We have not lost the faith. We are 
standing behind the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I referred earlier, Mr. Speaker, to that 
debate in 1975-1976 that I piloted for three months in this 
House. I want to tell you that was one of my most, I feel, from 
my personal view, best contributions to public life in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada, of all the things that I’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Members opposite, members opposite may 
not share that view; that’s mine. But I want to tell you that this 
position that I took was because we took a faith, we 
demonstrated a faith in 1975-76 to take on the world — not, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, words, you know. We didn’t say, in 1976, 
first class and world class. We didn’t say, there’s so much more 
that we can be. We did it. We believed it and we did it. 
 
And I said, a few moments ago, I personally recall the very 
minister who spoke before me, who introduced Bill 20 today, 
the member from Qu’Appelle, the Minister of Finance, leading 
the fight against the creation of PCS back in 1976 when he was 
a member of the Liberal Party. In fact, I remember the then 
Liberal member criticizing every aspect of PCS at every turn, 
even turning on the third party of the day, as it then was, the 
Conservatives, and chastising them for not fighting the creation 
of PCS hard enough. Oh, he said, how those PCs had let down 
on  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

901 
 

the job. They simply weren’t fighting this creation of PCS as 
important — as hard as they should. 
 
In fact, he was the real hawk in the opposition of what we were 
trying to do — building a future for the province of 
Saskatchewan — the member who introduced the Bill today. So 
we know where the minister is coming from. What we didn’t 
know at the time of the speech is where he was going to. And 
he ended up going to the Conservative Party, and lo and behold! 
here we are in 1989 carrying his political and personal views 
forward again to the destruction and the dismantlement of this 
bold experiment and adventure called the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, 1976. 
 
And he did so then, and he does so now, because he 
fundamentally doesn’t believe in the ability of our province to 
make PCS a world class company. He didn’t then and he 
doesn’t now. And no matter how he attempts to dress up the 
Bill, no matter how much of your money — and to those who 
may be watching this debate — your money, the taxpayers’ 
money, you are going to spend to convince others, Mr. 
Minister, about your position, it says at the end of the line, you 
don’t have faith in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
He doesn’t believe that we’ve got the skill, the determination, 
the savvy to take the world on, more than just words, but to take 
the world on in action and to win. He wants the world to take us 
over, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while he stands back on the sidelines 
and facilitates the rest of the world taking us over, and I say no 
to that. We have faith in our province and we’re going to 
continue on that approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in fact there is a 
very different vision, there is a very different vision about the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan. We’re optimistic about 
what the people have accomplished in the past. We know what 
they’ve accomplished, and we’re even more confident about 
what they can do in the 21st century and beyond. 
 
We believe that Saskatchewan people relish the challenge of 
building and expanding a world class company like PCS. 
Saskatchewan people, I believe, want to encourage the growth 
of private business and the co-operative business. I’m a firm 
believer of the private enterprise, small business sector as an 
engine of economic growth in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
advocate that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at every turn. 
 
And I’m a strong proponent of the co-operatives. But I’m also a 
strong proponent because the people understand this too, that 
the public sector, working with private and co-operative 
enterprise, is also needed in a true partnership. 
 
I want to tell you something else, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan people know that there are some enterprises 
which are so important to all of us that the public sector simply 
can’t be eliminated. The public sector simply should lead the 
way. I say to you, sir, potash is one such enterprise. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So, as I said earlier in the first part of my 
address this afternoon, Bill 20 represents a critical choice. It 
poses a critical choice for all of us in this House and all of us in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And the choice is, I repeat again: 
are we going to work together to build the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan so that it can provide even more jobs and 
economic and educational opportunities for our province and 
our families and our youth right here, or are we going to do as 
the government proposes and surrender the control of this great 
company to foreign interests and out-of-province interests? 
 
I say the people, at the end of day, come the next election, are 
going to choose our vision — people working to help people 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll have more 
to say about why we say this about the vision, because this 
debate is about the future, but first I want to deviate a little bit 
and tell you why I feel so strongly — other than the future that 
I’ve talked about — about why Bill 20 is the wrong way to go. 
 
A learned American author once wrote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no 
one can walk backward into the future. No one can walk 
backward into the future. 
 
And with Bill 20, to the member from Regina, Urban Affairs 
Minister, that’s exactly what you’re attempting to do — walk 
back into the future. It pretends, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
pretends that it has unveiled a new direction. That’s the words 
they use, “a new direction”. But we know the actual fact is that 
Bill 20 is simply turning back the clock. 
 
This legislation proposes to sell off 100 per cent of PCS, 45 per 
cent for foreign investors and 55 per cent to Canadian residents. 
I’ll just stop there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to remind you there is 
no requirement under this legislation that a single share be held 
by a Saskatchewan resident. I repeat, there is no requirement 
under this legislation that a single share of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, after they get done with it, will 
be held by a single Saskatchewan resident. 
 
In other words, PCS could wind up in the hands of foreign 
corporations and interests and a few corporations and investors 
outside the province of Saskatchewan. And in effect, total 
control is lost. That’s what we’re talking about. I say they walk 
back to the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you why. That really does turn 
back the clock to the 1960s and the 1970s when outsiders, 
outsiders owned all of the potash companies operating in this 
province. That’s what we’re doing here — back to the ’60s and 
the ’70s. Everything in potash was owned by the private 
multinational corporations, and, Mr. Deputy, they called all the 
shots. 
 
The current government argues that Saskatchewan people don’t 
need to own the potash resource to get  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

902 
 

maximum benefit. They say tax and regulate; that’s good 
enough. Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I lived through it. 
And Saskatchewan people lived through it to know that that’s a 
false argument. Saskatchewan people have been there, and I 
want to tell the minister and the Premier, that does not work. It 
hasn’t worked. 
 
In the early 1960s and early ’70s, the private potash companies 
were exploiting our potash, and the people’s return was peanuts. 
The provincial royalty on potash on a regulated, taxated 
framework, but a privately owned potash industry — what these 
people are proposing — averaged less than, averaged less than 
two and a half per cent; that was our return. 
 
(1515) 
 
And, Mr. Deputy, there was no planned development of the 
industry. The industry decided when and how and where to 
develop. And in the 1960s the private companies expanded 
production too quickly; they created a huge glut on the world 
market. 
 
In fact, it took the private enterprise government of the day, led 
by the late premier Ross Thatcher, a Liberal, to bail the private 
potash companies out with a prorationing plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Late premier Ross Thatcher, he introduced a potash 
prorationing Bill. Journalists should be aware of this; the public 
should be aware of this; it’s key to the history of this province 
— because it was in such a mess the way the private 
corporations developed it, that this proration attempted to 
control production and set a minimum price for the product. 
And I might say the Minister of Finance was working with the 
Liberal government at the time when that scheme was 
introduced. 
 
Even Ross Thatcher, Mr. Deputy . . . I want to tell you that I’ve 
been in this legislature for quite some time, and I’ve been in this 
ring with the heavyweights. And Ross Thatcher was a 
heavyweight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Ross Thatcher was the 
consummate Liberal and the consummate free-enterpriser, and 
even Ross Thatcher looked with disdain and dismay about what 
the private potash multinational corporations were doing in 
their failure to manage this industry, this resource, in the best 
interests of all the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1969 Thatcher said — I was in this Chamber — Thatcher 
said this quote about the crisis: 
 

Seldom in the economic annals of Canada have we seen 
such responsible companies get in such an economic mess. 
 

That’s what Ross Thatcher said. And the consummate 
free-enterpriser, ironically, had to introduce an Act of socialism 
by introducing the potash production regulations, the proration 
regulations, in order to bail out the mess that the private 
enterprise sector in potash had produced. Even Ross Thatcher 
did that in 1969, and the Minister of Finance was there, and he 
knows of what I talk as being absolutely accurate. It was a 
mess. 
 
In fact, I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what Ross  

Thatcher got for all of his efforts. He went down to New 
Mexico to try to reason with the multinational potash 
corporations, and for all of his efforts he ended up being 
charged as an unindicted criminal co-conspirator against the 
laws of the United States because he dared to speak up for 
Saskatchewan potash and Saskatchewan industry, because 
regulation and taxation didn’t work. 
 
The Minister of Finance was there; he knows that to be the case. 
And what does he want to do in Bill 20? He wants to go all the 
way back to the 1960s and 1970s. Shame to him on that 
operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we then assumed 
office in 1971, the Blakeney government came in 1971, and we 
inherited that mess, the private enterprise market collapsing all 
around it, because this is a multinational corporation, a 
multinational industry. You just can’t control a hardware store 
here in Saskatchewan, then pass a provincial law. You’re 
talking about multinational corporations all over the world, and 
we’re trying to regulate from little old Saskatchewan here. And 
we inherited this mess created by the private enterprise people. 
We did inherit the mess in 1971. 
 
The hon. member from Regina, the member from Urban 
Affairs, he laughs, but his laughter betrays his total ignorance 
about the situation. Absolute total ignorance about the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And when we came to office, we had the 
potash proration regulations. They were still there. And we said, 
well look, this is an attempt at least to manage and to control, 
by regulation, how to manage the resource and how to get the 
maximum profit for the resource. Not for government. Who is 
government? Government is people. But get those resources to 
build the schools and the highways and the hospitals and get 
jobs and get the future going for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We looked at those regulations and we said, let’s see if we can 
improve this situation by getting fair, economic rent. Potash 
was put there by the good Lord, not for the International 
Minerals Corporation, IMC. It was put there for all of us. And if 
they’re going to exploit it, we’re going to use the benefits of 
that for our people and for our young men and women. That’s 
what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And so in 1974 — and these are historical 
facts which tie into the argument today in 1989 — in 1974 we 
introduced a potash proration reserves tax to try to get more 
revenue, because the potash prices were going up, in order to do 
the things for people, in order to control our heritage, in order to 
control our province, in order to build for the future and to give 
our young people some hope. 
 
But what did the private companies do? The private companies, 
I say to the member from Regina Wascana,  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

903 
 

the private companies said no, Mr. Blakeney; no, elected 
government of the people of the province of Saskatchewan; we 
are not going to pay your increased tax load. And they refused 
to pay the taxes. 
 
And then not only refused to pay the taxes because regulation 
and taxation wouldn’t work, they then refused to reveal their 
financial statements. They pleaded that they couldn’t pay, but 
they wouldn’t show the financial statements to prove that they 
couldn’t pay. They said to a duly elected government of the 
day, they said to us, no, you’re the government, but we’re the 
international potash companies; we’re not going to give you the 
financial statements. 
 
And then when we said, give us regular production reports; how 
much are you ploughing out; how much are you taking and 
selling out, and at what levels; and what are you doing? They 
said, no, you’re the government of the day, but we’re not going 
to give you those production reports either. 
 
They went on strike, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The large 
multinational corporations and the private investors to which 
this minister and this Premier want to take us back to, they went 
on strike. And our regulatory and taxation powers came to a 
standstill because they then took us to court. 
 
And when they took us to court, Central Canada Potash was the 
case, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down the power of a 
province — one little old province — struck down our power to 
try to get the best returns, not to kill the potash industry, but 
returns in order to spread it around for the benefits of schools 
and hospitals and roads. They struck it down and we had no 
power to act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And there was another insidious aspect 
about that period. Not only did they refuse to pay their taxes, 
not only did they refuse to give us the financial statements, not 
only did they refuse to give us the production records, but they 
did something else. They refused to expand their potash 
production, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They said that we’re not going 
to expand until the government gave in. They arrogantly told us 
that they were not going to expand production until we cut back 
our taxes. That was the stand-off in that period. 
 
In effect, the private potash companies told Mr. and Mrs. Joe 
Farmer, in effect they told Mr. and Mrs. Joe Business Person, I 
am holding you to ransom. Unless you lower your taxes to what 
we say is right, we are not going to develop an ounce or a 
pound of potash anywhere. They took the government right to 
ransom and right to the wall. That’s what we were at. 
 
That was only 10 years ago; that’s history. That is not Roy 
Romanow rhetoric, that is history that is written in tens of 
thousands of academic articles everywhere, that only if the 
Minister from Urban Affairs would take the time to read 
something thoughtful, they would understand that that’s the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. Those are the 
circumstances. That’s how this whole thing  

developed into that period. 
 
And I want to add something also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
make it absolutely clear. Not only was the government of the 
day beset by major lawsuits, not only were we beset by a large 
lobby of chambers of commerces in Saskatchewan and beset by 
the large multinational corporations, not only were we beset 
there; yes, the Minister of Urban Affairs, we were also beset by 
a determined, obstructive opposition by the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, or the Conservatives and the Liberals, who 
ended up selling their souls, selling Saskatchewan’s interests in 
order to be the mouthpieces of the large multinational potash 
corporations. That’s what we were faced with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Time after time, and I have here . . . I’m not 
going to rehash it, but this is how lengthy the minister of 
Finance — those 40 pages in a filibuster which took only days, 
the minister of Finance, today’s Minister of Finance, the 
member who introduced Bill 20, tried every argument of 
ridicule on his Conservative colleagues, on ridicule of us, 
calling this a communization of Saskatchewan and of Canada. 
 
Every single tactic, every amendment was tried to bring this 
whole situation to a halt because the Liberals and the 
Conservatives were in the hip pockets of those large 
multinational corporations. They made a choice. The choice 
they made was with the corporations and not with the people. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 20 is still that choice. We are standing 
with the people of the province of Saskatchewan, make no 
mistake about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — As that great American author says, nobody 
can build by walking backwards into the future. And that’s what 
they’re doing. They’re walking backwards to the future, these 
Conservatives; these people who don’t build; these people who 
don’t improve on previous governments; these people who tear 
down; these people who have old ideas; these people who are 
out of touch; these people who are arrogant; these people who 
think they’re going to wear down this opposition with this 
debate until we somehow collapse; this arrogant, out-of-touch 
party and government, one which is not concerned for one 
minute about the farmers or the small-business people; they’re 
following the same tactics in 1989 that they did in 1976, only in 
reverse — only in reverse. And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they paid a price in 1978 when they got washed out, and they’re 
going to pay a price in 1990 when this election takes place, or 
sooner — or sooner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So I’ve talked about the vision. Then I’ve 
talked about the history, and the history is important because 
this is where we’re heading — we’re heading back to the 
regulation taxation model. That’s what we’re doing here 
basically on the privatization of Bill 20, as opposed to acting as 
an operator. 
 
  



 
April 19, 1989 

904 
 

Now I want to move to a third category, and that is, how did we 
perform once PCS was established? What kind of a job was 
done? Was the venture successful or not? Well in a couple of 
words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is, PCS was extremely 
successful. 
 
In a few short years, PCS became the largest and most 
profitable potash company — get this — the largest and most 
profitable potash company in the world. And get this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, basically Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan 
people . . . take a look at the list. Oh sure, there were some from 
outside Saskatchewan, but at the top levels of management, 
Saskatchewan people to the miners, they made it a success. 
Those people made it a success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You know, I just want to take a moment to 
tell you about how successful this was, and just a moment. It’s 
all on public record, but this is the debate where I want to put 
my position on record. 
 
You know, in 1976, the first year of operation of PCS, the 
company paid more than a million dollars in provincial taxes 
and royalties and made a profit of a half a million dollars in the 
first year of start-up time. In 1977 taxes and royalties went up to 
$16 million; profits topped $1.1 million. Already we’re going 
up. In ’78 taxes and royalties went to 35 and profit went to 25 
million. In 1979 more than 58 million in royalties and taxes, 
and the company’s profits jumped to 78 million. 
 
In 1980 this public company, your company, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our company, paid 90 million in taxes and royalties. 
Look, this is money to be used for schools and hospitals. This is 
not some sort of theoretical . . . this is money to be used to build 
Shellbrook’s roads and Shellbrook’s school and hospitals. 
 
Ninety million in 1980, and its profits were $167 million. And 
PCS, on top of that, on top of that, in 1980 paid a dividend, a 
bonus of $50 million. That’s how successful we were in 1980. 
 
In 1981, taxes and royalties paid were 71 million. Its profits 
were 141 million. And the company then paid in 1981 a second 
$50 million dividend to the treasury. That was our record from 
1976 to 1982. That is a public record. All the journalists can 
check what I say. It is true. It is fact. Six years of operation, six 
years of straight profit for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, with jobs. That was our record. 
 
By the way, may I say parenthetically, 11 years of government, 
from 1971 to 1982, in the ordinary budgets of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and 11 years of balanced or surplus budgeting. 
That was also our record at the same time. 
 
(1530) 
 
In six years, from 1976 to 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, PCS had 
made more than $413 million in profits. That’s, by the way, 
more than we invested for it when PCS was established. It paid 
the provincial treasury more than  

$270 million-plus in taxes and royalties, and it paid dividends 
of $100 million. 
 
Get those numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 413 in profits, 270 
in taxes and royalties, 100 in dividends, right here, staying in 
Saskatchewan. Not dividends to private shareholders, not 
dividends to foreign shareholders, not dividends to the Chinese 
communists or the Indians, as proposed by these people 
opposite, but dividends right here. 
 
And during those same years — and this is the part that really 
makes me the most proud — the number of Saskatchewan 
people working at the potash corporation from ’76 to 1982, it 
increased from 1,164 to 2,267, Mr. Deputy Speaker — up 1,100 
workers, feeding their families and their children. Twenty-two 
hundred and sixty-seven Saskatchewan people having good jobs 
at good wages, contributing to the small businesses where they 
live. No wonder we were thriving in the 1970s and building a 
future for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Deputy, when we left office, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan had a long-term debt of 
only $88 million. It had already turned more than the original 
public investment back to the people, as I’ve said. PCS gave the 
people ownership of a profitable corporation, more than 2,200 
employees. 
 
All this nonsense in question period yesterday about a world 
class corporation. We had them — a world class headquarter 
corporation right in Saskatoon in 1982. We had world class 
research. Money was being spent, through universities, 
everywhere, through the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a synergy working here. When you put money to the 
university for research — how to use potash, how to mine it 
more efficiently, how to mine it more safely, their jobs — and 
young graduates could leave the university and they took their 
place — no wonder the work-force went up. That is the kind of 
operation that we developed because we had faith in the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is our record. It’s a record that we can 
be proud of under the history of the province of Saskatchewan 
and this party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now those, sir, are the facts. Those are the 
facts. 
 
But now I want to move on to a fourth category. I’ve talked 
about division. I’ve talked about how it was that PCS was set up 
as a pragmatic response to the battle we had with the 
corporations. I talked about how we performed from ’76 to ’82. 
Now I want to talk about how they have performed when they 
took over in 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This I want to contrast. 
 
And here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as some of my colleagues are 
saying, this is the sad time. They came to office in April of 
1982. And I want to examine the facts and figures  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

905 
 

about what took place after that. 
 
In 1982, the first year of operation under the PC government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the profits of the corporation fell, in the 
first year, from 141 million to less than 1 million. Just like that, 
overnight. Even though the company made less — now get this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — even though the profits were less than a 
million dollars, what did the government do? The government, 
nevertheless, somehow found its way clear to take $50 million 
dividend from the company to general revenues to start working 
on what we now know, but didn’t at that time, was going to be a 
mountainous, disastrous debt, engineered by that Minister of 
Finance. They still took 50 million. This, by the way, was the 
first of many questionable accounting practices by PCS since 
1982. I won’t belabour those on this debate. 
 
And then in 1983, in 1983, Mr. Speaker, under the 
Conservatives, PCS suffered its first loss ever — $18 million. 
And in spite of that loss — get this — somehow the 
government opposite took yet another $62 million in dividends 
from the company back into the general revenues of the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. By this time we knew we had 
a major debt problem on our hands, thanks to the PC’s 
mismanagement and waste, and they were now siphoning the 
money away into their general coffers to try to keep control on 
that debt. 
 
In 1984 there was a profit of $25 million, and they siphoned 
another $12 million dividend back to the ordinary purse, 
because by this time this debt had grown up like Topsy; there 
was no way to control it. It had simply become a gargantuan 
problem, but they were struggling everywhere they could. Then 
in 1985 they lost 68 million; in 1986 they lost 103 million. In 
1987 the losses piled up; they lost 21 million. 
 
Now just contrast that. Under our administration from 1976 to 
1982 — six years — six profits and dividends for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. Under the Conservatives, four 
deficits of major consequence, even though they played some 
hanky-panky in order to get the money over to the treasury. 
Four out of six years, deficits of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, just like that. At the same time, the Tories 
allowed the corporation’s long-term debt to go from $88 million 
to more than $600 million during this period, post-1982. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy, this increase in the long-term debt was the 
result of the PC government, I say, robbing the potash company 
of more than $120 million in dividends — I’ve identified that 
— taking $120 million in dividends to pay for the government’s 
now uncontrollable huge deficit which, by the way, is going to 
be the crisis for this province in the years ahead, thanks to what 
this administration has done. 
 
And what was the government’s response to this sorry mess? 
Well at first they didn’t say very much, but then eventually 
what was the government’s response? Well the response was, it 
blamed the NDP, if you can believe it. We’re not even in office, 
and seven years later they blame the NDP. It sounds ludicrous, 
Mr. Deputy, but that in fact was their strategy and, by the way, 
it still is their strategy. 
 

If Rafferty gets shut down, blame the NDP, not the Canadian 
Wildlife Federation. If somebody takes a moral position on 
hunger, blame the United Church, not the NDP. And the 
member from Regina, Urban Affairs minister says, right on. If 
there’s a statement of concern on social policy and ethic, blame 
the Catholic bishops and say they’re the mouthpieces of the 
NDP. Blame everybody except those who are at fault, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Those are the people on the front benches — blame them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the . . . 
and the journalists take this approach from time to time as well. 
And I wish they would take a look at the financial statements. 
With the greatest of respect to them and to the opposition, the 
government, one of the explanations about this 1982 to 1986 
period is, well, you know, the NDP was way too optimistic in 
1982 before it left office, about the potash demands. The potash 
market in 1970s was too big so the NDP decided to go with the 
major expansion of a mine at Lanigan. That’s what they say. 
This myth is a myth, and it ignores the facts which I’m going to 
describe in a moment. 
 
Fact number one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the final approval 
for Lanigan expansion did not come from the NDP, but it came 
from the government opposite, and it came from the member 
from Yorkton when he was the chairman of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, who speaks glowingly in the 
context of the annual report. I have a copy of the annual report 
there. He says this, referring to the expansion: 
 

This clearly illustrates our commitment (this is what the 
minister wrote) clearly illustrates our commitment to and 
our belief in the future of PCS as a viable, vibrant 
commercial entity. 
 

And I’ll go one step further. I will say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the government had memoranda at the board of directors’ 
level — I’d even say so high as the cabinet level — in 1982, on 
Lanigan, which clearly gave them the viable option of shutting 
down Lanigan if they wanted. I make that statement, and I 
challenge the minister to produce the documentation in that 
regard if it’s wrong. They had that option open to them, but 
they looked at it and they made the decision to proceed in 1982, 
because that was, at one point, their situation where they 
weren’t quite sure what to do exactly with this situation of the 
potash corporation in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government can’t have it both 
ways. You can’t say the Lanigan expansion decision was bad 
and then take credit for it in the annual report as a wise decision 
at the same time. Which way is it? It can’t be both. Now that’s 
fact number one. 
 
The second fact is that the government ignores, when it attacks 
the Lanigan expansion, is this, and this is very critical: between 
1982 and 1988 — get this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
especially speak to those who are watching the debate in the 
public and to the journalists —  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

906 
 

between 1982 and 1988, new potash production came on 
stream. New, Mr. Deputy, new potash production came on 
stream in Jordan, Israel and New Brunswick during the time 
that this bunch was in control of potash and managing our 
resource. 
 
I want to review in some detail that point, because it cuts to the 
heart of the government’s argument — even more important 
than the Lanigan issue. The PC government says that Lanigan 
phase 2 should never have been planned because it helped 
create a glut on the world potash market. That is their 
rationalization. Lanigan phase 2 expansion increased the 
productive capacity of the PCS Lanigan mine, Mr. Deputy, by 
about 1.9 million metric tons of KCl a year — 1.9 million tons. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy, I want you to make a special note of this: 
between 1982 and this year, 1989, the Israeli potash company, 
called the Dead Sea Works, increased its capacity — increased, 
in this so-called period of glut by over 500,000 metric tons, and 
it’s announced plans to increase capacity by another 300,000 
tonnes this year. I point out that that is 90 per cent . . . or 90 per 
cent of Israel’s production is production for export. They’re our 
competitors. They are expanding and producing potash because 
they’re meeting our customers in the world all the while that 
our people are shutting down our expansion so the Israelis can 
take over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And get this: Israel has announced plans to 
increase capacity by a further 300,000 tonnes this year — this 
year, 300,000 tonnes more. I point out again, as I say, that’s 90 
per cent of Israel’s production is for export. 
 
Now I want to give you another one. Between 1982 and this 
year, Jordan, not Israel — they’re obviously enemies — 
Jordan’s potash company, called the Arab Potash Company, it 
increased its capacity by nearly one point — get this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — from 1982, all the while that this 
government was in office, Jordan increased its capacity by 
nearly 1.3 million metric tons on top of the amount that Israel 
increased its expansion. So there is Jordan. Where’s the glut? 
They’re expanding. They’re producing the potash. Our boys are 
asleep at the switch. They’re shutting down the jobs and 
shutting down the potash operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Get this figure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
between 1982 and 1988 — get this, Mr. Deputy, I know you’re 
interested in these figures — the Potash Company of America 
. . . who knows, maybe soon to be a 5 per cent owner of the 
brand-new PCS, or more. The Potash Company of America, the 
Denison Potacan Potash Company, they opened two brand-new 
mines between this period in New Brunswick with total 
capacity of 1.6 billion metric tonnes on top of the tonnage that I 
have described. Right here, the Potash Company of America 
and Denison Potacan, they’ve increased it. Right here in the 
Canadian-North American context. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what in the world do these  

numbers tell you? Well I want to tell you for the honourable 
benefit of the member from Regina, Urban Affairs Minister, 
and the others in the back benches there, for the government 
members, that adds up to, that adds up, Mr. Minister, to more 
than 3.2 million metric tonnes of new capacity since 1982, 
compared to Lanigan’s 1.9 million metric tonnes of new 
capacity. They’re out there producing and selling while our 
government’s asleep at the switch. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government says it can’t sell Lanigan’s new 
production. We’re too optimistic, it says. But today all of those 
new or expanded mines in New Brunswick, Israel and Jordan 
are selling nearly 100 per cent of their production. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why should our young families and 
workers suffer with unemployment when those in Jordan and 
Israel and other parts of Canada expand their production? Why? 
I think the people of this House and the people of this province 
have the right to ask the question, and we’re going to put it to 
them time and time again: how is it that all of these new mines 
find new markets, but PCS under the Tories can’t find new 
markets? I think the answer’s quite clear. 
 
The fact that PCS has shut in capacity today is not a result of a 
lagging world demand for potash. No way. Do you know what 
it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s the result of lagging marketing 
and total mismanagement on the part of the PC government in 
Saskatchewan, that’s what it is! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now there’s one other point, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Members opposite will say, well on this question of 
productive capacity they’ve got another little wrinkle to come 
at. I’m sure that government members will try to argue that 
while production has increased in some parts of the world — oh 
well, they say, maybe Jordan and Israel — they say other 
productive capacity has been forced off the market because of 
the new tonnage. And they point to the United States. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that so optimistic are those 
producers of the world that that statement is not true either, Mr. 
Speaker, between 1986 and 1988, even the high-cost mines in 
New Mexico have found enough markets to justify going back 
into production and even increasing production — our main 
North American competitors. 
 
I wonder what Ross Thatcher, if he were alive today, would be 
thinking? He was down there in New Mexico, the big 
competitor as it was back in those periods, and now, thanks to 
these policies, even they are expanding their production. 
Mississippi Chemicals has recently reopened an old . . . my 
desk mate, the deputy leader says, inefficient mines, a very old 
mine near Carlsbad, and they’re selling an additional 270,000 
tonnes, metric tons of potash. That’s what they’re doing today. 
 
And the plans announced by Amax corporation to close down 
its operation in New Mexico, those are scrapped;  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

907 
 

they’ve been put on hold; they’re not going to close them down. 
In New Mexico, where potash mining is a high-cost operation, 
they, the Americans, are reopening or maintaining the mines, 
not shutting them down like we did in Cory here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
No, but here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan where we have 
the best potash supply, the most efficient mines, the most 
dedicated workers, and the most committed Saskatchewan 
people, right here in this province, this government has doomed 
them to unemployment so that Americans and Israelis can 
work, and that’s a shame. That is a shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What is the true answer? Because 
somebody failed to forecast world markets, or is the real answer 
because those people right there opposite do not know how to 
manage . . . no, I wouldn’t say do not know . . . yes, they do not 
know how to manage. But it’s more than not knowing how to 
manage, because they came to office carrying the philosophy of 
the Minister of Finance, who in 1976 wanted to kill the PCS, 
and today, for personal, political reasons, right-wing reasons, is 
about to achieve his goal. Is that the reason why we’re not 
getting our share of the market and our jobs? That’s the answer. 
 
They’re tied in to all of the large multinational corporations in 
potash — lock, stock, and barrel. They were in 1976 and they 
are in 1989. It’s going to take an NDP government to restore 
potash again back to the people of this province, I guarantee 
you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, whatever else 
it is, these facts are not reason to introduce Bill 20. I say with 
the greatest respect to the Minister of Finance, the member . . . 
actually we’ve had many debates, great debates in this 
legislature, but a person I respect although I disagree with his 
views. That’s not a reason to sell off the potash corporation. 
That’s not a reason to change the company. That’s a reason to 
change the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So I’ve touched now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
on a fourth point. I’ve talked about our vision; I’ve talked about 
how PCS was set up; I’ve talked about how we did; I’ve talked 
about how they did in 1982. 
 
And I want to move on to a fifth topic in my address, and that is 
the current dilemma that the government finds itself in in trying 
to explain what it’s trying to do here, and the deep political 
trouble that they’re in. Because people know that this is their 
Alamo. They’ve gone too far. They’ve gone too far with their 
ideology. They’ve gone too far and they know it. Everybody 
senses it and they’re telling them that. 
 
And the government therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has had a 
great deal of difficulty getting its story straight. This is 
something for the journalists to analyse — the schizophrenia of 
the position, the story. 
 

We were hinting at that at question period yesterday and the day 
before that, about what it is — and by the way, I repeat again, in 
today’s second reading speech the minister was not able to tell 
us what shares are going to be retained by PCS, what shares are 
going to be sold off, what assets are going to be retained. None 
of that. I mean, this is really, with the greatest of respect to the 
hon. minister, an incredible, incredible, shabby performance for 
second reading of a major Bill of this nature. 
 
And do you know why they can’t do that? Because they’re 
caught. They’re caught between not being able to get a straight 
story out as to why they’re doing this. The government can’t get 
its story straight. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy, the Premier took a famous trip to the Orient 
about a month ago, a month and a half ago. Everybody calls it 
the Orient express. We’re just not quite sure who got taken on 
the Orient express. The Premier offered 25 per cent of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to five corporations, five 
companies; somehow came back saying, don’t worry, we’ll still 
retain 100 per cent. No wonder the deficit situation is so critical. 
These boys can’t count over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But he came back, and actually before he came back — I noted 
this because I was on an airplane for a three- or four-day 
holiday just outside of Victoria. February 9, I got on the 
airplane and I see this story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which says: 
“Albatross must be sold; half of PCS could be foreign-owned.” 
Well it wasn’t half, it’s 45 per cent. But it’s half. Albatross. 
 
Well I alluded to this in question period the other day, but I 
want to say it in my main remarks today. Someone, I think, 
should tell the Premier to think through his descriptions a little 
more carefully in the future, because any encyclopedia would 
have told him that an albatross is — as I said yesterday, but I 
want to put this on record: 
 

. . . a large oceanic bird with unsurpassed powers of flight. 
They are most common (albatrosses are, Mr. Speaker) in 
the turbulent seas around Cape Horn where they ride out 
the roughest storms with ease (is the description in the 
encyclopedia I have). 
 

Some albatross, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some albatross that is 
likely to produce a profit of $100 million. 
 
I tell the Premier that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
built by the people of this province, will in the end prove strong 
enough to ride out even this short-lived storm by the PCs and 
overcome their mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because I think the albatross has taken 
flight. But the Premier’s message in that article was clear, 
depressingly clear. He was telling them in that article, the 
journalists, that the PCS’s long-term debt was a burden, a 
burden that should be sold off to foreign investors. That was a 
few weeks ago. By the way, that’s like selling off the home 
quarter to pay off the debt, once in a lifetime —  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

908 
 

maybe pay off the debt, maybe not. 
 
And now the government says it’s changed its story. The 
Minister of Finance now says in his second reading speech: 
why, PCS is a modern, world class potash company which is 
going to lure investment from all over the globe, the Minister of 
Finance says. Come on in, China. This is PC style privatization 
in Saskatchewan. Let’s get the ownership out of Saskatchewan 
hands, and come on down, China; come on down, India; come 
on down, Pakistan; come on down, the United States at 5 per 
cent; come down, Toronto, and come down, Montreal, it’s open 
for sale. That’s what they’re saying. 
 
They’ve changed the story. All of a sudden they’re going to get 
investment from all corners of the globe. Now they’re saying 
that foreign investors are knocking on the door — I think, Mr. 
Minister of Finance, you said “breaking down the door,” was 
the exact quotation — wanting a piece of the action. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kicking at the door. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Kicking at the door, wanting a piece of the 
action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, you know something? I’m not going to believe the 
Premier in his albatross comment because he doesn’t know 
what he’s talking about. But you know something? I am going 
to believe the comment of the Minister of Finance if they’re 
breaking down the door to get a piece of the action of PCS. But 
I’ve got to ask the question, why? If PCS is such a great 
company with such a great future, why are they breaking down 
the doors, these foreign interests, to get a piece of the action? 
And if it’s such a good company, why aren’t we keeping this 
company in the hands of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, that is a fundamental good 
question that needs to be answered, and they didn’t in second 
reading. The journalists know that and the public know that. 
That’s why they’re caught in this debate politically. The 
government is suffering political schizophrenia at its worst. 
They’re totally confused. They have no details, and now even 
their big-business friends are out after them and have pointed 
out their confusion. 
 
Now I have here in front of me the Toronto Globe and Mail, 
which is of course a great booster of the Conservatives, April 
18 edition, in a headline called “Potash and Pablum”. If you 
haven’t read it, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you to read it. 
 
Oh, the hon. Minister of Urban Affairs laughs again. No, I don’t 
think that he thinks a joke. I think that his laughter is a cover-up 
for the fact that what he knows we say is true. It’s a nervous 
concern. 
 
But this “Potash and Pablum” article, I think, is very, very 
important. I’m not going to make any references to Mr. Devine 
. . . to the Premier, in the personal sense that the editorial did. 
But the editorial talks about the schizophrenia that I’m 
discussing. It refers to privatization of PCS, and begins with 
this question, Mr. Speaker. I’m  

reading from the editorial: 
 

Is this the Waterloo of socialism or the Revenge of the 
Nerds? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s a direct quotation. This is not Roy 
Romanow speaking, this is The Globe and Mail. In fact, if I 
may so, parenthetically, in this election, which I hope is held as 
soon as possible, I could see a very nice little advertisement 
about the potash corporation privatization Act put forward by 
the PCs, and I think we’d just simply have the visual on the 
screen and ask: is this the Waterloo of socialism or the Revenge 
of the Nerds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’m going to continue, Mr. Speaker, as to 
what this editorial says. The editorial says: 
 

When Saskatchewan Premier Grant Devine announced 
plans last month to sell off three provincial Crown 
corporations, he predicted a battle royal with the 
opposition New Democrats. 
 
“This is their Alamo, this is their Waterloo, this is the end 
of the line for them,” he thundered. 
 
Now he has unveiled the Bill to privatize the Potash Corp. 
of Saskatchewan, and he shows (according to the editorial) 
a disappointing failure of nerve. 
 
Former NDP premier Allan Blakeney was wrong to 
nationalize (the editorial says) Saskatchewan’s potash 
industry more than a decade ago . . . 
 

I disagree with it, but that’s what the editorial says. Then it goes 
on to say this. 
 

. . . but at least Allan Blakeney showed the courage of his 
convictions. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The revenge of the nerds! No, but you see 
we laugh a little bit about that; we laugh a little bit about that. 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what I fear is a lot of 
the animist behind this — revenge, revenge for what we built, 
revenge that they’re not ever, ever going to allow if . . . not if, 
but when they lose this election in 1989 or 1990, they are not 
going to allow the people of the province of Saskatchewan — 
I’ll say a word about free trade and the tie-in there again — ever 
to build the hope and the future of a million people with jobs 
and opportunities. 
 
We can joke about this being the revenge of the nerds, but I’ll 
tell you one thing it is not. If it’s not the revenge of the nerds it 
is the revenge of the multinational corporations who in 1989 
have been restored to where they were in 1973 and 1960s, all 
the way back to the future, thanks to those people over there 
who have no faith in our province and in our people. 
 
  



 
April 19, 1989 

909 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, the editorial says, referring to the 
Premier, he says, well . . . “at least he (Mr. Blakeney) had the 
courage of his convictions . . .” But not so the current Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That is the position of the big business friends of The Globe and 
Mail. 
 
The Premier gets up and he says, well, you know, it’s because 
they’re mad we want to keep Saskatchewan having some say 
about it. 
 
No, it’s the worst of all worlds, this Bill. I suppose what could 
be worse is just absolute, outright sale, which is what will 
happen in any event. But this is neither fish nor fowl, this Bill. 
That’s why everybody is opposed to it. Those who oppose 
privatization are going to be mounting a big battle on this 
because this is the way they’re going to handle the power 
corporation, Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the way they’re going to do away with power. They’ll 
handle it the same incompetent way where only their big 
business friends benefit. This is the way they’re going to . . . 
they’ve done it with WESTBRIDGE. Their private friends have 
taken that over. That’s the way they’ve done it with 
Weyerhaeuser — thirteen and a half per cent profit without 
having to pay back a penny on the purchase price. This is not 
the revenge of the nerds, this is the destruction of 
Saskatchewan, that’s what this is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This government is done politically. It’s 
dead politically, and this Bill shows it. It doesn’t have the 
courage of its convictions. It can’t manage. It’s wasteful. It’s 
misdirected. It is out to hurt Saskatchewan people. 
 
This editorial clearly, more than any, says this government is 
done. It’s going to be defeated in the biggest rout ever 
experienced in Saskatchewan history. I guarantee you that, Mr. 
Speaker, I guarantee you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And you know, this schizophrenia, this 
schizophrenia doesn’t stop there because it also comes down to 
the question of the 1988 annual report. I’m glad that the 
minister in charge of piloting this Bill is sitting in the legislature 
to listen to my remarks. 
 
And may I say parenthetically here again — but I mean this in 
the sense of colleagues — I think that that is a very good thing 
that the minister is doing. I listened to most of his remarks — I 
was called away momentarily for a few minutes for other 
reasons — but I think that it’s a good thing he’s listening. I 
think what’s happened in this legislature is too many of the 
speeches which are just simply watched on television or 
otherwise, and the Minister of Finance displays here a certain 
principle and approach that I like. I don’t like what he’s doing; I 
want to make that clear. 
 

But I say that because while the minister is here I want to make 
this point to him, and I want to make it to you too, sir, not as a 
warning, because I respect your office, but I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, I am not going to conclude my remarks on the 
consideration of Bill 20 unless and until I get the 1988 Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan annual report tabled by the time I 
am next on my feet. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that a threat? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, it is a threat and a promise, because I 
am not going to be handicapped in the debate of what is one of 
the most important economic and political debates of this 
legislature, of not having access to that 1988 annual report. I 
want to know what it says even if it’s detrimental to our debate. 
I want to know what it is. That’s only fair, I say, Mr. Minister. 
We’re entitled to it; it’s democracy. 
 
I’m going to be adjourning the debate. I’m going to be 
adjourning debate because I’ve got much more to say on the 
Bill itself and the future in detail about what we would do. But 
I’m going to be asking the minister — and I’m glad that he’s 
here — to make sure that that 1988 potash annual report Bill is 
tabled and we have enough time to analyse it and to consider it. 
Because I tell you one thing that I will not, and my opposition 
side will not agree to, we will not agree to a Bill and a debate 
being foisted on us, all the while the government covering up or 
hiding what might be a report damaging to their case. That’s not 
democracy, that’s not fair, and we’re not going to stand for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because, Mr. Speaker, if — I say if — if 
that annual report says that there is a profit in 1988 of $108 
million or thereabouts, notwithstanding the mismanagement of 
the corporation by all of their IMC and Texas pals that now run 
it, from Mr. Childers down or Mr. Childers up, if there’s a 
profit of $108 million, I’m going to want to ask the question: 
why are we selling a company that is making a profit of a 
hundred million dollars a year? Where are you going to find 
that kind of money in future to build hospitals, schools, and 
highways if you give it away to the private corporations and 
individuals? 
 
I want to know that. And therefore I say, not in . . . It sounds 
aggressive, but I say this in the best of spirit to the minister, 
who I think in his parliamentary spirit will try to make the 
annual report available to us. I simply say to this House, when I 
adjourn the debate, before I speak next, I want to analyse that 
1988 annual report, because that question is going to have to be 
answered. It’s only fair. They’re not going to ram this Bill 
through, and they’re not going to muzzle me or anybody on our 
side by doing so or by trying to do so. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me close with a few more remarks. I’ve 
touched on five or six major headings. Now I want to close for 
today, before I adjourn. In light of the facts, many 
Saskatchewan people are asking the simple question, Mr. 
Minister. We can take away all the arguments and the rhetoric. 
The question that they’re asking is: why are you so adamant 
about selling off this public potash company  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

910 
 

and resource? Why are the PCs doing it? 
 
I think you’re going to have to answer that. I think the answer is 
all too clear in my books. You’re doing it because you owe a 
political debt to large, private, multinational potash producers 
who support your cause. And I think you’re also doing it, sir, 
because you ideologically believe what you’re doing. That part 
of it I disagree violently with, but at least I can understand. But 
I don’t think that’s 1990 Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say something else, Mr. Minister, and to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to members of the House. We’ll be exploring 
deeply whether or not this sale is a conspiracy. In fact, I will say 
this sale is a conspiracy between the government and the friends 
of the private multinational industry corporation. How else can 
one explain the government’s decision, even before it officially 
took office in 1982, to kill PCS International, which was our 
world arm, our world outreach? This new offshore sales arm of 
PCS was about to compete head to head. That’s language they 
like to use — first-class and world class, head to head with the 
private multinational corporations and overseas markets. But 
they killed it and forced it to go back into Canpotex, 
guaranteeing lower overseas sales for the public potash 
company, putting ourselves at the mercy of Canpotex, yes. 
 
And by the way, somebody laughed about Canpotex, and the 
big argument is made about head offices. You know Canpotex 
has had a head office in Saskatchewan since about 1971 or ’2, 
and it amounted to a post office number. It wasn’t until we took 
office later on that steps were taken to make it a meaningful 
office, and now we do have a meaningful office. 
 
But they killed PCS International. The private producers 
benefitted; the public company lost. If there isn’t a conspiracy 
between the PC government and the private potash companies, 
tell us why PCS would be reducing its production levels when 
everybody else increases. Tell us why we’re firing our workers 
and closing down our mines while they’re employing workers 
and opening up their mines. And tell us, Mr. Speaker, why it 
was that last year they introduced the potash resources board 
legislation, which to this day still remains unproclaimed. Why? 
 
The government closes PCS Cory mine, throwing people in this 
province out of work, throwing hundreds of families out of 
work, claiming a glut on the world market. But at the same 
time, Potash Company of America invests millions to convert 
Patience Lake, an old mine, from conventional to solution 
mining so it can reopen. Why, Mr. Speaker? Why can they do it 
and we can’t? 
 
My sources in the industry tell us that in 1988 the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan was operating at 67 per cent of 
capacity, and the private potash producers were operating at 88 
per cent of capacity. Why? Why is that the case? Private 
benefits; public loses. 
 
And I note for the news media and the members of the general 
public who is running . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sounds like Rafferty. 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, the member says it sounds like 
Rafferty. You’re doggone right, it does sound like Rafferty. It’s 
the same incompetence here that you had in Rafferty if you’d 
done your job. It’s the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I say there’s a conspiracy because all of the 
indicators show that PCS is going down in market share; PCS is 
not getting jobs; PCS was not expanding; in fact were selling 
off. All the privates are going up. I have to ask the question, 
why? I suggest that there’s a conspiracy. 
 
The president of our public potash company is Mr. Childers 
from IMC. The president of the sales sector in the United States 
— IMC, Mr. Doyle, and on it goes. These people, I do not 
allege that they do anything improper, but I say their 
motivations lie with interests which are not Canadian or 
Saskatchewan interests. That’s what I say, and I say that I want 
that question answered when the minister responds. 
 
Perhaps conspiracy is too strong a word. Perhaps again it is not 
too strong a word. But I want to leave the media with this 
question. It’s my information, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has attempted to sell the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan reserves at Esterhazy to IMC since 1982. And, 
Mr. Minister, in fact it is my information that it is involved in 
such negotiations right now. 
 
I call on the Minister of Finance, at the appropriate time, to 
explain to the people if this is the case, and if it’s the case, why 
that’s taking place. And I would call him to lay on the table at 
the appropriate time, when he re-enters the debate, the answers 
to these questions and these statements that I make. And I 
challenge the minister to explain how that sale fits into the 
long-term plans for Saskatchewan’s potash company. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, during this debate, I want to put on the 
record a thorough review of Bill 20 — I’ve not done that yet — 
and its implications. And I also want to discuss, in detail, our 
party’s future vision because there’s a better way to do this. 
There’s a new way of doing it. There’s a new day coming. I 
want to talk about that at the next . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I say to the members opposite that, 
unfortunately for them, we’ve only just begun, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve only just begun. Because of the lateness of the hour and 
because of my hoarse throat and cold, I believe this would be a 
logical place in my remarks to beg leave to adjourn the debate 
for this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1615) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

911 
 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 1 — An 
Act to establish the Public Participation Program be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
for me to join once again in this debate on Bill 1. It’s seems that 
— and I’d like to set the record straight — that when I was 
speaking on Monday last, the NDP, for whatever reason, called 
quorum and closed this House. And we should really make that 
clearly understood, Mr. Speaker, that it was the members 
opposite that decided they didn’t want any more work for the 
day, for whatever reason. 
 
And it was unfortunate because for the week prior we had heard 
them, one by one, asking the members of the government to 
become involved in this debate, and as we did become 
involved, they chose to close the House. It was unfortunate for 
the debate, unfortunate for the democratic process, certainly 
unfortunate for the people of this province and my constituents 
of Regina South who were amazed at their action. 
 
Although they wanted us to become involved in this debate and 
they wanted us to get to Bill 20, according to the media at least, 
Bill 1 all of a sudden became unimportant. And it became 
unimportant to the NDP after a whole lot of them had stood up 
and talked about it. So they seem to be, again, all over the place. 
 
They also seem, Mr. Speaker, to be all over the place again in 
crying for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I just ask the hon. 
member to please restrain himself. The Minister of Urban 
Affairs is speaking, and certainly loud, loud hollering in the 
House is not acceptable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
every time I get involved in a debate in this House I have to 
challenge the whole bench of the members opposite, but, you 
know, my voice is powerful enough; I think that I can handle 
myself. But I appreciate the fact that you have brought them to 
order again. 
 
But they keep asking for legislation, Mr. Speaker, and I ask: 
what has legislation got to do with good government? The NDP 
believes in big government, in big legislation, and in 
regulations, and in the like. That’s their belief — to just choke 
and stifle everything in our economy. So the howl goes out, 
where is legislation? and that we’re going full speed ahead with 
privatization and public participation at the expense of farmers 
and small business, for instance, and that we should be 
introducing legislation, rather, to avoid that. 
 
And you know, what does legislation have to do with, for 
instance, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have introduced the 
business tax program for the small-business people of this 
province — $10 million in our budget? It doesn’t require 
legislation; it’s there for the small-business people. And the list 
could go on and on, but that’s not what we’re debating today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The NDP, Mr. Speaker, fails to recognize 
that public participation and privatization results in economic 
diversification and job creation. And that, I guess, is the big 
thing that they miss. And certainly our two members from the 
Prince Albert area, they miss that because they’re living in the 
midst of one of the most successful of all, Weyerhaeuser. 
 
The small-business community that is in place now to support 
Weyerhaeuser since they have come along, since they have put 
in a paper mill that this province has never had before, again 
creating jobs, sending product all over the world from 
Saskatchewan — that’s exactly what we’re talking about. 
 
And when the sale of the PCS goes through, that’s exactly what 
we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to further 
diversify our economy. We have been saying for a long, long 
time, no longer can we be a resource based, single province, 
depending on agriculture and our resources. We must diversify. 
And by doing this, Mr. Speaker, and by privatizing the potash 
corporation, that’s exactly what we will be able to do. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition said that the public must ask the 
question, how privatization has helped them individually. He 
referred to that in his remarks this afternoon again. I couldn’t 
agree with him more; not a bit more. Ask the small-business 
community in this province what privatization has done for 
them. Ask them. They don’t talk to the members opposite. 
 
The member from Prince Albert stands there. Have you joined 
your chamber of commerce yet? I doubt it. And if you have, it’s 
only because you were embarrassed into joining them. And 
that’s the only reason. But the other members opposite, the 
other lawyers that all belong, that could belong to chambers of 
commerce, do they indeed belong, Mr. Speaker? No, they don’t. 
 
Now they stand here and they claim to represent the 
small-business community, only one of the groups of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, that has enjoyed the benefits of 
privatization and will continue to enjoy those benefits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — They say that they know that small 
business is the engine that drives our economy and creates all 
the jobs, and yet if the small-business community recognizes 
and appreciates the privatization and the diversification that’s 
going around in our province, think about the numbers of jobs 
that go on with that, Mr. Speaker. But they can’t think that far. 
 
I agree again with the Leader of the Opposition — ask the 
people how privatization has affected them. Ask the people that 
have bought SaskTel participation bonds, the people that get the 
discounts now on their telephone bills. Ask them how 
privatization has affected them. They’ll tell you. The list goes 
on and on. 
 
And you then talk, Mr. Speaker, about politics. You know, the 
NDP are famous for tabling documents. Table it in the  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

912 
 

legislature, table it in the legislature. Or they’ll ask the ministers 
to resign — every day, resign, resign, resign. Or they’ll call for 
an election — call an election, call an election. 
 
Well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And they’re calling for it 
right now. Well I’ll tell you, I’ll get into that in a moment. 
 
But you know, now there’s a new group formed now. And I ask 
you, and I ask them, who formed this group? The citizens 
against privatization formed to oppose government 
privatization, right here in my home city of Regina. I doubt that 
there’s anybody from Regina South in that group. But their only 
hope, their only hope, Mr. Speaker, is to force a provincial 
election. That’s what they say. Well who sponsors that group, 
that’s what I ask. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us who’s behind that group. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That’s right. Who indeed is behind that 
group? Who indeed calls for all of these elections? It’s the 
NDP; it’s the NDP. And we’ve heard them calling for an 
election. One by one they all get up and they all speak and they 
call for an election. And we heard the Leader of the Opposition 
again calling for an election, the member from Riversdale. 
 
And he mentioned in his remarks this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
about the Rafferty project. Well, you know, he was sitting there 
earlier during the federal campaign last fall when the issue of 
the day was free trade and that was the argument. And he said, 
we can’t go with free trade; we’ve got to vote against free trade 
because we’re going to give away our water. We’re going to 
give away our water, that’s what your leader was saying. What 
happens today on Rafferty? Nope, don’t let Rafferty go through 
because we want to give the water away, we don’t want to keep 
it here. You talk about not wanting it both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — What do you want really? Do you want an 
election? I’ll tell you what, don’t be in a hurry. He lost once in 
1982, and he doesn’t want to suffer that embarrassment again. 
And I’ll tell you he’s getting perilously close to it at this point. 
Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t be in a hurry. 
 
But moving along with what I was saying before I was 
interrupted on Monday by the call of the House Leader 
opposite, public participation is more than the contracting out of 
public services to the private sector, the volunteer 
organizations, or to other third parties, although these are major 
measures in taking as much economic activity as possible out of 
the hands of big government and placing it in the hands of the 
work places of our citizens. 
 
Public participation is more than the privatization or the sale of 
government owned assets, although these are important 
developments in creating more efficient and more viable 
enterprises, thereby contributing greater economic development 
and a stronger economy. Public participation is all of these and 
more. It’s a new way of doing things in this province. It’s a new 
era and a new way  

of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a place where big 
government will have less control of our lives, exactly the 
opposite of the legislation that they continue to call for. For 
example, the privatizing of potash will be good for economic 
diversification and job creation in our province. 
 
And you know, they miss the boat — opposite. The Leader of 
the Opposition really misses the boat. You talk about living in 
the past. You talk about not understanding how that will be 
good for economic diversification and job creation. 
 
We just witnessed the Leader of the Opposition in a real 
grandstanding performance. He is so politically afraid of what’s 
going to happen to him tomorrow that, you know, he resorts to 
meaningless babble. He went back into the archives of Hansard 
and probably pulled out a lot of his old speeches. He has 
nothing new to say. 
 
He got a standing ovation from his caucus, the third one this 
season, and that’s pretty good because he’s the one that publicly 
stated that there was disunity. So they must have got their stuff 
together in the last little while and given him a cheer. And that’s 
good, I guess. 
 
But when you listen to his story on privatization and public 
participation in the potash, it’s kind of like opening last year’s 
mail. There’s really not a heck of a lot in it, and there’s nothing 
new. 
 
What changed between 1975 and now? You know, the 
efficiency, the world production at our fingertips, the control of 
the market, the 4,000-year supply of potash. What changed? 
Well I’ll tell you what changed. It was the private sector that 
was involved in it before, trying to get a grip on all of this, 
trying to make it work. Something that the NDP is dead set 
against. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition stands up and said, we did it; we 
did it. They did it all right. What did they do? They nationalized 
the potash industry, and what happened? What’s changed? 
What caused a total disaster in the potash industry since that 
time? 
 
You talk about being 15 years behind the time and missing what 
public participation does, Mr. Speaker — the diversification to 
the economy and the jobs. You know, the Leader of the 
Opposition says that he’s a firm believer of private sector. 
Persiflage, I say. We tried public sector potash. It failed, and it 
failed miserably. 
 
He talked about walking backwards into the future. He is the 
author of the economic plan for the 1970s. The problem is the 
book was written in 1989. Where has he been for the last 15 
years? I don’t know. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, if his hidden dream of 
being the national leader for the NDP ever comes true, he’s 
probably going to argue against jet engine aircraft as well. 
That’s how far back he is. He can’t lift himself into the modern 
era. It’s really, really an unfortunate situation. 
  



 
April 19, 1989 

913 
 

But where do the NDP members opposite stand in the midst of 
successful public participation initiatives? Do they recognize 
the diversification and the jobs it’ll create? Not a bit. They’re 
out of step as usual. They put their heads in the sand and they 
stubbornly refuse to accept any progress, anything. They’re still 
trying to exist with their policies for the first half of the 20th 
century — the first half. And here we are moving along almost 
into a new century, never mind the first half of the last one. And 
the rest of the world is getting ready for it, but they’re not. 
 
Even the NDP leaders are starting to admit that they’re not in 
step with the rest of the world, Mr. Speaker. Gerry Caplan, one 
of the socialist back-room strategists, one of their top people, 
admitted the other day that their policies were not viable in this 
new economic world. One of their strategists said that — 
there’s something going on in the new economic world that we 
in the NDP don’t know about. That was his confession. 
 
That may be startling for a die-hard NDP socialist to confess. 
But as a business man for many, many years in the city of 
Regina, I could have told him that 25 years ago, Mr. Speaker, it 
was nothing new. 
 
Another NDP stalwart for many years, Stephen Lewis, who was 
reported, although recently he again denied that he was going to 
be the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. We’re having difficulty hearing 
the minister. I’d ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m trying hard to 
be heard but my vocal cords are getting a little weak. It’s 
difficult with all the noise that the members opposite are 
making. But I’ll keep struggling through it. They just don’t like 
to hear what I have to say, and I thank you for bringing them 
under control. 
 
But Mr. Lewis, who reportedly was one of the stalwarts for the 
vacant national leadership said he isn’t, the other night, but 
none the less, he also made quite a confession. And he said the 
other day that the NDP were great at distributing wealth but 
very poor at productivity. How very true. How very true. And 
he said that. 
 
Many of us in this province have long, bitter memories at the 
efforts to try and distribute wealth and their weak experiences 
in production. But they were great at distributing that wealth. 
They taxed companies and industries to their death, companies 
and industries who had been providing jobs for the people of 
this province. Then if they couldn’t finish them off by heavy 
taxation or their bureaucratic regulations, there was always the 
threat of simply taking them over, nationalizing them. And that 
has been a key platform plank in the NDP philosophy. 
 
(1630) 
 
Even recently, Mr. Speaker, where we are trying desperately to 
go along the way of public participation and privatization, the 
NDP come along and say that they’re going to nationalize the 
banks — public statements that were heard. I don’t know how 
they intend on doing all this, or what they intend  

on doing, or what the reasoning behind that would be. 
 
But can you even begin to think of anything worse than that, to 
have the government — the government owning the banks. And 
how many banks would there be then? One. And how would 
that work? We would have a total socialist state. It would be 
total communism. I don’t suppose you would even need money 
except for the people that run it. Everybody else, nothing would 
matter, nothing would count. I really don’t know. They just 
simply make these big grandiose statements, we’re going to 
nationalize the banks. What does it mean? They probably can’t 
even explain it. 
 
The only way in which the NDP could hope to develop any 
productivity was really to take over an existing industry or 
business already developed by a private entrepreneur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I lived with that my entire business career in this 
city, day after day after day. And now the NDP come along and 
try to convince us that they are the saviours of the private 
sector, that they understand entrepreneurship, that they really 
understand small business and all the rest of it. And here they 
sit in the House and they ask for legislation so that the 
small-business community can get something from the 
government, that we can get on with delivering the programs. 
 
That’s exactly what their problem was — legislation, 
regulation, legislation, regulation, big government, more taxes. 
Who was paying for all that? 
 
And now they come along and they say, oh we’ve changed. 
They haven’t changed. They don’t intend on changing, and 
they’re not going to fool the business community to think that 
they are. They’ve never understood business and they never 
will. 
 
The only thing that they know about creating jobs is to add 
people to the government payroll, either directly within 
government departments, or within that vast family of Crown 
corporations that they had created and which they had added to 
the tremendous burden of Saskatchewan taxpayers. And that 
basically laid the foundation for the debt that we are now 
carrying. A major flip-flop. 
 
You know, despite the current amount of noise being made 
these days by the NDP MLAs in opposition to public 
participation, did you know that back in January of 1982, Mr. 
Speaker, four months before they were turned out of office — 
four months before they were turned out of office — the former 
NDP government secretly decided to launch a massive 
privatization program of their own family of Crowns at that 
time? 
 
And this decision that was made in January of 1982 — and this 
is leading up to something, so I hope that they pay attention — 
would have allowed individuals and private corporations to buy 
up to 50 per cent of Crown companies. But even though they 
favoured the philosophy of public participation while they were 
in office, the NDP MLAs are now travelling up and down the 
province loudly voicing their opposition to our  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

914 
 

government’s efforts. 
 
You know, they’re calling for an election; they call for an 
election. I wouldn’t be in a hurry. And I’ll explain one reason 
that the member . . . for instance, the member from Regina 
North East, he’ll be in trouble in the next call for an election, 
Mr. Speaker. You can’t do what he is doing, the member of 
Regina North East, where he keeps saying things. And you 
know, I can quote out of Hansard and different quotes 
attributable to the member of Regina North East that what we 
are considering here today is a right-wing privatization Bill. 
That’s one of the statements he made, and that wasn’t even this 
year; that was last year. The purpose of the Bill is simply one 
that is to sell out Saskatchewan; that’s the purpose of this Bill, 
privatization; and it won’t work because we won’t let it work. I 
mean, that’s what he’s saying. 
 
And yet he was one of the members of Executive Council at the 
time that had agreed in 1982 that maybe privatization wouldn’t 
be too bad, and that they were contemplating doing something 
along that line in 1982 prior to the election. Now he comes 
along and he’s speaking out against it. And he stands back now 
and he calls for an election. The people are going to ask, well 
what do you stand for really, Mr. Member from Regina North 
East? What is your stance really if it’s an election? Here in 1988 
you’re saying that privatization and public participation is no 
good; and here in 1982 when you were a member of Executive 
Council, you were planning on doing the same thing. 
 
I mean, you can’t be on both sides of the fence. So, you know, I 
think that for the members opposite to keep harping and saying, 
call an election, call an election, that’s going to lead up to their 
own demise. And I wouldn’t be in such a hurry if I were them 
unless if they don’t like it in here, but I’m sure that the people 
would welcome the opportunity to get rid of them now. 
 
But when you get back to why they’re against it, for some 
strange reason it’s a motive on their political calendar, and it’s 
only one more small reason why their leader, the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, is quickly losing any credibility that he 
was desperately trying to regain or gain from the people of this 
province. It’s obvious that he has no control on his caucus. He 
has admitted that publicly that he’s suffering unity in his 
caucus. So he’s got a tremendous problem. 
 
Another reason why . . . why are they against public 
participation? Well, I believe that they’re against everything. 
They have no policies, they have no programs. They don’t have 
anything to offer to the people of Saskatchewan. So all they can 
do is oppose any program that the government puts forward, 
including Rafferty. Their leader never takes a positive stand on 
any item, and how can he with his caucus all over the place. I 
guess at any given time, if he asked the caucus opinion over 
there he’d probably end up with 25 different opinions. So it’s 
no wonder that he suffers that kind of a thing. 
 
They just have no policy; they have no plans; they have no 
agenda. They simply each have their own political agenda on 
whatever suits their needs. And day after day,  

day after day, Mr. Speaker, that’s brought forward as we listen 
to them, either publicly through the media where they’re all 
over the lot, or as they speak wherever they might be speaking, 
or in this Assembly. They’re just all over the place. 
 
Question period, for instance — they go from one to the other. 
Is there any plan, is there any meaning, is there any rhyme or 
reason to it? Is it really the burning issues of the day, the 
questions that they bring up? And then desperately looking at 
the clock most of the time to see if they’re even going to get 
through question period — make a big foofraw to hopefully 
waste the time to get through question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they found out how they rate with the voters in this 
province. They found that out in the worst way in the past 
winter’s by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and what some 
of their policies, and how they deal with the public, are. A 
constituency that they used to win under former leaders, but 
they couldn’t win under their current leader. No, sir. 
 
No wonder there’s talk in that caucus already encouraging their 
leader today to run as the federal leader and sending him to 
Ottawa to rescue their leaderless party there, and then maybe 
they can do whatever they choose to do here. I really don’t 
know. But the Leader of the Opposition requires some 
discipline in that caucus, and it’s quite obvious to those of us 
sitting here that he just doesn’t have it. 
 
But on the subject of privatization and public participation, Mr. 
Speaker, when we listen to the members opposite, and as they 
went through the debate on this in the last week, their policy 
and their speeches and the like, there was no focus. They were 
just each one on their own agenda, failing to see the 
diversification; failing to see how the economy of 
Saskatchewan could flourish; how the business community 
would help diversify; how this would create jobs and 
employment for our people. 
 
And then, you know, recently as we were talking in this same 
debate and we got into the section of diversifying through 
public participation, our agricultural economy. And they 
continue their irresponsible behaviour. You know, they laughed 
when we worked to tackle the serious problem of dangerous 
dogs in this province. They laughed at that. They thought it was 
humorous. 
 
You know, it resulted in the government introducing legislation 
that had been applauded by communities large and small across 
our province, but we had the amazing spectacle of the 
opposition insulting the whole agricultural community of our 
province, Mr. Speaker, insulting them, the political party, by 
poking fun about how our agricultural community has to 
depend on rain. 
 
Now the NDP members thought that that was pretty funny. 
Well, if they were farmers and their very life depended on rain, 
I don’t suppose that they would take that as being so humorous. 
But when you see how they handled the other things, you know, 
it’s all in bad taste. I never thought that I would see the day 
when members of this legislature would try to make fun of rain. 
But if they  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

915 
 

make fun of things like the Rafferty and saving the water, then 
the rain as well . . . But they care so little about the agricultural 
industry, that that moisture is so vital to our economy so that we 
can get on with the job of what we’re trying to do, and that’s 
diversify, and diversify by means of public participation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the agricultural sector is very important to 
our plans, and so is the badly needed moisture so that we can 
grow good crops and make that part of our economy prosper, 
because as that prospers then we can continue with our public 
participation. That we must do, to continue to diversify exactly 
that, so that we’re not so desperate and need to rely so much on 
one industry like agriculture or like our resources. 
 
You know, it’s simply a fact of life. I don’t know where the 
NDP, where have they been for the last year. The worst drought 
since the Dirty Thirties hit us last year and dealt a severe blow 
to our economy, and I suppose next, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be 
making fun of that. But I don’t consider it to be very funny, and 
I’m sure that the agricultural sector doesn’t. We depend very 
much in Saskatchewan on good crops, and we have to have 
adequate moisture and good rains to produce that. 
 
At this winter’s annual convention, Mr. Speaker, of the Urban 
Municipalities Association in Saskatchewan, I had the privilege 
of discussing the merits and opportunities created by the private 
sector deliveries of activities that are currently carried out by 
governments — federal, provincial and municipal. And I talked 
there about the possibility of privatization in some areas. And I 
must say that I received quite a favourable response from the 
record attendance of more than 1,000 delegates from around all 
parts of the province. 
 
And as I discussed with the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) delegates, we as governments, 
provincial and municipal, are here to provide service to the 
public, Mr. Speaker. The public expects us to maintain, and not 
only maintain but to improve the level of service. And at the 
same time, they obviously resist paying more in taxes for those 
services, Mr. Speaker. So we as government agencies have a 
duty, have a responsibility of considering alternative ways of 
delivering services. 
 
Municipal public participation can help to achieve these ends, 
and at the same time encourage local economic development, 
because there too, Mr. Speaker, public participation will 
encourage diversification, will create employment. And it will 
create employment because we will see the private sector, small 
business, really start to boom and flourish in our local 
economies and create those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I advised the SUMA delegates, if private sector 
delivery of services works well in many circumstances 
provincially, and it does, then it should work in municipalities 
as well. 
 
And there are many examples of municipal privatization and 
public participation, Mr. Speaker. In Yorkton, for a long, long 
time now, garbage has been picked up by the private sector. No 
longer do they use their own municipal  

staff to do that, at quite a substantial saving to the taxpayer. 
 
Transit services: in Prince Albert the transit services for many, 
many years, many years, very efficient, very successful, 
operated by the private sector, Mr. Speaker, not by the 
municipality, but by the private sector. And as I mentioned, 
garbage collection in many, many communities throughout our 
province, the collection of refuse, Mr. Speaker, done by the 
private sector. 
 
Municipal rink management, municipal rink operation — many 
communities, Kamsack, for instance; the town of Kamsack is in 
that — very, very successful operations. It’s less costly for the 
municipalities to operate under that form of public participation 
and privatization, and it improves service. 
 
(1645) 
 
So it seems that if they can do that and if our government, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of public participation and privatization, can 
improve service, can decrease costs — in other words, you 
know, supply a better quality of work for less dollars — our 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, are the big winners. They’re the 
beneficiaries. 
 
I believe that my constituents in Regina South understand and 
recognize that, and that’s why they asked me to speak on Bill 1. 
They want to participate in public participation and 
privatization. They want to see and have the opportunity to do 
the things that should be done to provide better services that 
they require and demand from the government, and by the same 
token, to expect to see their tax dollars spent wisely and 
efficiently. And we’re trying to provide them with just that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But over the past few years there has been growing public 
discussions all over, on the merits and opportunities created by 
private sector delivery of activities currently carried out by 
government. 
 
And this discussion, Mr. Speaker, is not just simply here in 
Regina or at the SUMA conference or in Saskatchewan. It’s not 
even in western Canada or all the provinces — Canada, or in 
the United States, or in North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, indeed this movement is world-wide. It’s going on 
across the entire world. It’s not limited to governments of any 
continent. It’s not limited to any particular ideology. And within 
this context the provincial government has carried out a number 
of public participation initiatives that have the goals of 
encouraging economic diversification and enhancing private 
sector opportunities in a way that respects employee rights and 
maintains service levels that I mentioned earlier. 
 
And as we get into the debate on Bill 20, we will see there how 
that participation and privatization, Mr. Speaker, will enhance 
the diversification of our province. Again, where we have to 
diversify our agricultural sector, we must diversify our resource 
sector, take all of our eggs out of one basket and spread them 
around. And that’s what Bill 20 will allow us to do. And by 
diversifying Saskatchewan’s economy, it will provide many 
badly  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

916 
 

needed jobs for the people of our province. 
 
We’ve had cases in public participation where employees 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, have come forward with an idea and 
have been very excited about the challenge of serving the 
public, but serving them from the private sector for a change 
and not from the public sector. 
 
And in all cases the provincial government screens these 
potential initiatives carefully. And if delivery of a particular 
government activity by the private sector doesn’t make sense, 
then understandably, Mr. Speaker, it’s not pursued. However, if 
it is feasible, if it expands economic opportunities, if it can be 
done in a way that protects employee interests, then it is 
pursued in a careful, methodical, organized fashion. 
Throughout, there must be assurances that service levels will 
not deteriorate. In fact, we make every effort, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve services. 
 
Many of our public participation initiatives have been well 
received, both by the public and the employees involved. My 
colleague, the Minister of Public Participation, has done an 
outstanding job in implementing these initiatives and in making 
public participation a successful achievement for our province. 
And indeed he has carried the message far and wide across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He has met with I don’t know how many communities, 
countless communities now, countless number of people from 
all walks of life — farmers, retired people, young people, 
people in business, people in government, union people — from 
all walks of life have attended these countless meetings that the 
minister’s held around the province. And after they start getting 
some understanding and some knowledge about what we’re 
trying to do, they recognize that’s not a bad idea. Why wasn’t 
this explained to us this way before? 
 
Maybe, you know, in some instances, we should even go one 
step further, Mr. Speaker, when we go into public participation. 
I dare say that there might be a lot of people involved. I can 
think of some of my own relatives that have never had the 
opportunity to invest in shares or in a business or in a bond. 
They really don’t understand that once they put their money in 
. . . they’re used, as a lot of us are, saving our money in a bank 
and just leaving it sit there and getting the bank interest. That’s 
fine, pretty safe, good security, but there’s other different ways 
of doing it. 
 
Maybe we should explain to these people just how they can put 
their money to work for them, and, once the money works for 
them, how indeed it works for this province. Because by putting 
the money to work in this province instead of giving it to some 
big outfit in New York, the interest money on a loan, and by 
having it here in this province, Mr. Speaker, where our own 
people can get these dollars and invest it, then what happens of 
course is that this money goes to work here, creates jobs and 
employment here. 
 
So maybe we should go back and just start explaining the very 
basic principle to these people, explain to them how they can 
get dividends from companies when indeed the companies 
show a profit as they can expand their market. 
 

Saskoil is a typical example. We heard the big howl come up 
from the members opposite when Saskoil was first taken out 
into the private sector. And look at it now — one of the top oil 
companies in all of Canada, because they’ve been able to 
expand their horizons — certainly still have all the 
Saskatchewan holdings; certainly still represent all the 
Saskatchewan people very well; certainly has millions and 
millions and millions and millions of dollars invested by 
Saskatchewan people that are gaining and reaping the benefits 
of it. 
 
The head office is here in Saskatchewan, employing hundreds 
of people here in Saskatchewan, and yet having the opportunity 
to expand their horizons well beyond this province so that they 
can indeed grow and prosper more and create more opportunity 
and create more employment, and eventually, Mr. Speaker, 
create larger dividends for the people of our province that have 
invested in that very company. And I think that what we should 
do is perhaps go and tell that to the people. 
 
Interestingly enough, with Saskoil they always did have the 
opportunity to have Alberta holdings, even when they were the 
beloved little company here in Saskatchewan before the public 
participation occurred. So what was the hoot and holler from 
the NDP about? Because if they had Alberta holdings before 
and they could have them again now, what was the big 
difference? What made it so darn different that they wanted to 
fight about it and argue about it? 
 
One thing, Mr. Speaker, they will be against anything that this 
government does — anything and everything — regardless, and 
it doesn’t matter. And they will fight it; whether it makes sense 
or not to them doesn’t matter. And that’s why they shouldn’t be 
in a hurry to call an election, because they will not be here, Mr. 
Speaker, after that election is called. 
 
But as I was saying, it stands to reason that if private sector 
delivery works well in many circumstances provincially, then 
we can carry it to the next step, and it can work very effectively 
in our municipalities as well. 
 
And as I mentioned, there were quite a few successful ventures 
in contracting out these municipal services. One right here 
around our legislature, one right here around the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was with the Wascana Centre Authority 
where, rather than continue on with an old piece of equipment 
that we had, our old street-sweeper, we contracted out to a firm 
that manufactures street-sweepers right here in Regina. 
 
For whatever reason or other — and my colleague, the Minister 
of Finance often refers to the fact that the Regina council is of 
different political persuasion than us — they will not deal with 
Sweeprite here in Regina, their own manufacturer who deals 
around the world. And this is right on the topic of 
diversification and public participation, Mr. Speaker, because 
here we have this firm manufacturing right here in Regina that 
the city of Regina won’t deal with. And they’re dealing 
throughout North America. 
 
As the people come in from New York, from San  
  



 
April 19, 1989 

917 
 

Francisco, from wherever, they could see the plant, they see the 
product, but they couldn’t see the product in operation. So what 
did we do at the Wascana Centre Authority, Mr. Speaker? We 
decided that we would put out for tender to contract out and get 
some privatization, some public participation, and public sector 
work by putting that out to tender. 
 
Sweeprite came along and tendered on that. They do it for us 
cheaper than we were able to do it in-house, and they are now 
showing off their machine. I think that they’ve done a pretty 
good job around this legislature, Mr. Speaker. I think that our 
roads and sidewalks are very clean as a result of this piece of 
equipment. 
 
Now when these customers of theirs come in from around 
North America, they can see their machine in operation. Only 
one of the little benefits that I’m referring to, of public 
participation and privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But about municipal activities, many of these opportunities 
have been pursued in the United States of America, and I’ve 
mentioned many examples right here in our province and 
indeed across country, and the point is simple. We as 
governments — provincial, municipal — we are here to provide 
services to the public. Health care and education are obviously 
major programs provincially, and in the municipal areas there 
are such programs as street maintenance, or recreation, and 
water and sewer services. 
 
And the public expects us to maintain and improve those 
services for a reasonable price. So we as government agencies 
have a duty and a responsibility of considering alternative ways 
of delivering these services. And it seems that the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, will just simply not look at alternative 
ways of supplying those services. They just simply want bigger 
government; they want more government. And that ends the 
conversation as far as they’re concerned. 
 
So as I mentioned earlier, I suggested to SUMA that they 
examine the many successful ventures in contracting out 
various municipal services right here in our province, among 
their own membership. And then, as the speech to the throne 
outlined, public participation will continue to chart a new 
course for economic growth for diversification and job creation 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And during the coming year, our government will be giving 
further encouragement to public participation initiatives through 
employee ownership, and there will be new savings 
opportunities in Crown corporation bonds and the like. 
 
And indeed public participation opportunities such as these are 
leading to the creation of our own capital market right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which mobilizes local savings, as I 
mentioned earlier, rather than borrowing only from the 
international financial market at high interest rates. 
 
Again I commend my colleague, the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, for the tremendous leadership that he’s giving 
to the public participation movement in our province. And 
under his leadership our province has  

moved to the forefront of public participation initiatives across 
Canada. And this is brought about day in and day out, day after 
day after day. The NDP say that the only thing on our agenda, 
Mr. Speaker, is privatization and public participation — and 
indeed it isn’t the only thing on our agenda, but if they choose 
to say that, so be it. 
 
Saskatchewan is joining many countries now, not only 
provinces, but countries around the world that are active in 
public participation programs. And as it has been mentioned 
before, and well worth re-reading into the record, countries as 
diverse as China, a communist nation; Australia, with a socialist 
government; France; Sweden; New Zealand; the United 
Kingdom, are all busy reducing government involvement in 
their economies. 
 
These countries, Mr. Speaker, are adopting public participation 
measures because it creates new investments, it creates jobs, 
and it gives their economies a shot in the arm for sure. And 
that’s why both free enterprise and socialist governments 
around the world support it. 
 
We find that even now the Soviet Union is getting involved in 
public participation and recently they announced a plan to 
present public share offerings within the state farms in order to 
raise capital and give greater control to the local people. 
Imagine that. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. Soviet Russia is 
planning on doing that; Soviet Union on privatizing and selling 
their state farms off to the people that work them. 
 
And I think that that’s going to be to their betterment as well. 
They too realize that, you know, government ownership of 
companies and industries hasn’t really worked anywhere in the 
world. And that’s why it’s going to be interesting to get into this 
debate of Bill 20 because we now have history to delve into. 
 
And we will establish, Mr. Speaker, for the people of this 
province, indeed, how government ownership of companies and 
industries just doesn’t work. And as soon as you can get out of 
a lot of those areas — not all of them perhaps, but a lot of them 
— then we should move along into that area and let the private 
sector do what they know what to do best, and that’s to drive 
our economy and to create the jobs. And that proof will be in 
the pudding. 
 
But one of the objectives of the public participation movement 
is to take as much control over the lives of people out of the 
hands of government, Mr. Speaker, and put it back into the 
hands of the people, just as the Soviet Union is doing on their 
farms, and letting the people run their own lives and get on with 
the job of living. And that’s probably . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, this House now stands 
adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


