





























































Hansard: August 22, 1989


August 22, 1989 
 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the Assembly to proceed to government 
orders today. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 20 
 

Mr. Chairman: - Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me today the deputy minister, Gerry Meier, 
seated to my left. He’s just come out of the hospital where he’s had oral surgery and therefore he looks a 
bit like Gainer the Gopher today. But he has dragged himself down here from the surgery and will be 
here to assist me. 
 
On my left, as the TV camera view this, is Judy Moore, the assistant deputy minister in the labour 
division. And directly behind deputy minister Meier is Ron Kruzeniski, assistant deputy minister, 
Human Resources and Employment division. Beside Mr. Meier, to my left, is Pat More, a senior 
financial advisor in support services division. Natalia Carroll is behind me. She’s the executive director 
of the support services division. Also with us are Joan Greaves, director of the women’s branch, Anne 
McFarlane, employment opportunities; and Dave Argue, director of labour relations. We have other 
officials available today should they be required. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’ve sent across a list of standard questions related 
to staffing, advertising, travel, including both yourself and staff within your department, as well as 
polling. If it’s acceptable to you, I would accept a written response to those in the interest of time in the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well thank you. I just handed the list to my officials. They’re going to fill in the 
blanks for you and I’ll send it over. They’ll fill in the blanks for you and we’ll send it over. I may have a 
few comments on them, but it shouldn’t take too long. 
 
I didn’t really have an opening statement but I just wanted to maybe state a few sentences with respect to 
the past year at this particular department. For the most part, the year has not been one of major change. 



There has been gradual progress. With respect to senior citizens, there has been no change in the 
programs; they are identical from the prior year. There is one slight sign of improvement with respect to 
senior citizens in that their incomes have increased this year so that fewer of them qualified for the $500 
and $700 heritage grant program. The rules have not changed, but it’s an automatic calculation that if 
your income is over $30,000 you do not quality, and if your income is over $25,000 you qualify for half 
the amount. We’ll have the exact figures available, but seniors’ incomes have improved to the extent that 
fewer have qualified and more seniors are over that income level. 
 
With respect to women’s issues. The women’s branch has been capably managed by Joan Greaves, and 
there have been some modest improvements. For example, as we speak today, Mr. Chairman, 
Saskatchewan has the second lowest unemployment rate for women in all of Canada, and that is second 
only to the province of Ontario. So we are making progress with respect to women’s employment and 
are working on the other issues. So I wanted to make a few of those opening statements. 
 
Also in the area of labour, it has been a relatively quiet year, not as quiet as one would like with respect 
to labour relations, but it’s been a relatively quiet year. The unemployment rate has remained static or 
decreased slightly. The contracts that have been negotiated have been done so with less confrontation 
than in prior years, so we’re satisfied that while things could be better, there has been modest 
improvement in all areas in this department. 
 
I’m very satisfied with the management of the staff in this particular department and I believe that the 
public has been well served by the officials here today and all of the employees of the department 
because it’s been an uneventful year. And in politics and government, uneventful means that 
everybody’s doing their job. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, I trust from your response that I can anticipate responses to the written 
questions I sent over today during the course of estimates. I’d appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, as we review the mandate of your department and how effectively you’re meeting the 
mandate, have met it in the past year, I suspect that we may find ourselves having the occasional 
difference of opinion. However, I think, in your opening remarks you may have touched on something 
where as a matter of fact we do have a common opinion. 
 
The fact of the matter is that I will agree with you that there has been little change within your 
department and its mandates this past year. And unfortunately I think, Mr. Minister, that that bodes bad 
news for the people of Saskatchewan, particularly as it relates to some of the big pictures that impact on 
the people of Saskatchewan in a broad sense. 
 
I’d like to being a more detailed review, Mr. Minister, of the function of your department and the 
meeting of its mandates in a number of areas. Let us begin with probably, in most people’s mind, the two 
most important areas of mandate of your department. Let me refer, first of all, to section 4.01 of The 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment Act, Mr. Minister. And a significant part of that reflects an 
increasing problem, many would say and I would concur, a growing crisis in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Section 4.01, Mr. Minister, of your Act to define the mandate of your department reads in part, and I 
quote: 
 
The minister may: 



 
(a) establish and operate any programs and services connected with manpower matters that he considers 
necessary to provide adequate employment opportunities for residents of Saskatchewan, including 
programs related to: 
 
(iv) migration of persons into Saskatchewan; 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if the department has been working hard at reaching this mandate in the past year, in 
fact in the past four and a half years, I would say that the migration is working in reverse. Clearly that as 
what the numbers indicate, Mr. Minister, and let me just take a quick review of what’s been happening 
by way of migration in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately Saskatchewan has not been seen as a place of activity and attractiveness to people in other 
provinces in our country. And as I take a look at the record over the past years, Mr. Minister, let me just 
review what’s been happening since 1985. And in fact I think it spells out a trend that is getting not 
better but worse. 
 
In 1985, Mr. Minister, under the PC government of which you are a part, Saskatchewan suffered a net 
loss of 4,151 people. Let me point out here, that’s not 4,151 people who left Saskatchewan; that’s 4,151 
more who left than chose to come into our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s bad enough that we were losing people in 1985, but in 1986 it got worse yet. In 1986 
we had a net loss of 7,276 people. The trend got worse and it continued. In 1987 unfortunately the trend 
continued, Mr. Minister. From Saskatchewan we had a net loss again of 9,983 - nearly 10,000 broken 
dreams, dashed hopes of the future, representing people who have moved our of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year, Mr. Minister, we suffered even a greater loss of Saskatchewan people, of our most valuable 
resource, our people of this province. Last year we had a net loss of 13,346 people. And, Mr. Minister, 
this year in 1989, already in the first seven months of 1989, we have surpassed the total loss in all of last 
year. Already in the first seven months, Mr. Minister, we have lost 14,000 - a net loss of 14,639 people. 
 
Mr. Minister, what does that mean? It means that in the past four and a half years, in the past four and a 
half years Saskatchewan has suffered a net loss of nearly 50,000. And I think if we would roll in the 
numbers for August to date we would find that we are very, very close, if not in fact, bang on - a net loss 
of 50,000 people from the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, I don’t know about you but it strikes 
me that that is not meeting a mandate of developing programs related to the migration of persons into 
Saskatchewan. The migration is in reverse, Mr. Minister. 
 
(0815) 
 
And what is the impact of that? Let’s translate that into reality. When we look at a net loss of 50,000, 
people what does it mean? It means, Mr. Minister, that Saskatchewan has suffered in the past four and a 
half years the equivalent to the entire population loss of the following community, if we rolled them all 
together: Lloydminster, Melfort, your home city of Melville, Assiniboia, Biggar, Carrot River, Carlyle, 
Davidson, Esterhazy, Gull Lake, Herbert, Indian Head, Kamsack, Kerrobert, Kindersley, Leader, 
Lumsden, and Meadow Lake. 
 



Mr. Minister, what we have gone through in the past four and a half years is the equivalent of those 
communities literally dropping off the map of the province of Saskatchewan - every man, women, and 
child in those communities having vacated Saskatchewan, having given up their citizenship in our fair 
province - Mr. Minister, 50,000 people representing dashed hopes and failed dreams. 
 
Mr. Minister, no matter how you look at it, whether you look at it over the past four and a half years, 
whether you look at it over the past couple of years, whether you look at it on a month by month basis, 
consistently there has been a constant trend in the province of Saskatchewan in that we have been losing 
our most valuable resource, our most valuable energy form in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister - our people. 
 
And so I simply ask you, I ask you to give me an explanation, an explanation as to just why this is going 
on. Clearly your department is mandated to deal with the exercise of migration, preferable in-migration 
as it’s laid out in your department, but we’ve got it going in reverse. Clearly, it is the mandate of your 
department to understand why it is happening. And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, to explain to this House 
and to the people of Saskatchewan why it is that Saskatchewan is suffering that dramatic crisis of loss of 
people from our province. 
 
And I ask you as well, Mr. Minister, to not give me the glib answer that has been part of your pattern as 
we’ve dealt with this question, this very important question in question period. I ask you not to just stand 
in your place and say it’s time to pray for rain and that’ll cure all that ails us. Clearly the drought is part 
of the problem. I admit that. I accept that. I don’t like that, but that’s reality, and I understand that. But 
also, Mr. Minister, it’s not the whole story. 
 
As you will know last year Manitoba had a drought just as bad as Saskatchewan, and while we were 
losing 13,300 people, Manitoba was losing only 6,200, even though they were the second highest 
province to suffer a loss in 1988. Last year, we had the largest population loss by more than double of 
any other province in all of Canada, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, let’s set aside the drought. You and I both accept that that’s had an impact on 
Saskatchewan, but clearly that’s not the whole explanation. You have a department which is mandated to 
deal with migration. You have officials who, I am sure, if you have been serving this province according 
to your responsibilities as required I your act who have been looking at this, and I would ask for your 
explanation, sir, as to why it is that we are losing our most valuable resource from the province of 
Saskatchewan - our men and women and children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, it’s truly sad that for many, many years people have left 
Saskatchewan to seek opportunities elsewhere. It is a situation that bothers this government a great deal 
and we try to do whatever is possible to correct that situation. The fact is that from 1971 to 1982, 51,000 
people left Saskatchewan; and then from 1982 to 1989, 52,000 people left Saskatchewan. So what we 
had was a decade of social democratic government where 50,000 people left. We’ve had a decade of a 
free market government and 50,000 people have left. And I’d be pleased to analyse why that has 
happened. 
 
The socialist decade in Saskatchewan was a decade of where we had high oil prices, high grain prices, 
high prices for potash, and just as many people left as the decade where we had a Conservative 
government where we had low prices for all three of those commodities, and drought thrown in on top of 
that. Part of the reason that is the past decade we’ve had people leave is because of the diversification 



that didn’t take place under social planning in a period of time when money could have been spent 
diversifying Saskatchewan. 
 
People will go to where they believe is a land of opportunity, and that’s what this government is trying to 
do. This government has not done that quick enough, mostly due to the opposition who have held up 
plans of this particular government to diversify the economy, to include the public in participating and 
investing in their own province. We are trying to make this a land of opportunity; due to the opposition 
that progress has been shower than we had hoped. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, people world-wide have always left socially planned states and moved to 
market economies, and Saskatchewan is not yet a full market economy province; and that is what we 
were trying to do in this session and the last session, and in the next session, Mr. Chairman. And I can 
give you many, many examples, but I mean you could follow the list. People try to leave East Germany 
for West Germany. People try to leave Vietnam for Hong Kong. And people are allowed to leave 
Saskatchewan for Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario. Not many are going to Manitoba these days 
because they weren’t diversified enough either. Manitoba is virtually a city state; it’s an entirely different 
kind of province in any event. 
 
So those examples will tell you that people leave socially planned economies whenever they are allowed 
to and move to free market economies. People look for opportunity. We have to build in Saskatchewan, 
the land of opportunity, so that people have the ability, the rights, the opportunity to succeed. And 
unfortunately with that opportunity to succeed also comes the opportunity to fail. Because you have the 
old saying: nothing ventured, nothing gained. And there always will be some failures when people are 
trying new things. But if we don’t try new things in Saskatchewan, we will continue in the same old 
ways. And when prices are high, we will live high. And when prices are low, people will leave. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Chairman, members opposite and I will have a disagreement on how to improve 
Saskatchewan in the future. I ask the people to look at the world as a whole, to look at the world-wide 
economies, see where people are trying to move to in the world. For example, California in the United 
States has been the fastest growing state. It is also the most conservative state and also it is the most 
capitalistic state in the United States, although they might have a dispute about that. 
 
So clearly people are flowing within countries and throughout the world to areas where there is a free 
market economy with opportunity, and that’s what we must build in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, if the plans are working so well, then explain to me why people, if they’re 
coming into this province, they’re fleeing into this province in reverse, Mr. Minister, because as a matter 
of fact, as I’ve outlined in what I’m quoting to you are numbers that are produced by your government, 
Mr. Minister. These are your numbers, not mine. These are your numbers that I’m using. Clearly your 
free market economy is not working. 
 
You know, you refer to the population loss in the era of the Blakeney government, through the ‘70s and 
into the ‘80s. Mr. Minister, that statement you make is blatantly incorrect. It’s non-factual; it’s 
unjustifiable. The total population loss, Mr. Minister, in the first seven years, Mr. Minister, of your 
government clearly exceeds the population impact over the 11 years of the Blakeney government. 
 



And also we have to look at that in its proper context. You and I both understand that when a new 
government comes into place for a year or two the impact of the previous government, you are either 
blessed with that or you’re saddled with that, because it takes time to put your new imprint. And you will 
recognize, Mr. Minister, when you look at the population impacts of the ‘79s, that the largest population 
losses of the Blakeney government were in its first couple of years, while we’re still saddled with the 
impact of the Thatcher Liberal government. 
 
You will also recognize, Mr. Minister, that the two best years of your government were your first two, 
while you were still blessed with the benefits of an economy that was overseen, that was directed by a 
New Democrat government in the province of Saskatchewan. Them’s the facts. Mr. Minister, them’s the 
facts. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Minister, your explanation of the problem is not correct. It is not substantiated by the 
numbers. It’s not substantiated by the history or the record. 
 
I ask you then, Mr. Minister, given that it is your responsibility to deal with in-migration to attract people 
to this province of ours, and that your explanation as to why we have lost 50,000 - a net loss of 50,000 
people in the last four and a half years alone, in this period of time in which you have been able to 
entrench your economic approach to the province - piratization . . . I mean, your philosophy has been 
operative and I will admit you started a little slowly and you benefitted from the economic impacts of the 
performance of the Blakeney government. But since you have moved to your ideologically motivated 
piratization agenda, the impact in this province has been clear. It’s been people fleeing this province, and 
there can be no more telling indicator as to the effectiveness of your approach. Clearly your assessment 
of the problem, Mr. Minister, is one upon which we will not agree. 
 
But let us deal then with the more important question, and the more important question is: what are you 
going to do to reverse it? Are we down to praying for rain as you’ve said in this House before? Is that all 
that you have to offer to reverse this trend to start bringing back the young people and brining back the 
families of Saskatchewan who have left with shattered dreams? 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the plan? And don’t give me piratization. Piratization is the cause; it’s the 
problem, not the solution. The solution is not more of the same that has driven 50,000, a net loss of 
50,000 people out of the province in the last four and a half years. More of the same is not the solution, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And I ask you to explain to this Assembly, and you have more time today than you do in question period, 
but to give the people of Saskatchewan a sensible explanation as to what it is that your government is 
going to do differently. Don’t tell me more of the same. More of the same obviously will get the same 
result. That’s not the one we want. What is your government doing, or going to do differently from what 
it has been doing in order to reverse that trend to bring home the children and to bring home the families 
from Saskatchewan, those who have been lost, those 50,000, who’ve been lost over the last four and a 
half years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite denies that an equal number of people 
left under social planning of the 1970s and gives no logical explanation why those people left other than 
he says, well the statistics aren’t correct. Does he say that StatsCanada lies? Or does he say that they 
can’t add? I don’t know what he says about StatsCanada. But StatsCanada did those calculations, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 



If the member opposite won’t accept the truth, then they can continue speaking otherwise. That is their 
business. We’re quite used to them doing that, not accepting the facts in front of them. But there is no 
explanation as to why, under social planning in the ‘80ss, we lost with high prices as many people as we 
lost with low prices and drought. I’ve explained that we have done a lot, and I have agreed that we 
haven’t done enough and we are going to do more. 
 
I mean, what does the member want us to do? Shut down the upgrader in Regina so that we could go 
back to not having those jobs? Or do you want us to tear down the paper mill in Prince Albert because 
those 300 jobs have been detrimental to Saskatchewan economy? Does he want us . . . I mean, we know 
that he wants to stop the construction of dams and power plants in south-eastern Saskatchewan. They’ve 
already cheered about that delay. 
 
Does he want us to stop the expansion of Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon with 300 new jobs? Does he want us 
to stop the construction of a fertilizer plant between Regina and Moose jaw because Cargill owns half of 
it? Yesterday we heard the members opposite say that SaskEnergy, if privatized, should not invest in a 
fertilizer plant. But we didn’t hear them say that SaskEnergy, if owned by the government, should not 
invest in a fertilizer plant. Those are the kinds of things that they would do, but didn’t do. 
 
(0830) 
 
I mean, they owned the potash company for many years. Did it ever diversify? It never diversified from 
holes in the ground, still has the holes in the ground, still has the same people working in those holes; 
people have the same jobs. Where are the new jobs? Where’s the diversification? 
 
If they believed so much in the values of socialism, why didn’t they at least diversify the Crown 
corporations? The answer, Ms. Speaker, is because they could never get it right. Back when I was a little 
boy they couldn’t build shoes, they couldn’t build state shoes, they couldn’t build state boxes, they 
couldn’t run anything appropriately from a state point of view. And when we sell these things to the 
people and the corporation’s owned by the people, to operate these things properly, they say, stop doing 
that. 
 
I say, what is the alternative to our programs? Not only will you see these megaprojects like the Husky 
Oil upgrader at Lloydminster, but you will see in the next few years, hundreds of small diversifications, 
operations with 10 and 15 employees, owned by Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
And clearly we have to do - I agree with the member opposite - we have to do more decentralization 
outside of the large cities of this province. We have to do more diversification in the rural areas which 
are becoming depopulated. I’m pleased that the members opposite will agree with those policies, and 
I’m sure that they will applaud, as much as they can find it in their hearts to applaud, when we move 
other industries and other organizations into rural Saskatchewan to stop the depopulation there. 
 
So at least we have a plan. And I say the reason it’s not working as well as it should is because it’s not 
moving as fast as it should. And if he wants to talk about privatization, the answer is yes, more of that. If 
he wants to talk about diversification, and the answer is yes, more that that. If he wants to talk bout 
building more small industries owned by the small shareholders of Saskatchewan, yes, we need to do 
more of that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have a plan, we are moving on it, it can be more successful and it will be more 
successful. But I have yet to hear from members opposite what they would do. I challenge the member 



opposite to tell us how he would make this economy work. Would he buy other existing business or 
would he diversify something? The members opposite have been a true opposition. They have opposed 
everything, but there is a greater duty. There is a duty, if they ever wish to become government, to tell us 
how they would make things better. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, I think you’ve just uttered the most frightening words that the people of 
Saskatchewan could possibly year in that your plan, your plan for the future is more piratization. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you talk about decentralization and diversification, you’ll get not argument from this 
side of the House. That’s the route to go. But, Mr. Minister, the fact of the matter is and the record of the 
New Democratic government is that those were things that were not just talked about, but were done. 
And there’s a difference between using words and using the actions. 
 
Your piratization plan has been an abject failure in the minds of the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people because they understand; they understand the results of piratization. It has been lost jobs, it has 
been a failing economy, and it has been people fleeing this province. That’s been the consequences, and 
they do not want more of the same. 
 
I am extremely disappointed, Mr. Minister - not suprised by extremely disappointed - to hear you say 
that what people of Saskatchewan can expect from your government is more of the problem, when what 
they’re really looking for is a solution. 
 
You will recognize, Mr. Minister, that in the days of the New Democrat government when there was 
some conscious planning put into management of the economy, that natural resources returned a fair 
profit to the people of Saskatchewan to provide services, to stimulate employment, and to keep down 
taxes. That was the reality. We had low unemployment I those days and we’ll get into the comparison in 
a few minutes. We’ll deal with the comparison of the New Democrat track record in creation of 
employment and your track record in creation of employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is an idea that has been successful traditionally and historically in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the idea is one, it’s not ideological, it’s pragmatic, and it works. It’s the mixed 
economy, Mr. Minister. It’s the private sector functioning with the entrepreneurial spirit, allowed to do 
that. It’s the co-operative sector, Mr. Minister, which under your government has simply dropped out of 
sight. Point me to the department of co-operatives, if you will. There is not a sign in this province that 
describes the department of co-operatives. You can’t find the building; it doesn’t exist anymore. You 
don’t have such a department. And there is the public sector which in a province of low population, a 
large area and intense climate that we have to deal with, Mr. Minister. That’s the reality. 
 
The reality is that it’s the mixed economy that has worked historically in this province. That is the model 
of economic development that your government has deserted, and we’re paying the price. People are 
fleeing the province - 50,000 in the last four and a half years alone. That’s the answer, Mr. Minister. 
That’s what New Democratic have done. It’s worked successfully and that’s what New Democrats will 
do, and it will work successfully when given the opportunity which I expect in the next year or two to 
being once again, Mr. Minister. That’s what it’s about. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, to give some serious thought to my recommendation that you desert your 
failed plan for managing the economy that impacts so drastically in the people of Saskatchewan - the 
most devastating impact it can possibly be, the loss of 50,000, a net loss of 50,000 men, women, and 
children from the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, the solution the opposition have is not very promising. They say 
develop resources and that is the case, but I mean Saskatchewan has been developing new resources for 
100 years and I . . . Very few things scare me, Mr. Chairman, but what scares me is the thought of the 
members opposite governing this province with a 100-year-old policy of developing resources. The 
problem in Saskatchewan is nobody has ever processed or manufactured those resources into finished 
products. 
 
Members opposite still have, I believe, as part of their resolutions, the policy that anything sold by this 
government would be bought back for a dollar. That is one of their resolutions. Would they buy back 
WESTBRIDGE for a dollar from the employees who paid to buy shares and have built that into a big 
company? Would they buy back Saskoil from the employees who participated by buying some of that 
company? Would they buy back the yellow pages operations into the SaskTel from the employees who, I 
believe, it is 85 per cent over-subscribed yet for those shares? Would they do all that for a dollar? That 
should scare those employees. That should scare those shareholders, as much as it scares me, to think 
that those people only have one policy to dig more holes in the ground. At least that’s an improvement 
over their last policy which was to buy the existing holes. But there has to be some secondary processing 
in this province. Mr. Chairman, buying back what already exists for a dollar, I submit, this is a dollar, a 
submit that policy is loony. 
 
Mr. Pringle: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, at the end of the day there is only one measure 
that counts and that’s your job creation performance, and it’s dismal. And so your jumble of words a few 
minutes ago about what you’re doing doesn’t make any sense. And it’s curious. I’d like to know at what 
point you and your government are going to consider that you’re responsible for the situation we find 
ourselves in. I don’t know how long you think you can go on blaming an administration that’s been out 
of power for almost 10 years. And the fact that you’re now the government and have been for over seven 
years, it’s your responsibility to develop specific policies, to improve the employment situation for the 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you talked at the outset about gradual progress over the last year. And I’d like to tell the 15,000 
people almost who have left this province this year that you’re making gradual progress in your 
department. The facts don’t bear that out - 1988-89 has been a year of hardship for thousands of families 
and thousands of young people in the province of Saskatchewan. The first year, you talk about gradual 
progress, this is the first year that we have consistently had an unemployment rate above the national 
average. Now that’s your legacy. It’s got nothing to do with the opposition or any other government, 
that’s your legacy. For the first time that’s a situation we find ourselves in. 
 
Now you may be satisfied with that, but I can tell you that the Saskatchewan people are not satisfied with 
that. Young people are not satisfied with that. You talked about the need to build opportunity. Well tell 
the 43,000 people looking for work that you’re creating opportunities for them. I mean, that just doesn’t 
make any sense. Your record doesn’t bear out what you’re talking about. 
 
I would like to focus a few comments this morning on the issue that young people find themselves in. 
And I too have travelled around the province as critic for youth and families, and have talked to many 
young people in many settings - at the university level, at the technical school level, and in smaller 
communities. Mr. Minister, the issue of unemployment and out-migration, while serious for 
Saskatchewan people generally, is especially troubling when we look at the situation in those two issues 
for our young people. And I’m referring here to young people generally under the age of 29. But the 



unemployment rate for young people 15 to 24 is over 12 per cent, almost double the provincial average 
as you will well know. 
 
The work-force of young people under age 25 in 1981 was 110,000 - 110,000 young people in the work-
force. In 1988 or just seven years later, that was reduced to 90,000. In other words in this seven-year 
period under your administration, we have lost 20,000 young people in the work-force. Now that’s not 
opposition propaganda; that comes from your statistics. And I don’t see you dealing with this issue, in 
fact, that increasingly the number of young people in the work-force is being decreased. 
 
In 1982 the number of young people under age 25 represented 19 per cent of the population. Today that 
number is less than 16 per cent, in other words, a drop of over 3 per cent in just seven years. And I 
assume that you are concerned about that, the loss of our young people. I think any responsible minister 
would be concerned about that situation. 
 
In terms of out-migration, I’ve asked you questions in question period two or there times over the last 
four months, and you have never once acknowledged that out-migration of young people is a concern of 
you and your government. And as my colleague has just said, we’ve had the words record last year of 
any other province in general out-migration, over double those who have left Manitoba, and certainly the 
drought didn’t stop at the Saskatchewan-Manitoba border. This year again, almost 15,000 people have 
left, and that could result in, over the course of the years, some 20,000 people leaving, or 25,000 people 
leaving. So every month you talk about, when those statistics come out about out-migration, you talk 
about how good things will be. And we heard you talk . . . you’re starting out like that again this morning 
- how good things will be. 
 
Well in 1985 we lost over 4,000 people in terms of net out-migration. In 1986 it was over 7,000; 1987, 
over 9,000, almost 10; 1988, almost 15; projected for 1989, 25. So over the five-year period, Mr. 
Minister, you can see an alarming trend occurring. It’s just simply getting worse every year . . .(inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, certainly you can’t cover that up. What does that tell you? That’s over a five-year 
period, the situation gets worse by anywhere from 3 to 5,000 people leaving the province. 
 
And the concern I have is that, as I understand it, about 60 per cent of these people leaving are under 29 
years of age. So approximately 30,000 of these people who have left over the last five years have been 
young people under the age of 29. 
 
So for five years you’ve been selling our assets and you’ve been promising that this will create jobs and 
we will diversify. Well it just simply isn’t working, and I wonder when it’s going to work. This high 
unemployment and these frightening out-migration figures show one thing, Mr. Minister, and as my 
colleague has said, they show that your privatization policies are simply not working. Privatization is 
failing. 
 
And I would suggest that instead of selling young people’s future, you should be developing programs, 
specific programs to boost the economy and to provide specific jobs and opportunities for our young 
people. As I say you keeping denying that there’s a problem. You’re the Minister of Social Services, 
well, that says there’s no poverty in Saskatchewan. Well you can’t deal with the problem, Mr. Minister, 
until you acknowledge that it exists, and so far you haven’t done that. 
 
(0845) 
 



And I would say that it’s no wonder that small-business people, it’s no wonder that ordinary workers and 
poor people have no confidence in you. Your Premier promises cheap land and cheap labour, and the 
only result has been that young people are leaving in record numbers to seek opportunities elsewhere. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, these young people are our future workers; they’re out future leaders, they’re our 
future small-business men and women. And you talk about valuing families. You and the Premier talk 
more than any other ministers about valuing families and valuing young people. And I don’t doubt that 
you do value families and value young people, but certainly your policies don’t demonstrate that you 
consider ordinary Saskatchewan families and young people as being valuable. Your legacy of failed 
economic policies is going to cost young people dearly for many, many years to come. 
 
Mr. Minister, in terms of summer jobs for young people, to get a little more specific here, you have 
persistently and continually lessened the amount of money targeted or available for summer 
employment. And one of the ways you’ve done that is that you’ve tightened the eligibility criteria for 
employers. In this budget you’ve cut almost a million dollars or over 22 per cent, which represents 
another loss of a thousand jobs this summer. 
 
So in 1986-87, which was the election year, you put $9 million towards summer employment programs 
for young people. The very next year you cut it back to 4 million, eliminated over 6,000 jobs for summer 
students. Now in this budget you’re only going to create about 3,000 summer jobs. And so you . . . in 
three short years you’ve cut back in about 8,000 jobs, and you now have to be a Tory to get a summer 
job in this province. That’s the only way you’ll get a summer job. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, given your sorry record of high unemployment for young people and young people 
leaving in record numbers, these kinds of cuts to summer employment programs are inexcusable. Our 
young people are bright and they’re energetic and they’re eager, and they’re looking for opportunities. 
They deserve opportunities. They deserve a promising future. You’ve got money for Montpetit and 
birthday parties and money to rent expensive office spacer and money for expensive advertising. And I 
suggest, Mr. Minister, that you should shift your priorities to diverting some of that money to job 
creation for young people in the province. 
 
And I guess I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, and I’d like you to be specific if you don’t mind: what 
are your plans - apart from general, fuzzy sort of rhetoric that you’re uttered so far this morning - what 
are your specific plans? You’re the minister that’s responsible to ensure that there are job opportunities 
for young people in the province. What are your specific plans to improve the economic prospects and 
the job prospects for young people so that we won’t have this high unemployment rate and so that young 
people won’t have to leave the province in record numbers in the coming months. What are your specific 
plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not surprised that the members opposite don’t understand 
my answers. They didn’t understand my answers when I was a member of their party in the 1970s. 
 
An Hon. Member: - That was before we kicked you out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, members opposite say they kicked me out. It seems to me that you don’t have 
no documentation or any truth that you ever kicked me out of your party. But if you want to retroactively 
kick me out of your party, I will accept a letter stating that as of 1975 that I am kicked out of the NDP. I 
would accept that and hold it in high esteem as being proof that they didn’t understand my answers in 
1975 when I told them not to do certain things that were loony. 



 
I certainly didn’t fit into that party, Mr. Speaker. I had too great of a respect for the truth and I couldn’t 
master all of the tricks of that particular party with respect as to how one should campaign and how one 
should speak in public. And I was raised as a Christian Lutheran, where my grandmother taught me 
strictly and my parents and my church that one should not lie, and my wife finally convinced me that I 
could not fit in to the New Democratic Party. 
 
Let me state clearly, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has said that I said there’s no poverty in 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Chairman, here’s what I said, and you can check the record. I said, the people 
of Saskatchewan are not living in poverty. I’ve never denied that there aren’t poor people in 
Saskatchewan. I did not say there is no poverty in Saskatchewan. If it were not against the rules, I would 
call the member what he is, Mr. Speaker. But clearly stating the truth in here is sometimes against the 
rules and so you can’t say anything on some occasions. 
 
So let it be made clear that the members opposite have not changed their ways from the time I left and 
still do not understand the facts as they are, can’t read Hansard as it is. Of course, I know the problem 
Mr. Chairman, is they don’t want to. They don’t want to face the facts. 
 
The facts, Mr. Chairman, with respect to employment for youth are that the NDP spent in the last four 
years of their government, for summer employment, an average of $1 million per year. But this 
government by 1986-87 had increased that spending to $9 million a year - ninefold. And clearly, we 
could not with out deficit sustain a ninefold increase in the expenditure for youth summer employment. 
So in the next few years we reduced that sum. 
 
This year it stands at $3.1 million, triple what the NDP spent in 1981-82, 1980-81, 1979-80, and 1978-
79. We are still spending triple that sum. The facts are right there. They may not want to accept them, 
Mr. Deputy Chairman. The facts are there. The NDP don’t understand my answers because they don’t 
want to understand my answers. They don’t like the answers. They don’t like the fact that they are true, 
clearly there states. That auditor, I believe, can add and subtract. I have no doubt whatsoever that those 
figures are accurate, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In addition, let us look at what’s happened in the last six or seven years with respect to the economy and 
this government’s job creation policies. In non-agriculture, the number of people employed has gone up 
by 35,000 in the last six or seven years, Mr. Chairman. In agriculture the number of people employed has 
dropped by 9,000. Certainly, Mr. Chairman, that is not for lack of this government trying. 
 
The Premier of this province said that he would stake the treasury for agriculture, and he did. You ask 
why do we have a deficit. The Premier kept his promise. He promised that he would stake the treasury to 
defend agriculture and assist agriculture. He did, and we now have a deficit. And if people want to know 
where that money went, it went into health care for people, it went to assist farmers, and it went to assist 
home owners. That treasury has been put to use for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chairman, since April of 1982 the total labour force has increased by 52,000 people. 
This is 11.6 per cent increase. Since 1982 total employment has increased by 45,000 people. Since April 
1982 the participation rate has increased by 5.4 per cent. We now have more two-income families in this 
province, and we have one of the highest rates in Canada for participation. We have more two-income 
families than virtually any province. There may be an exception in Ontario, but for a province of this 
size, with this type of economy, our record is phenomenal. 
 



Mr. Chairman, after the member opposite went through a rather long speech asking many questions 
which I’ve tried to answer, he said specifically, what are you going to do in the future to provide jobs. 
Specifically, what we are going to do is we are going to continue to diversify Saskatchewan. We are 
going to build Saskatchewan. There are building period in Saskatchewan and there are buying period. 
Ross Thatcher and his Liberal government in the ‘60s built. The NDP government under Allan Blakeney 
in the 1970s bought what already existed. In the 1980s, the Government of Saskatchewan, a PC 
government, has continued to build and sell some of those things that were needlessly bought. 
 
The members opposite are concerned with privatization, as they call it. There are two elements to that: 
there is public participation, and yes, there is privatization. I can say to the members opposite that 
privatization will soon come to an end, because you cannot sell off things that should not be sold, and 
there’s very little left to be sold in Saskatchewan. However, once we have completed the few small 
projects that should no longer be owned by the government, then we have to move into the future. 
 
The policy of this government will be to continue to build and diversify. The members opposite live in 
the past. They believe that there’s only two possibilities: nationalizing or privatizing. Neither of those 
two concept are relevant when the government governs and does not own everything. The next phase for 
the government then is to continue building. That’s the policy - specifically we will continue to build, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there was a political leader some time ago who 
operated under the principle what we desire for ourselves we wish for all. I was J. S. Woodsworth who 
said that, and also, Mr. Minister, who put that policy into practice. And it is one that I would recommend 
for you. 
 
Mr. Minister, in response to your answer that you just provided the member from Saskatoon Eastview, 
you say that your government is trying - very trying on the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the reality. 
That’s the reality. 
 
When we take a look . . . Mr. Minister, let’s just take a look at your mandate and some of the facts, 
because the facts, your own government’s facts, Mr. Minister, do not back up your contention that things 
are somehow getting better and that you’re on the right track for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own Act requires you to again, under section 4.01(2), and I quote. Where it says: 
 
The minister may: 
 
(a) establish and operate any programs and services connected with manpower matters that he considers 
necessary to provide adequate employment opportunities for residents of Saskatchewan, including 
programs related to: 
 
Now, related to what? 
 
(v) the development of employment in Saskatchewan (it says); 
 
It says: 
 
(b) co-ordinate and promote policies, (and) programs and activities of the departments and agencies of 
the Government of Saskatchewan relating to job creation; 



 
It says: 
 
(d) monitor, promote and co-ordinate the development and implementation of programs respecting the 
provision of jobs in Saskatchewan; 
 
And: 
 
(i) implement any programs that he considers necessary with respect to the provision of jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The provision of jobs in Saskatchewan is repeated over and over in the mandate of your department, Mr. 
Minister. And what’s the reality? What’s the reality? Let’s take a look a some government . . . 
Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics numbers, Mr. Minister, the cold, hard facts of the matter. 
 
And what they tell us, Mr. Minister, is that in 1981, if you want to go back that far to the beginning of 
the New Democrat era in the province of Saskatchewan, there were 3,300 . . . sorry, 334,000 people 
working in the province of Saskatchewan. By 1981 that has increased, Mr. Minister, to 425,000; over 
90,000 jobs created, Mr. Minister, an average - an average under New Democrat administration in the 
province of Saskatchewan of 9,100 new jobs per year, Mr. Minister. 
 
What’s been the performance of your government, Mr. Minister? In 1988, number of jobs has increased 
- I agree - to 451,000 is the number that your Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics indicates. That’s an 
increase, Mr. Minister, of 26,000, on average, an average of 3,417 new jobs per year, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, clearly, clearly, the track record of the New Democrat government for the people of 
Saskatchewan is that the creation of jobs is more than twice as successful as the record of your 
government. That’s the facts of the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(0900) 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, in 1981, the last full year of a New Democrat government, there were 21,000, 
unfortunately, 21,000 unemployed - 4.7 per cent. What’s the reality in 1988? Thirty-seven thousand, 
37,000 - 7.5 per cent unemployment under our government. Again that’s the reality. 
 
My colleague has underlined and outlined the loss of employment opportunities for young people. Well, 
Mr. Minister, let’s take the most recent information. The publication by your government, Mr. Minister, 
your government, which was released last month, The Saskatchewan Labour Market, July 1989, and 
what does it say about your government? Does it say that you’re heading on the right track, that things 
are getting better, and that there is a rosy future ahead for the province and for the people of this 
province? It doesn’t say that, Mr. Minister. It doesn’t say that. Let me quote from your own document, 
your department’s own document for July, for last month, Mr. Minister. And what does it say? It says 
this, it says: 
 
Saskatchewan is tied for Alberta with the third lowest unemployment rate in Canada on an unadjusted 
basis, 7.1 per cent. 
 



Now some would say third lowest in Canada is not bad. Under New Democrats, Mr. Minister, never 
were we worse than second in unemployment and often we had the highest employment rate in all of 
Canada. It says, Mr. Minister, in your own document: 
 
On a seasonally adjusted basis, Saskatchewan had the fourth lowest rate, 7.5 per cent on a seasonally 
adjusted basis. 
 
It says: 
 
The unadjusted employment rate of 7.1 per cent . . . 
 
Was it better, Mr. Minister? No, it says: 
 
The . . . unemployment rate of 7.1 per cent was up from 6.7 per cent a year ago. 
 
What else does it say? It says: 
 
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate of 7.5 per cent was up from 7.2 per cent of July 1988. 
 
It says: 
 
Since last July, (since a year ago, Mr. Minister) employment decreased on an actual basis by 3,000 in the 
province of Saskatchewan to 464,000. 
 
Your document, Mr. Minister, in July also says: 
 
That Saskatoon’s unemployment rate was 9 per cent in July, up from 8.1 per cent a year ago. 
 
For Regina, is there good news for the people of Regina from the PC Government of Saskatchewan? 
Your document of July, Mr. Minister, says: 
 
Regina’s unemployment rate was 7.6 per cent in July, up from 6.4 per cent a year ago. 
 
What does your document, Mr. Minister, of July say about unemployment. It says: 
 
On an actual basis, 35,000 people were unemployed in July, up from 2,000 from June, and up a 1,000 
from the level one year ago. 
 
What does it say about employment in your document of July, Mr. Minister? It says: 
 
The actual number of people employed fell by 3,000 since a year ago, totalling 464,000. 
 
That’s performance PC style, Mr. Minister. What does it say about the labour force? It says: 
 
That Saskatchewan’s labour force was 499,000 - 2,000 below the July 1988 level of 501,000. 
 
That’s what your document says about your performance, Mr. Minister. What does it say about youth 
employment in the province of Saskatchewan? It says: 
 



The number of unemployed youth, 15 to 24 years old, was down 5,000 over July of last year. The 
unemployment rate for youth was 11.6 per cent, unchanged from last year. 
 
Young people, Mr. Minister, are not lining up to send thank you cards to you and the PC government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What does it say about the cities in the province of Saskatchewan, the biggest cities? It says, Saskatoon’s 
unemployment rate of 9.0 per cent was up from 8.1 per cent a year ago, and that Saskatoon had the 
fourth highest unemployment rate amount 23 cities for which unemployment rates were recorded - the 
fourth highest unemployment rate in all of Canada, Mr. Minister. And employment in Saskatoon 
decreased by 1,000 since a year ago. 
 
What does it say about Regina, Mr. Minister? Your document of July. It says the Regina unemployment 
rate was 7.6 per cent, up from 6.4 per cent a year ago. 
 
And what’s going on in Canada? How do we compare to the rest of the nation, Mr. Minister? Perhaps 
Canada’s in trouble and we’re just going down with the rest of the country. What it says about the 
nation, Mr. Minister, in your document of July: that the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in all of 
Canada was 7.5 per cent, down, down - unemployment down in Canada - from 7.8 per cent in the 
previous year. And on actual basis the national unemployment rate was 7.2 per cent, down 0.3 
percentage points from the previous year. 
 
And so that’s the picture, Mr. Minister. For the first time in the history of this province since 
unemployment records were kept, the province of Saskatchewan has had higher unemployment rates 
than the national unemployment rates. And while the national unemployment rates are going down, the 
unemployment rates in Saskatchewan are going up. That’s PC performance in the area of job creation for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, and I submit that it has been a dismal failure. Your 
government has failed miserably for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the reality and there’s no 
denying it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, -mm, we’ve heard your explanations that what people can expect is more of the same, 
more of the same. That’s all you have to offer in these estimated related to Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment in the most significant issue in the province of Saskatchewan - out-migration, 
unemployment, and more of the same. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you also have a mandate to implement the policies of your Premier. And I want to 
quoted to you, Mr. Minister, from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, Saturday, March 4, 1989, in an article 
entitled: “Devine yens for Asian funds.” And how does article lead off, Mr. Minister? This is an article 
that covered statements of your Premier when he was in Moose Jaw speaking to PC loyalists. 
 
And the article begins this way, and let me quote, Mr. Minister: 
 
Asian entrepreneurs hoping to cash in on the Canada-U.S. free trade pact could be lured to Saskatchewan 
with promises of cheap land and cheap labour, Premier Grant Devine said Friday. 
 
That’s the statement of your Premier - cheap labour. Mr. Minister, what’s the reality? The reality is, 
when I take a look at the last available annual report of your department of 1987-88, it points out a 



startling fact, a harsh reality for many people in the province of Saskatchewan, for literally, literally, Mr. 
Minister, somewhere between 30 and 50,000 people, probably closer to the higher number. What it says 
is that the order, number one, of your minimum wage board, Mr. Minister, the minimum wage 4.50 per 
hour effective August 1, 1985. That’s the last time the minimum wage changed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you inherited government, unemployment was below 5 per cent, people were 
working, small businesses were doing well, the province was flourishing, and we had the highest 
minimum wage in all of Canada. Here we are now in 1988, 1989, being the only province - the only 
province - that has not had a change in minimum wage for over four years - over four years, Mr. 
Minister. That’s the reality. 
 
And where are we now? How does Saskatchewan compare to the rest of the country? Mr. Minister, the 
reality is that today Saskatchewan has the sixth highest minimum wage in all of Canada. Once we were 
tops. And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, that one of the provinces we’re tied with is British 
Columbia, which also has a 4.50-an-hour minimum wage, and which is increasing to 4.75 on October 1, 
and then again increasing to $5 an hour on April 1 of next year. 
 
On October 1, Mr. Minister, the reality is Saskatchewan will have the seventh highest minimum wage in 
all of Canada. As of October 1, Mr. Minister, as of October 1, only Newfoundland and Prince Edward 
Island will have lower minimum wages than the working people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Everyone other province and territory has increased their minimum wage since Saskatchewan’s last 
increase way back on August 1 of 1985. 
 
Mr. Minister, the consumer price index has gone up 16 per cent since the last time that your government 
has seen fit to move the minimum wage for the working poor of the province of Saskatchewan. Inflation 
has been 16 per cent since that time. 
 
Mr. Minister, since your government came to office in 1982, there’s been only one adjustment in 
minimum wage back in August 1 of 1985. Since that time, inflation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, has 
been 45 per cent - 45 per cent is the reality in the cost of living for the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Minister, you’ve had one minimum wage increase in seven and a half years of PC government, an 
increase of 25 per cent, less than 25 cents and less than 6 per cent. That’s the reality, Mr. Minister. 
That’s the reality for working people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I ask you, sir, I ask you: last year we talked about your policy for minimum wage and my belief that 
what you’re attempting to do, consistent with the philosophy of your Premier, is to move the 
Saskatchewan minimum wage closer to the standard in the United States. And as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Minister, most American states are very close; they’ve caught up to the province of Saskatchewan, while 
the rest of the nation continues to move ahead. Not here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, and I ask you: is 
your dealing with the minimum wage, one increase in seven and a half years, 25 cents, less than 6 per 
cent while inflation has gone up 45 per cent - is that part of your Premier’s philosophy, part of your 
Premier’s policy of cheap labour to attract Asian investors? Is that what it’s all about, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, first of all, dealing with unemployment, Saskatoon has a high 
unemployment rate. It’s also one of the fastest growing cities in Canada. It has now outgrown Regina in 
size. One of the main reasons Saskatoon has such a high unemployment rate is because people desire to 
live and work in Saskatoon and move in faster than jobs can be created in Saskatoon . . .(inaudible 



interjection) . . . One of the members opposite shouts from his seat, I am sickening. Yes, I am sick, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: - No, he said you were a sick man . . . (inaudible) . . .you can tell by your voice . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Oh, they’re arguing now that I am a sick man. Yes, I do have a cold today. Mr. 
Chairman, but that kind of attitude from the members opposite shows you what they are really like, Mr. 
Chairman. They are people who go around saying, oh we care for people, but their hears are as hard and 
as mean as you will ever find, Mr. Chairman. And if you look around the world, you will see that 
socialists everywhere are long on rhetoric but short on heart and caring about their actual people. 
 
With respect to costs of labour and wages, labour costs are not nearly as major a factor as they once 
were. In fact in manufacturing, Mr. Chairman, labour costs are only 13 per cent of the total overhead in 
manufacturing. 
 
It is an interesting fact, Mr. Chairman, that the highest overall wage costs in the world are in the 
following countries: number one, Switzerland; number two, West Germany; number three, Japan. 
Canada and the United States have lower wage costs, or have lower wages than those three countries. 
What’s interesting about those three countries is they also have the healthiest economies of any of the 
countries of the world. They have the highest wage costs and the healthiest economies. That is proof that 
you can have prosperity and high wages. 
 
What you have to have, Mr. Chairman, is productivity. You cannot think about archaic ways, you cannot 
have your ideas in the 1930s and the 1920s. You can have high wages and a productive society if you 
have market economies, as they have in Switzerland, West Germany, Japan. Here was have the socially 
planned ideas and confrontation between the class struggle is what they try to encourage. What we 
should be encouraging is a classless society where everyone has an opportunity to be an owner or an 
employee. 
 
Switzerland, West Germany, and Japan have the highest wage costs, have social programs that are richer 
than Canada’s with respect to Switzerland and West Germany, and they also have greater productivity. 
And therefore to have greater productivity, you cannot remain in the old ways of thinking, you cannot 
have the ideas of the 19th century, you cannot follow the theories of Marx and believe you will have 
prosperity. 
 
Those three countries do not confuse social programs with socialism. They have market economies, they 
have productivity, they have healthy economies, and they have high wages. That is something Canada 
should strive to attain. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, that was a wild and rambling oratorical excursion you just took us on. 
But in the course of your comments, Mr. Minister, you make my point. It’s not tough, it’s impossible; in 
fact it has been the history in this province of Saskatchewan that you can have a healthy economy, you 
can have people working, you can have mall business flourishing, you can have people with money in 
their pockets, and you can have a high minimum wage all at the same time. It’s happened in 
Saskatchewan and it’s happened under a New Democrat government, Mr. Minister. That’s the reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



Mr. Hagel: - I note as well, I note as well that you managed to avoid my question. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is whether your government’s minimum wage policy reflects you Premier’s statement that 
what we want to do in this province to attract the Asian investors with cheap labour? That’s the question, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And so let me ask you: in light of your Premier’s statements that what we are trying to do in 
Saskatchewan is to attract Asian investors with our cheap labour, what are you plans, what are your 
plans regarding the minimum wage in the province of Saskatchewan? What hope do the working poor in 
the province of Saskatchewan have, and by right then, what can they expect from your department, Mr. 
Minister, by way of movement of the minimum wage in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - The assurance that people of Saskatchewan have, Mr. Chairman, is that we will 
build a healthier economy where fewer people will have to worry about working at the minimum wage, 
where there will be jobs that are diversified and industries. The great economies of the world today do 
not concern themselves with minimum wage jobs. We do not think at that kind of level that we should 
try to create more minimum wage jobs. We are talking here about jobs that pay 12, 14, $16 an hour. 
That’s what drives the economy of West Germany and Japan and Switzerland. We’re looking at jobs that 
pay higher wages. 
 
Now that’s clear the members opposite only think in terms of the negative, the lowest common 
denominator. If this government is allowed to continue with its policies, there will e more higher paying 
jobs and there’ll be fewer people working at minimum wage. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, you’re totally ignoring the question. The reality is that there are at least 
30,000 and possible up to 50,000 people in this province whose income is directly related to the 
minimum wage or that their wage is tied to minimum wage. It’s minimum wage plus 10 cents or 
minimum wage plus 25 cents. That’s the reality. You know that. 
 
Why are you avoiding the question? I ask you simply. I pointed out your Premier’s policy, stated policy 
of cheap labour in the province of Saskatchewan, and I ask you again: what is your intention to move the 
minimum wage for the working poor in the province of Saskatchewan? Mr. Minister, will you please 
address the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, the Premier has not policy of cheap wages in Saskatchewan. I do not 
accept that media article as being accurate. I would have to have further proof. I have learned a long time 
ago not to believe everything you read in the paper, nor to believe everything that the members opposite 
drag into the House. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, your policy for changing the minimum wage in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: - Can you repeat that again? 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well I’ll repeat it again, Mr. Minister. I’ve asked the same question three times; this will be 
number four. What is your policy for changing the minimum wage in the province of Saskatchewan? 
What is your plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, we plan to raise the minimum wage as soon as possible, and we’ll 
have to see how the economy progresses. Things are looking quite good this fall. With at least an 



average crop and a growth rate in the 3.8 per cent rate, I believe it will be possible to do it in the near 
future. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - When and by how much, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I already said in the near future, and by a sum that we feel the 
economy can absorb. The member opposite wants to know exactly which day, and there’s somethings I 
don’t know. I don’t know which day I will die on; I don’t know which hour. I don’t know many things, 
Mr. Chairman. I don’t know how much it hailed in my constituency last night. There are some things 
that members opposite will just have to wait and watch them unfold. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, the reality is that there are some 50,000 people in this province who depend 
on you to adjust their potential income in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the reality. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you had input from small-business people, saying that they could live with a 
minimum wage? Have you had input from small-business people, Mr. Minister, who recognize that an 
increase in minimum wage, as a matter of fact, increases the disposable income that’s spent in the 
communities in which they operate? Have you had any of that kind of input at all, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, Mr. Chairman, small-business people, for the most part, do pay more than the 
minimum wage. Our minimum wage is at a minimum, and the business people who can afford to pay 
more are encouraged to do so, and most of them do that. So people who can pay more are paying more, 
and we wouldn’t want to have the wage to high as to put people out of business and lose the jobs that we 
now have. So there has to be a very delicate balancing act. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the opposition never uses the word responsibility. To them responsibility is a dirty word 
such as work, profit, and prosperity. Those are all dirty words to the members opposite. But a 
government has the responsibility to try to balance what is good for society and people in the long run. 
And in the short run, you can have short-term gain but we want long-term gain; therefore, Mr. Chairman, 
we will move when appropriate to increase the minimum wage. Hopefully the economy will develop in 
such a way that minimum wage will not be a major factor. 
 
The member opposite has already stated that there are 30,000 people that are depending on the minimum 
wage, and then in the next breath he changed his mind and said, no, there are 50,000 people. The 
member opposite doesn’t know how many people are on minimum wage. We have an approximation, 
but we don’t know how many of those people rely on that wage as their chief source of income and how 
many of those use it as their second income. We also don’t know how many of those people are actually 
high school students who are topping up the income that basically their families already have. 
 
So it’s an area of government regulation that you have to move in very carefully because there is a 
responsibility for the government to do what is right with respect to society as a whole. Members 
opposite have simple solutions and never consider that responsibility. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, I assume your definition of moving very carefully is to increase minimum 
wage by 25 cents every seven and a half years. That’s been your record, Mr. Minister. You and I both 
know that there is some 15 to 20,000 people working at minimum wage in the province of 
Saskatchewan; then a large number that depend on minimum wage to determine what their income will 
be, and that number in total, added to those who are making minimum wage will come down somewhere 



between 30 and 50,000 - I believe it’s closer to the 50,000 than 30. It’s a debatable point, and for the 
purposes of our conversation here today, it’s irrelevant. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe that small-business people, family business people in the province of 
Saskatchewan would mind working people having a little more disposable income in their pockets. And 
based on your answers here today, I find that your approach to minimum wage is equivalent to the 
Minister of Finance on potash; you have no plans is essentially what you’re saying - charging ahead 
recklessly with this rosy future that people of Saskatchewan are somehow supposed to have confidence 
in you when you have no plans. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will conclude this portion of the estimates by simply saying that on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan, I’m disappointed in your response to the questions about minimum wage. My 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre would like to address some questions related to the seniors’ division of 
your department, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Smart: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, first of all, just looking at the Saskatchewan 
income plan, the last increase in the Saskatchewan income plan was in November of 1988, and I 
understand there are no plans for this fiscal year to increase the rates. Your department apparently sent 
out letters in September of 1986 to seniors announcing that there would be increases over the next three 
years, but nothing much has happened except that increase in November of 1988. 
 
Mr. Minister, statistics from your own department show that in 1986 the average income for people 70 
years of age and over in Saskatchewan was $12,000 - 12.989 to be exact. That was in 1986. This is now 
1989 and while there may have been an increase in the income for people age 70 and over, I’m sure it 
has not been that great. 
 
And we know, Mr. Minister, that the number of people who are ageing in Saskatchewan is increasing 
and that you have more people age 65 and over now than you did in ’86. Mr. Minister, what is your 
response to the request that the Saskatchewan income plan be increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased that the member from Saskatoon Centre asked that 
question. It gives me the opportunity to clearly set out for the people of Saskatchewan the fact that the 
NDP government had a Saskatchewan income plan payment to senior citizens of $25 per month, which 
this government has raised to $80 per month - more than a threefold increase for a single senior citizen. 
 
I’m also pleased to advise you, Mr. Chairman, that there are only 26,000 senior citizens who qualify for 
and are indeed in the Saskatchewan income plan. It’s based on need, of course, topping up people who 
have no other income whatsoever - maybe a little bit of income, but basically no other income. And out 
of 134,000 senior citizens, only 26,000 are in need of a Saskatchewan income supplement, which is the 
percentage of senior citizens who are self-sufficient, living off of their savings, living off of their 
investments, living off of their profits - the dirty words that the members opposite can’t stand to hear. 
There are only 26,000 seniors who are in need of this particular program, but I’m pleased to see the 
numbers each year are going down. 
 
Other senior citizens have been able to benefit from the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, where they have 
been able to, with the government, save for their retirement. Others have been able to benefit from their 
savings on the profits that they’ve made in the last seven years under a Conservative government in this 
province, and therefore fewer and fewer senior citizens rely on the government to support them in their 
retirement. And I congratulate these senior citizens for becoming self-sufficient. 



 
So while we have tripled the amount paid, I don’t really see where the members opposite and criticize 
considering that they paid a mere $25 per senior citizen. 
 
Ms. Smart: - Mr. Minister, the senior citizens are living on very low incomes, whether you want to 
accept it or not. Your own statistics for 1988 show that 20 per cent of the seniors in Saskatchewan are 
receiving the SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) plan, and that their average income per person is $9,000; 
the average income for couples is $14,500, and that’s well below the poverty line, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to compare that with the heritage grant program, because you’ve talked about how seniors are 
living off their profits, and how this bottom-line income of the Saskatchewan income plan plus the old 
age security and the GIS (guaranteed income supplement) from the federal government is available only 
to a few. Twenty per cent of the people in Saskatchewan of the senior citizens are getting it, according to 
your own statistics. But then you go on to make this quantum leap, that other seniors are fine because 
they’re living on their profits and their dividends, and all the rest that you fantasize they have. 
 
Your own minister in charge of the seniors’ directorate has said that almost three-quarters of the seniors 
in Saskatchewan qualify for the heritage grant, and I want to tie that to people on low income. Three-
quarters of the people in Saskatchewan, according to your own department, qualify for the heritage grant, 
and yet you decreased the amount of money that’s in the heritage grant this year. When I questioned you 
about that, you said seniors were richer this year than they were last year, and that’s not substantiated by 
any facts. 
 
Seniors are ageing and as they get older, they get into lower income brackets, especially older women, 
and yet you’ve decreased the amount in the heritage grant. You’ve also taken away the administrative 
costs so the amount of money that’s available to the heritage grant is way down, and the seniors are 
concerned about this, Mr. Minister. What do you have to say to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, I am sick. The members opposite make me sick, Mr. Chairman. I 
can’t believe this. Let me go through this one more time, very slowly, so that the members opposite can 
understand this. Maybe if I repeat the answer as many times as they repeat their questions, they might 
understand this. I mean, good heavens, what are the qualifications to get elected to this place? 
 
The rule is, Mr. Chairman, the rule is that if your income is over $30,000, you don’t qualify for the 
heritage program. The second rule is, Mr. Chairman, the second rule that if your income is over 25,000, 
you qualify for half the senior heritage program. The fact that more seniors do not qualify means, 
number three, more seniors are making more money. If more seniors are making more money, is that a 
bad thing? No, I submit. 
 
(0930) 
 
Will the member listen carefully? If fewer citizens quality for the heritage program because more 
citizens are making more money, therefore without changing the rules, you will pay out less money 
because it is a mathematical calculation. It doesn’t take calculus; it simply takes arithmetic. 
 
Now if you want me to give you that explanation one more time, stand up and tell me you still don’t 
understand it. 
 



Ms. Smart: - Mr. Minister, the population is ageing. The statistics show that over the age of 65 people’s 
incomes go down. Your own statistics show that many, many people in Saskatchewan over the age of 65 
are living below the poverty line. Your own department has said that three-quarters of the seniors qualify 
for that grant. And yet, you reduced the money available to them. 
 
The reason that you’re not getting the applications, although the applications are up from . . . in 1987 to 
’88, 71,000 grants were provided; in 1989, at the senior citizen conference in Prince Albert, your own 
deputy minister said 75,000 cheques were issued last year. That’s an increase in the number of people 
applying for the heritage grant, and yet you decrease the money. 
 
Now what you’re doing is your hiding that grant from people. They’re not informed about it properly. 
They’re not getting their access to the money that they’re entitled to. And with the increase in school 
taxes and the increase in property taxes, and the increase in the cost of supplies to senior citizens, and the 
increase in utility rates, and all the other taxes and costs that you’ve heaped on the people of 
Saskatchewan - your government’s heaped on the people of Saskatchewan - they need that income, Mr. 
Minister. They need that income, and that grant should be increased in your budget, not decreased. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in the interests of time, I want to turn to another issue regarding income for senior 
citizens and quickly ask you about your position and your position to the Premier of this province 
regarding the federal government’s plan to claw back the old age security program. Now you will know 
that the seniors who advise you, including Tex Azevedo, have said that they don’t want that claw-back 
on the federal pension plan. Their position is that that’s a universal program, a basic senior citizen 
pension for people over the age of 65, and that by the federal government introducing this claw-back 
clause, they are destroying that universality. 
 
The senior citizens, Mr. Minister, are well prepared to recognize that there are a few seniors on high 
income, and their position is that those seniors on high income should pay taxes on that income and that 
would be part of the government’s revenue. But by clawing back the old age security to people whose 
incomes is $50,000 or over this time around, they are jeopardizing the universal program. 
 
And they are also failing to recognize that people’s income of $50,000 includes a number of ways of 
generating that income, all of which are taxed differently. And that some people who declare a $50,000 
income may actually has less spending money than others. So it’s unfair from the beginning, and it’s 
particularly unfair in destroying the old age security program itself. Because once the standard is set at 
$50,000 income, the standard two years down the road can be lowered to $40,000 income and so the 
erosion takes place. 
 
The seniors, Mr. Minister, are very concerned about that. And my question to you specifically is: what 
position have you taken on it? What representation have you made to the Premier to bring to the 
Premier’s conference that’s going on now, to the federal government? What representation have you 
made to the federal government on that issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, can you believe this? I mean, just listen to the question. Can you 
believe this? The party that screams over there, tax the rich, says don’t tax senior citizens who make 
more than $40,000 a year. These are people who don’t have children to raise. These are people who can, 
I believe, live comfortably on their $50,000 per year. I don’t believe, Mr. Chairman, that the old NDP 
out there making more than $50,000 are refusing to pay taxes because they don’t think they’re rich. If a 
senior citizen has an income in excess of $50,000 a year, they should pay taxes like everybody else. 
 



And I can’t believe that the NDP, who clamour and scream to tax the rich, say now don’t tax the senior 
citizens who have incomes over $50,000 a year. I can tell you that the Conservative and Liberal senior 
citizens out there with incomes over $50,000 a year are prepared to pay their fair share of taxes and have 
not one of them has complained to me about having to pay their fair share of taxes if they have incomes 
over $50,000 a year. Would the members opposite please talk to all those old CCFers (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) out there and those old NDP, who think that if their income is over $50,00 a 
year, they are still poor. 
 
Ms. Smart: - Will the minister please answer my question which is specifically what your position is 
regarding the claw-back of the old age security pension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, our position is the people who have adequate incomes should pay 
taxes to help support the health care system, the social services, the highways, and all the other things 
that are dear to all of us, including the senior citizens who make more than $50,000 a year. I know they, 
like many other people, fell that the tax burden is getting quite high, but they also realize that they want 
the health care, they want the services, and you have to pay for these things if you want them. 
 
Ms. Smart: - Mr. Minister, I’ve made the point that the seniors on high incomes are quite prepared to 
accept taxation. They are not prepared to accept the claw-back of the old age security which undermines 
their universality. And I’m not surprised that you can’t even understand that concept or address it, 
because it’s one that you want to sweep under the rug. But it’s not going to be swept under the rug by the 
senior citizens, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have one more question to you regarding the grants to the seniors’ centres, senior citizen activity 
centres. These grant have not been increased this year or last year, despite the fact that the insurance 
rates are high, the cost of utilities has increased, the janitor fees need to be increased so that they can pay 
people well to maintain those centres. And that is a major concern for the seniors, that you have not 
increased the grants to their own senior citizen activity centres where they have an opportunity to gather 
and to enjoy their company in their retirement years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, I’m very proud of our senior citizens and the way they operate their 
centres in Saskatchewan. Twenty per cent of them did not require any grant at all because they have 
money in the bank. Eighty per cent of them required some assistance from the government, and this was 
a sharing process where the government assists them in operating centres. And the senior citizens realize 
that when revenues are down for the government and expenditures are up - revenues were up 5 per cent 
last year, expenditures were up 10 per cent, most of that on health care which is very dear to senior 
citizens - they realized that the priorities should be in health care and education, rather than in buying 
new furniture for senior citizens’ centres. 
 
So they have been very, very co-operative in that area. They have become self-sufficient in their centres. 
And I believe that we should encourage all elements of society to become self-sufficient. Twenty per 
cent are fully self-sufficient; the other 80 per cent receive assistance and will continue to do so. 
 
Ms. Smart: - Well the seniors will be insulted to think that what you think they want the money for is to 
buy new furniture, when they’re talking about just covering their basic expenses, as I pointed out. 
 
I’ve one more question for you, Mr. Minister. In the last annual report that you gave us, which is 1987 to 
’88, so it’s some time ago, you mentioned that you have a standing interdepartmental co-ordinating 
committee on ageing, SICCOA, which co-ordinates and provides an overview of policy and program 



developments across government. And I want to ask you, who is on that committee and how often they 
meet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, the full committee last met in January of 1988. We find that it hasn’t 
been necessary for the committee to be as active in the past because things are working well. My 
directorate is doing specific work with other departments rather than an overall general approach through 
the committee. So the directorate has taken over the role of this committee and has co-ordinated specific 
initiatives with other government departments. In effect we’ve reduced bureaucracy here and the results 
are better than what they have been in the past. 
 
Ms. Smart: - I ask you, who was on that committee, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Your question was so brief that it went right by me. I’m used to these long 
questions. Could you just repeat it for me? 
 
Ms. Smart: - I said, who was on that committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, this committee, this standing interdepartmental co-ordinating 
committee on ageing is longer as essential as it once was, because the Senior Citizens’ Provincial 
Council has been providing me with a lot of advice and good counsel in the last year or so. I’ve met with 
them on several occasions, and they have had very good input. 
 
Specifically answering your question of who was involved in the standing interdepartmental co-
ordinating committee on ageing, was the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower, Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs, Co-operation and Development, Culture and Recreation, Employment 
Development Agency, Executive Council, Finance, health, Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, Justice, 
Labour, Northern Secretariat, Parks and Renewable Resources, Public Service Commission, Rural 
Development, Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Corporation, 
Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation, Social Services, Urban Affairs, and also the women’s 
secretariat. 
 
We find that they last met in January of 1988 and that the committee is rather large, and we’ve dealt with 
the problems specifically and have received good advice from the provincial council of senior citizens. 
So the committee is not as essential as we once felt it was. 
 
Ms. Smart: - Well, the co-ordination of services between your different departments is still very 
essential, Mr. Minister. In the interests of time I won’t go into the details regarding such things as the 
transportation grant, etc. I just want to point out that the seniors continue to have concerns about the 
consultation and the co-ordination of services to them, and it’s obvious by your actions that you are 
restricting yourself and cutting back on this process which is very necessary in order to provide good 
services for seniors. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - Yes, I’m just trying to get some clarification, Mr. Minister, in regards to certain things, a 
bit of the changes that have taken place in the past three, four years in regards to employment and Indian 
and Metis people. 
 
First of all, as I was reviewing the historical development . . . of course, Bill 5 had made it possible for 
you to change whatever department and organizations within department, and you shifted things around 
quite a bit in the past couple of years. Now as I was reviewing the estimates, I looked at the native career 



development program and employment development program back in ‘86-87 and I notice that there were 
under the estimates . . . they had estimated approximately 1.270 million, and the actual expenditures 
were 1.338 million at that time. 
 
(0945) 
 
Now when I checked out the figures for ‘87-88, the actual figure had dropped 1.338 million. When I 
combined the native career development program and employment development program it had dropped 
to $747,591 on the actual Public Accounts. It was a drop of 41 per cent. 
 
Now in ‘88-89, of course, the estimates were the same. And the I was looking at ‘89-90 and I was trying 
to figure out exactly what the amounts were and what the specific amount were last year in comparison 
to the estimates this year. Could you provide me with the detail on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, no, I can’t. That native career development program is part of the 
Indian Affairs Secretariat for which the Minister of Highways is responsible. And so I don’t have that 
information available today. I suppose the minister responsible could provide that material, or you could 
ask that question in question period and he could take notice and get you the information. So I’m sorry I 
can’t give you that information today. 
 
Mr. Goulet: - I might just say, Mr. Minister, therefore I will be asking the questions, I will be referring 
the questions then to the minister in charge when his estimates do come up, and the Minister of 
Highways, I would imagine, will be coming up the following week. 
 
I might just add that the, for the record, the minister, the portfolio for Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat used to be under your direction and so on, but I notice that the Premier took it away from you 
for whatever reason it was. I might add it may have been due to statements or it may have been due to 
the huge cut-backs that were made previously, but I’ll just leave the for the record and do any of my 
questioning on a specific level to the Minister of Highways who is now in charge of Indian and Native 
Affairs Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Simard: - Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I note from the budget that the 
women’s directorate has been cut almost in half, from 700,600 in ‘88-89 to 395,400 in ‘89-90. I also 
understand that the staff has been reduced to seven staff positions from nine, Mr. Minister. Could you 
please tell me what the reason for these funding cuts is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, Mr. Chairman, the communications subvote money was moved to another 
subvote which changes the amount in the budget, in the blue book. Also two clerical positions which 
were not being utilized to the fullest extent in this particular secretariat were moved to where the 
positions could be utilized more. We find that the women’s directorate is operating very efficiently and 
is functioning very well with their current staff. 
 
Ms. Simard: - Mr. Minister, when you say that money is moved, does that mean that is it not allocated 
then to the women’s directorate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, the major communications expenditures at the women’s directorate 
are for Focus and Focus on Your Future which have been very successful publications in the women’s 
directorate. They have gained accolades rights across Canada, and I’ve had requests from departments 
and organizations right across Canada for copies of those publications. 



 
Originally in the budget of this particular branch, when it was a separate directorate rather than part of 
the all encompassing Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, they had a separate 
budget for those matters. Their budget for communications is now part of the overall departmental 
budget for communications, and so we’re really taking here about accounting practices rather than actual 
dollars expended. 
 
Ms. Simard: - Well it makes it very difficult, Mr. Minister, for anyone to determine what your 
commitment is with respect to the women’s directorate and the work that is envisaged that the women’s 
directorate do when the funding is being cut in half and moved all over the place and put into general 
revenues with respect to the department. It gets very difficult to determine what your commitment is, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I note that there has been a lot of reorganization over the years with respect to the women’s 
directorate in your department. In 1982 there were some 18 positions, and now I understand it’s down to 
seven, Mr. Minister - from 18 to seven positions. The women’s directorate used to conduct research on a 
wide range of issues affecting women - day care, legal issues, women in prisons, the effects of the 
technological change on women, and so on. But, Mr. Minister, you appear to be just eroding and slowly 
eroding the functions of this department and the functions of the women who were employed in the 
women’s directorate. That’s what I see happening in your department. 
 
And it’s not good enough for you to say that, oh well, it’s a part of the general overall department, 
because it gets lost, Mr. Minister, it gets lost then. And what we need from that department is 
meaningful research and a commitment on the part of your government to properly staff it and to set in 
apart with a meaningful and strong mandate. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to women living in poverty, I simply wish to make the point that something 
like 56 per cent of one-parent families are headed by women who are poor, and six in 10 children raised 
by a single parent mother is poor in this province, Mr. Minister. And something like 35.1 per cent of low 
income families are headed by women. So we have nearly 70 per cent of children living in female-
headed, single parent families living in poverty, Mr. Minister. That’s some 19,600 children. And 
between 1981 to ’86 the number of poor children increased by some 12.8 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, as women’s critic for the opposition, I simply want to point out to you that many single 
mothers are earning minimum wage in Saskatchewan, and the minimum wage if a very grim wage and 
something like half the poverty level. 
 
So the situation for single mothers earning minimum wage is very difficult, Mr. Minister, and it affects 
their children. It’s not just the mother we’re talking about, it’s children as well. It’s our future in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, and I really believe that it’s important for this government to take a look at 
that situation and ensure that these families are not in such financial straits. 
 
I’m wondering how your government can explain, Mr. Minister, paying George Hill salaries and benefits 
of some $200,000, for example; and about - what is it? - $100,000 to Paul Schoenhals to ease the pain of 
his election defeat. I’m wondering how your government can do that, Mr. Minister, and in face of the 
statistics pertaining to children and single mothers and families living in poverty in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, certainly it’s of great concern to myself and this government that as 
many women as are, are living in single income families with low incomes. That is a great burden to 



them. There’s several things that have to be done. Get the economy rolling through diversification, as 
I’ve indicated earlier, so that there will be more jobs for single parents. 
 
We now have child care where 80 per cent of our child care budget is spent on single parents. We are 
trying to do everything to alleviate their problems. However, the fact is that as single parents, they do not 
have two income families. One of the things that we have to do is crack down on fathers. I don’t know if 
you call them single fathers, because they seem to be off and about - single, but they’re really not fathers; 
they’re only biological fathers - and we have to crack down on fathers who have responsibility towards 
their children and their former spouses. We intend to do that in a greater way. 
 
I really don’t see how George Hill and Paul Schoenhals are involved in this matter. Maybe it’s just for 
political grandstanding that the member opposite raises their names, but I can say that George Hill and 
Paul Schoenhals, as many other people who have been hired to management in this government, have 
more than earned their income in the returns they have made to the province with respect to the money 
they have been able to save through better management and efficiency. And you certainly have to pay a 
high enough wage to attract the people who can get the job done. 
 
That’s one of the problems I have in government is that because of our egalitarian notions that everyone 
should be paid the same and the ideas of the members opposite that no one is worth more money than 
anyone else, I can’t attract as good as managers as I’d like to. I have a deputy minister here who took a 
cut in pay to take this job. That is an indication of devotion. But our rules don’t allow me to pay my 
deputy minister what he was making with a private company before he came to work for the 
government. 
 
So not only do politicians sacrifice in their personal lives, but there are civil servants who sacrifice in 
their personal lives because good people like the people I have surrounding me here can make more and 
were making more in private industry where their talents are adequately compensated. Fortunately, these 
people are driven by higher motivations than pure money. 
 
An Hon. Member: - Didn’t Louise used to work for the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - One of my members opposite reminds that the member who asked this question 
used to also at one time work for the provincial government, and I don’t know what she is saying. Is she 
saying to us that . . . If she’s suggesting that Mr. Hill and Mr. Schoenhals are incompetent because they 
are Conservatives? Is she admitting that she was incompetent because she was an NDP at that time? 
Would she get this discussion out of the gutter and stick to the topic at hand? That is what is essential 
here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, with respect to George Hill, Mr. Hill is making a 
very handsome salary. As you know, he’s past president of the PC Party, and we also know, Mr. 
Minister, that what Mr. Hill is doing is attempting to privatize one of the major Crown corporations in 
this province against the wishes of 70 per cent of the population, and the taxpayers are paying him over 
$200,000 a year to do it, Mr. Minister, and that’s why it’s an issue. At the same time, we have single 
parent mothers and children living in poverty in this province at unprecedented rates, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now with respect to battered women, I notice that transition housing the increases have been very 
minimal, Mr. Minister. From ‘88-89 budget to ‘89-90, we’re looking at Saskatoon Interval House, 2.8; 
Regina Transition, 2.3; Isabel Johnson, 2.1; Moose Jaw, 3.9; P.A., 2.1; Battlefords, 1.6; 3.8 for Yorkton; 



and La Ronge, 1.7. That’s the information I have, Mr. Minister. Those increases do not even meet the 
rate of inflation, Mr. Minister. 
 
I also understand that there’s federal funding that still exists for another 13 emergency spaces. I want to 
know whether the minister is going to approve operating funds for additional emergency spaces in the 
province in order to cash in on the federal funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, federal funding is not always what people make it out to be. The 
federal government are prepared to pay for bricks and mortar, and thereafter have the provincial 
government pay the operating costs for ever and a day, and there are only so many operating costs we 
can pay. 
 
Last year we chose to put an extra $130 million into health in this province, and an extra $52 million 
into education in this province. That is a clear choice that we have made, a priority to allocate the money 
that we didn’t even have, but we had to spend it. 
 
(1000) 
 
And so as soon as the member opposite can tell us which tax should be raised, then we will spend the 
money on the priorities that she believes it should be spent on, but we feel that the services to women 
have been increased nearly threefold under this government. And there are period when you can afford to 
expand and there are period when you have to put the money into health and education and into other 
social services, and we’ve tried to put money into raising the wages of the workers at group homes. 
We’ve tried to put money into improving the foster care program. 
 
And I might point out to the member opposite, who is a lawyer as I am and I know that she can clearly 
do arithmetic, contrary to what some of the other members over there can’t do, and that she could add up 
the situation. And when your expenditures are increasing at 10 per cent per year and your income is 
increasing at 5 per cent per year, you have to be very careful with your expenditures. 
 
And the services to women have continued, have improved. I read in the paper two years ago, such 
outrageous lies as things had been cut off, which is not the case. And when you get right down to the 
facts, this was the government who in this year’s budget allocated another facility for Swift Current. So 
we were spreading the services around the province as fast as possible. And there’s a limit to what you 
can do in any given year, and we’ll try to do as much as possible in the future. 
 
Ms. Simard: - Thank you. Mr. Minister, you indicated that if we could tell you what tax to raise, you’d 
have more money to spend and that when expenditures are outstripping revenues, that the money simply 
isn’t there. And that’s a valid comment, Mr. Minister. However I wish to point out that it isn’t simply a 
question of raising taxes. There are other ways that government money can be spent . . . or can be saved. 
For example . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: - Cuts. 
 
Ms. Simard: - No. Cancel our $9 million birthday party, Mr. Minister. Clean up your GigaText scandal 
and your GigaText affair that’s costing the taxpayers of this province some $5 million, Mr. Minister. Cut 
your patronage - George Hill, $200,000 a year to privatize a Crown corporation that nobody in this 
province except Tories want privatized, Mr. Minister. Cut your patronage. 
 



Cut your waste and mismanagement. Cut your privatization agenda that is costing jobs in this province 
for many, many young people who are fleeing the province in unprecedented numbers. And when people 
leave the province, Mr. Minister, it means less revenue for the provincial coffers in terms of income tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s a lot of ways that can save money in this province for programs like transition 
homes, for the development of women, for health care, and for other social programs - a lot of ways, Mr. 
Minister, besides raising taxes. And it’s about time that this government realized that the way it has 
governed this province has created a situation in Saskatchewan where we cannot afford many of the 
social programs that we used to enjoy because of your incompetence and your mismanagement, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: - I want to make two more point in closing and that is the fact that the wage gap between 
men and women, Mr. Minister, is increased as I am advised. And women’s full-time wages dropped 
something like 2.5 per cent in comparison to men’s wages in Saskatchewan from 1977 to ’87 and in ’87 
a female full-time worker earned on the average 66.3 per cent of what men earned. 
 
Now we have debated in this legislature at some length the pros and cons of pay equity, Mr. Minister, 
and we’ve had that discussion over a period of time. And I will ask the minister to comment as to 
whether or not he has reconsidered his position with respect to pay equity and would be prepared to look 
at a broader concept of pay equity being implement in the province. 
 
The other point I wish to make before I sit down, Mr. Minister, is the fact that I have in my hands here a 
brief from the Saskatchewan Association of Women and the Law who re very clearly stating and present 
a very sound and logical case against for-profit child care programs in the province - commercial child 
care services. 
 
They indicate that a parliamentary special committee on child care showed that 77 argued against, 
against for-profit child care centres. They indicate that in commercial operations, the minimum standards 
set out in the day care regulations in all probability will be the maximum. And the profit motive is 
inconsistent with provide high quality child care. 
 
I think that . . . they also go on to say that experience in other jurisdictions where for-profit child care 
services are licensed is not encouraging. Complaints and violations, complaints about violations of 
regulations and non-compliance with the minimum standards are much higher for for-profit centres. 
These reports indicate that commercial child care services will be expensive to monitor in order to 
promote compliance with minimum standards. In other words, they are making a case against for child 
profit commercial . . . pardon me, for-profit child care commercial centres, you know, as distinct of 
course from the small neighbourhood family home. And, Mr. Minister, I’m just going to urge you to 
consider the comments of these women and consider the comments of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Women and the Law in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well I will consider those. I think the member opposite and the people who are 
opposed to any kind of commercial child care centres are first of all getting overly concerned because I 
don’t think we will have a large number of them, considering that the so-called non-profit child care 
centres are so heavily subsidized, I doubt if anyone could compete with them in the market. But I don’t 
want to absolutely ban and outlaw commercial child care centres because I believe a little bit of 



competition is healthy, and the people who cry wolf here, I believe, fear competition more than they fear 
lack of adequate child care. 
 
What we have is a greater demand, according to members opposite, for child care than there is a supply. 
Yet we just opened a child care - and I’ll give a free commercial to this child care - a brand-new child 
care, Transcona child care geared up for, I believe, 40 students, or 40 children, and they’ve come to me 
with a problem that they only had I believe seven or 11 registered in the first two weeks. 
 
So I say when there is apparently, allegedly such a great demand, that people should take their children 
to the new Transcona child care which is in a building subsidized by the provincial government, where 
parents qualify for subsidy, where, if the members opposite and the advocates tell me there’s such a great 
demand, and I’ve believed them up until now, there’s a child care and a brand-new one that isn’t full. So. 
I would encourage people to use that new child care, and when that’s full, then we’ll build some more. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell me who the acting director of the occupational health and 
safety branch is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - The acting director is Myles Morin. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, is that the same Myles Morin that was the former PC MLA for North 
Battleford, continuing that unbelievable phenomenon that we see in this province, down goes a Tory and 
up pops a job; is that the same Myles Morin, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Yes, Mr. Chairman, this is the same Myles Morin who in the 1970s worked for this 
same department and is now again working for the same government department that we worked in 
when the NDP were government. Surely if he was incompetent, the NDP would have dismissed him in 
the 1970s. It seems to me, now that he has become a cabinet minister and showed his leadership ability, 
because he was a cabinet minister in a Conservative government, now all of a sudden he’s incompetent 
to work in the same department in which he worked in the 1970s. 
 
Can the member opposite explain why they hired an incompetent man; or will they acknowledge that he 
was competent in the 1970s, is now more mature, more experienced, has been a cabinet minister, and is 
more competent to work in the same department in the 1980s? 
 
In addition, there was a vacancy due to the untimely death of an individual in pensions. It so happens 
that Mr. Myles Morin was a minister responsible for the implementation of the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan. It so happens that he had some expertise in this area, and when this vacancy occurred by the 
untimely death, Mr. Morin was suited to fill that position. He filled that position at a salary $8,000 per 
year less than the incumbent was receiving. So by hiring Mr. Morin to fill that position, the government 
saved $8,000. 
 
Mr. Morin filled that position so successfully that when a vacancy occurred for director of occupational 
health and safety, we placed Mr. Morin, at the request of my department, in an acting role there. He now 
is the director of pensions and the acting director of occupational health and safety, which because he is 
filling two jobs, Mr. Morin has replaced two people at present. I don’t know if he can continue with that 
work-load, but he is not only now saving the government $8,000 per year, he is now saving the 
government approximately $60,000 per year. 
 



If you want me to put Mr. Morin back as director of pensions and pay him what the other person was 
receiving, it will cost an extra $8,000 there, and we will have to hire a new acting director, and that will 
cost another approximately 55 of $60,000. So if you don’t want Mr. Morin to replace two people, let me 
know and the taxpayers can waste $60,000 that we’re not spending right now. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, I’m sure that Mr. Morin will take interest in your reflections about his 
incompetence. However, I’ll leave that for others who may be more knowledgeable about the specifics to 
decide. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s kind of an interesting explanation, a bit of a defensive explanation I must add. The 
rationale you use is somewhat equated to the person who would buy something on sale and concentrate 
on how much they saved, and by buying even more on sale they saved even more, which makes it just all 
that much wiser and expenditure. You claim, Mr. Minister, that somehow he’s saving the province 
$60,000. How much is costing the province, Mr. Minister? What’s his salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well I will give the total figures here, Mr. Chairman, so that anybody who can do 
arithmetic can calculate the net saving to the province as we stand today. The incumbent, who dies 
suddenly in his office, or in his position, was receiving $68,000 per year. Mr. Morin was hired at 
$60,000 per year. And now because he’s assumed the role, in addition, of acting director of occupational 
health and safety, receives $66,000 per year. He is replacing an individual that was paid in that position, 
$76,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Morin now holds down two positions for which he is paid $66,000 per year, replacing the two 
incumbents who were paid $68,000 and $76,000 per year. So I would submit there’s a net saving, as we 
speak today, of $78,000 per year to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and I only hope that Mr. Morin can 
continue to fill both of these positions for quite a long time because we can certainly use that saving. I 
think if you add it up, he is being paid $66,000 a year for two positions; we are saving $78,000 per year 
under the current arrangement. 
 
I make no apologies for Mr. Morin who worked in this department while you were government, and you 
would know the competence of people hired because you yourself were paid an honorarium from the 
Department of Education before you were elected while the NDP were government. So I’m not denying 
that you weren’t competent at the time. Why are you denying that this man who worked as one of your 
colleagues at the time is not competent? Come on, be fair and reasonable for once. 
 
Are you suggesting that a person like myself, who was a prosecutor - not on pay, but on contract - while 
you were government, was not competent, and that as soon as I joined the Conservative party, I became 
incompetent and you cut off my prosecutions? It had cost me over $50,000 to quit the NDP, and I know 
it would cost me that. But as a matter of principle, I could no longer remain with your party. 
 
(1015) 
 
When it cost me over $50,000 to quit your party, because as soon as I became a Conservative I was no 
longer competent, are you telling me that Mr. Morin, because he became a Conservative is no longer 
competent? Be realistic. Are you suggesting that myself, who would be a solicitor for the Department of 
Justice, would not be competent to work in the Department of Justice? Be realistic. I mean, you can 
make your arguments and your political arguments, but be realistic. 
 



Constantly you people suggest that because someone is a Conservative he is not competent, but because 
someone is a social democrat, they are competent to do anything. And I have a list here that goes on for 
about 50 pages of social democrats that your government deemed competent to work for the 
government. I am pleased to say that we now have fewer civil servants, and that could be because some 
of your friends no longer work for this government. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, that is one of the most defensive answers I’ve ever heard to a 
straightforward question. In the last few minutes there’s one member in this House that’s used the word 
“incompetence” in respect to Mr. Morin and that’s yourself, Mr. Minister. I wasn’t asking about his 
competence. And if you have questions, you may want to look at that and I’ll leave it to others to decide. 
I’m simply asking what he’s paid, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let me ask you as well, Mr. Minister, how long will he be serving in this money-saving position that 
he’s been provided? And what benefits, Mr. Minister, is he receiving in addition to his $66,000 a year 
annual salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - He gets the standard benefits, Mr. Chairman. The member opposite want to 
languish in the gutter, drag politics into things. The member opposite should look in his own family. The 
member opposite should look in his own family and look at himself. He should look in a mirror and see 
if he can honestly say the he and his family, his relatives have always been fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan. He knows that I’m talking about. He should look at his own family. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, this gets curiouser and curiouser. I’m simply asking a straightforward 
question, and I would appreciate it if you wouldn’t mind just getting to the question. If you want to cast 
aspersions on Mr. Morin, I suppose that’s your prerogative to do that. I simply ask, Mr. Minister, what 
other benefits he’s receiving and what’s the term of his appointment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to calculate the other benefits. He gets the same 
benefits as every other civil servant. I mean, look it up in the contracts. He gets the same benefits. 
What’s the term of his office? The same as everybody elses. He’s in office until he quits or gets fired. 
That’s the same term as everybody else. So I don’t really see anything unusual about this. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, it does get curiouser and curiouser. But let’s just take a look at a few 
items related to the division that Mr. Morin is charge of. Mr. Minister, in the occupational health and 
safety branch there are some interesting numbers that I think just bear a little reflection. In 1986-87, the 
most recent year for which I’ve been able to acquire the numbers, Mr. Minister, there was some $6,000 
collected for violations of occupational health and safety. That’s all, in all of 1987-87, in the whole year, 
only $6,800 collected for violations of occupational health and safety requirements in all of 
Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Minister, I am pleased to note that in this budget, you’re increasing the number 
of occupational health and safety offices from nine to 12. I don’t know if those are all in place yet, but I 
hope so. 
 
But I note with interest, Mr. Minister, that the same year ‘86-87, there were $174,166 collected in fines 
for violation of wildlife protection laws. Mr. Minister, in 1986-87, there were some 200 wildlife 
enforcement officers who were protecting the wildlife in the province of Saskatchewan. You’re 
proposing this year to increase to 12 the number of people who are protecting the safety of working 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



And I note it does get curiouser and curiouser, Mr. Minister. It is an odd balance when we collect 25 
times as much money in fines for violation of wildlife protection laws than for violation of occupational 
health and safety protections for the working people in the province of Saskatchewan. It is an interesting 
comment as well, Mr. Minister, when as assign some 200 people to protect wildlife and enforce those 
laws, and you’re now increasing it to 12 to protect the application of the occupational health and safety 
enforcement in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll leave that to you and others to reflect on the wisdom of that and whether that’s the 
proper balance that we ought to have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note as well that in 1988-89 . . . or sorry, in 1987-88 that the number of occupational 
health and safety inspections dropped down to 1,989 from the previous year where there were 2,697 
inspections - a decrease of some 26 per cent. You many want to comment on what it was in the past year. 
That number has not been made available. 
 
I note as well, Mr. Minister, that in previous questions to you, you indicated that contrary to the law of 
the land which says that every work place that has more than 10 employees, 10 or more employees, there 
must an occupational health and safety committee; that, as a matter of fact, your government, Mr. 
Minister, is only enforcing . . . is not, as a matter of fact, enforcing that legislation; that only about 40 per 
cent of the work places that are required by law - required by law - to have occupational health and 
safety committees where employers, management, and employees work together in the interest of safety 
of the work place - and that your government is simply not enforcing that - some only 40 per cent of 
those work-forces required by law to have a committee, in fact, have one. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note as well that your department has been required repeatedly by a number of 
occupational health and safety committees to provide copies of the Act, the law of the land, and the 
regulations, the specifics to interpret the law of the land, and that they are denied. 
 
And I guess, again I wonder, Mr. Minister, what that indicates about your government’s commitment to 
occupational health and safety when you do not provide at no cost . . . I mean, let’s be honest here. 
Employees and employers are all paying income tax. It goes to the operating of government . . . you have 
legislation that says, every work place that has 10 or more employees must have an occupational health 
and safety committee, and yet you refuse to provide the copies of the Act itself and the regulations to 
those committees without them paying for them specifically, and that strikes me as bit odd, as a 
statement of your commitment to safety in the work place, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, also it’s reported to me that nowhere near the 100 per cent of work places that are required 
by again by your government to have a work place hazardous material information system operative and 
in place by February 28 of this year, that nowhere near the 100 per cent, again required by your 
legislation, have got the WHMIS ( work place hazardous materials information system) program in 
effect. And again we have to question your commitment to occupational health and safety as required by 
an Act that was approved with 100 per cent support by both sides of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note that you are paying some attention to occupational health and safety. You saw fit to 
form a review committee, which received briefs, presentations earlier this year; received them in private 
for some unknown reason, Mr. Minister. You and I both know that when the committee was holding its 
hearings that people who were presenting briefs to those hearings were not permitted to listen in to what 
other people were saying or were recommending by way of changes and improvements in occupational 



health and safety protection in the province of Saskatchewan, and in fact the media were barred from 
those hearings as well, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would mind just explaining, as a result of your commitment to 
occupational health and safety led by the, I assume competent, although you raise some doubts, 
leadership of Myles Morin in occupational health and safety, I wonder if you would explain, Mr. 
Minister, just why it is that when you undertook to have a committee to review The Occupational Health 
and Safety Act, regulations, practices of your government, invited people to make representation, why it 
is that you saw fit that those who were making representation couldn’t hear what anybody else had to 
say, and why the media was barred from those hearings? Could you please provide for me an answer as 
to why that was done, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well I’ll try to answer all your questions. First of all, I didn’t know you were 
talking about when you were talking about wildlife enforcement. It took me a whole to figure out what 
you were talking about. Then I realized that you were spouting the CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees) line that there are many more wildlife enforcement officers than there are occupational 
health and safety officers. And really I don’t really see the logic in comparing animals and people, the 
enforcement of rules with respect to animals and people. 
 
Clearly I can see that maybe CUPE was in error in that kind of logic, but I expected from a member of 
the Assembly better logic. So really, I think, you know, to compare animals and people, there’s not much 
more of answer I can give you. They’re just like . . . comparing apples and oranges is more similar, at 
least they’re all fruits. But I mean, gee, to compare animals and people, it makes no sense, so I can’t give 
you a further answer on it. 
 
With respect to occupational health and safety, you did finally point out that there is a review being held, 
and we’ll have to wait to see the results of the review. The decision to not have media and other 
presenters present at the committee hearing level was a decision of the committee. They made it for their 
own reasons. I can’t deny that I don’t agree with their decision, because members opposite, you know, 
have been grandstanding here for six months, and so we don’t really need a committee that wants to get 
down to work having members of the opposition grandstanding for the benefit of the media. So I think 
their decision was wisely made and I don’t fault them for that decision. 
 
Now the reason the number of inspections went down last year or one year, and it has come back up 
again now, is that in that in that particular year we had two resignations in the department in that area, 
and three early retirements, and until we retrained new officers to fill those positions and proceed with 
the inspections, the number of inspections fell, so that’s the logical explanation, and we are going to 
have a record number of officers in the field as soon as the new ones are hired and trained. 
 
And so with the review of this particular area, we expect there to be a report and further action taken. So 
fatalities had dropped considerably in the last few years. Unfortunately, this year there seems to be a rash 
of carelessness, and in agriculture we’ve already lost eight farmers, and we’ve lost - I’ll just do a quick 
calculation - 13 people in business and industry this year to fatalities, most of them road accidents, 
which are difficult to control. The number of injuries and time loss are down, and we’ll try to improve 
the record in the future, and we should both hope that we are successful in achieving that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, getting back to the secret public hearing that your review committee was 
holding. Mr. Minister, were there any general conclusions you’d like to share with the Assembly today 
from those hearings? And I specifically ask as well if you will provide for me, as the Labour and 



Employment critic in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, a copy of the briefs that were 
submitted to that committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, when the council completes the report and I’ve had a chance to 
review it, the report will be made public and we’ll send a copy to the member opposite as fast as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and will you provide the Labour and Employment critic in 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan a copy of the briefs that were submitted to the secret public 
hearing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, we’ve taken the position that the briefs are the property of the 
people who presented them. We’d be prepared to give the critic opposite a list of the people who 
presented briefs and he could contact them for copies of their briefs. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - And by when will you provide that list to me, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - My officials advise that within a few days they could provide you with a list of the 
people who submitted briefs. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - I assume a few is a single digit number something less than 10. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would ask as well if you would provide for me a copy of the internal Workers’ 
Compensation Board document which outlines the 18-point program related to the application of 
deeming in the Workers’ Compensation Board, and also the same document which outlines how it is to 
be implemented. Mr. Minister, will you provide me a copy of that document, and if you wish to 
comment on how effective the application of the 18-point programs is working, I would appreciate that 
as well. 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Workers’ compensation is a separate board. Traditionally, ministers have tried to 
answer a few questions. I would have to call in the officers from workers’ comp if we’re going to get 
into detail. But which particular document was it that you wanted? 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, you will recognize that there has been stated by you to be a change in the 
application of deeming to make it more realistic and fair. And I understand that there is an “18-point” 
program that has been a directive within, outlining as to how that is to be applied. And I’m simply 
requesting a copy of that document to understand what the approach is of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. And also is you have any brief comment as to whether in your view it’s an improve approach to 
dealing with deeming in the interest of fairness to injured workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, Mr. Chairman, in the absence of the officials, I can’t give you a specific 
answer. If you would drop me a short letter requesting this information, we’ll get it together for you and 
I’ll send it to you. Your members opposite have written me many letters and I’ve tried to answer 
wherever practical. So if you’ll just send me a reminder and I’ll try to get that information for you. 
 



As far as the deeming provision, it was a practice that had caused some problems and we’re trying to 
make improvement there. It hasn’t been as serious a problem in the last year as it was in prior years, so I 
feel that there’s some progress being made. 
 
But, as you know, in workers’ compensation it’s, as in other things, it’s impossible to satisfy everyone. 
The board was set up many years ago as an independent board and tries to operate that way. And the 
most I can do is . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Sorry, I can’t hear the member opposite from his seat, but 
he could get up and ask the question next, if he wishes. I can only answer them one at a time. 
 
With respect to the deeming provisions, we feel they’re working better. What we will do is if you sent 
me your little letter, I’ll review the whole area. As I was indicating, you can’t please everyone in this 
area of workers’ comp. The board tries to operate as independently as possible. And the most I can do as 
a minister is to ask them to reconsider something, and on occasions I ask them to reconsider these 
matters. 
 
But in most cases when I get complaints from MLAs or constituents around the province on workers’ 
comp, they haven’t followed the process of finalizing all of their appeals. And an appeal is not 
complicated; they merely have to write a letter to the board asking for a further appeal. It’s very seldom 
have they exhausted all of their appeals before they ask for me to intervene. In most cases I explain to 
them how they should proceed to appeal. And the complicated part is that they need some evidence that 
the board is wrong. They need their own doctor or a specialist to indicate that the evidence reflects an 
injury on the job or that they cannot work. 
 
And it’s a complicated area, not an exact science, in determining people’s pain. The board tries their 
best; we will continue. It you send me a letter, I’ll try to get you that information. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, I too am interested in see improved application of the deeming policy 
within the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Minister, my request is already in writing; it’s called Hansard. And I’ve made that request and I 
would simply ask that you direct one of your officials here to pick up a copy of Hansard tomorrow and to 
provide for me an outlines as to the 18-point program regarding the application of deeming policy in 
Workers’ Compensation Board. And I trust that won’t be hard to deal with. It is on record and it is in 
writing and it is available to you. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there any thought being given to changing the legislation related to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act to provide for the possibility of payment of unemployment insurance and Canada 
Pension Plan contributions on behalf of injured workers. Is there any thought being given to changes in 
the Act related to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well I could say in all honesty there is some thought being given to it; I can’t say 
results. When you weigh the matters . . . I was giving my own personal input to the board members as to 
what I was thinking was fair, and it doesn’t seem fair that where the workers are paying all of the 
premiums in this case . . . or the employers, and the workers do not pay the premiums directly, the 
employers argue that they are already paying workers’ compensation and Canada Pension Plan disability 
benefits. 
 
However I have made the argument that on the Canada Pension Plan the worker is paying half, and that I 
have asked them to consider the implications and do calculations of going . . . compromising in that they 



should only be considered half to the extent that the worker’s already receiving the worker’s share for 
the half the worker paid, but the employer should not pay twice. So I can say it’s under consideration. 
 
My own opinion is that this seems like a logical step, but I can’t say that we’re going to implement that 
immediately. We want to think about the implications of that a little further. But my feeling in fairness 
was that the employee who was paying half the Canada pension should get some credit for that half that 
they’re paying. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, let me simply say that I think you’re heading in the right direction, and keep 
on plugging. Being a man of determination, I am sure that you will see this social justice to its fruition. 
And if you want any support, I’d be happy to help in that regard. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you intending to appoint the next workers’ compensation review committee? It’s 
due to be appointed this year, as required, and I simply ask when you will be naming the members of that 
committee so it can begin its work for review of The Workers’ Compensation Act once again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Well, as soon as we get the chance to really consider the chairmanship of that 
committee. We’ve had a provincial court judge who has sat on the last four and has become very 
expertise in this area. And I have to approach this individual to see what his interest is in sitting on a 
fifth one. 
 
However, I also have to weigh the merits of seeking a new chairperson so as to say, get some fresh blood 
on this committee at the chairman level. And I have to weight these implications. I’m very satisfied with 
the work of the former chairman who acted under your government and under our government. We are 
satisfied with his work. So I don’t want him to be discouraged or slighted in any way. 
 
But I also want to consider the merits of a new chairperson, and of course there’s disadvantages in that in 
that the new chairperson is not as experienced as the former one. But at some stage the world has to 
change. So I want to weigh that, and when we’ve got that question sorted out on whether there are 
suitable people who could act as chairpersons, other than the one that has been chairperson for the last 
four committees, then we’ll make the decision and we’ll proceed. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - By when do you anticipate making that decision, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - I can’t say for certainty, but we’ll try to do it before the year ends. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you and I had a bit of question and answer 
exchange back on July 14, when it was brought to the attention of this House that CPIC (Canadian 
Police Information Centre) information is being provided to the Workers’ Compensation Board. That’s 
the police computer information. And, Mr. Minister, according to the internal document that was tabled 
in this House at that time, the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board has made available to 
investigators, a number of items, of information that are included in the police computer, in CIPC, not 
all of which are only criminal records, etc., and that Workers’ Compensation Board is classified by way 
of information purposes category (a) investigation, law enforcement, or administration of justice. 
 
When I raised that with you, Mr. Minister, your response was this, and I quote: 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m merely the minister with the responsibility of answering for that organization and we 
have only the power to change the board. But I do have information that on occasion the staff there has 



been threatened, and I believe that for the protection of the staff on occasion they have to call in some 
security. 
 
We have a double duty here. We have a duty to the people of Saskatchewan, but we also have a duty to 
our employees to make, at workers’ compensation, their work place a safe place to work. So if they 
receive a threat, they would have to call upon security. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s your statement in response to why CPIC information needs to be made available to 
the Workers’ Compensation Board. I’m not debating with you that there may on occasion be some 
threats. I can understand that that may happen. 
 
But I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you are saying then to this House that if threats are made to workers’ 
compensation employees that you do not report those to the police. If you do report them to the police, 
then I simply ask what you need CPIC information being made available to the Workers’ Compensation 
Board for? And if you’re not reporting those threats to the police, then, Mr. Minister, I simply ask, why 
not? That would seem to be the sensible way of dealing with that particular phenomenon, and certainly is 
not clear at all to me why CPIC information, which can easily be understood as an invasion of privacy, 
knowing that CPIC includes more information than criminal record. And I simply don’t understand, Mr. 
Minister, why it’s necessary to make that information available to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Your explanation implies that somehow you’re doing your own investigations. That strikes me as wrong 
and odd. If you aren’t doing your own investigations, then I don’t know why you would need that 
information. Mr. Minister, your explanation would be appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, the member opposite gave the workers’ compensation people an 
indication a few weeks ago that he wouldn’t really be raising workers’ comp in this estimates. And I 
don’t mind answering a few questions, but if wants details to get him to write me and I’ll try to give you 
more information on it. 
 
Basically, Mr. Chairman, honest people have nothing to hide, nothing to fear from what might be in the 
police computer. As far as I’m concerned, CPIC can print out whatever they got on me and you can table 
it here in the House here. Honest people have nothing to hide. Also people who have never been 
involved with criminal activity would not be in the computer and therefore, the average citizen is not 
particularly concerned about these matters. 
 
I really don’t know the details of how many threats they get, or why they need to check these matters out 
in detail on the threats. I can tell you that Workers’ Compensation Board accesses that information very, 
very rarely, and I don’t know if it’s crucial that they have that information. We have to weigh whether 
it’s more beneficial for society for them to have access than it’s detrimental. 
 
And I submit that since honest people have nothing to fear. There’s very little detriment . . .(inaudible 
interjection) . . . Honest people have no secrets that are stored in that computer. And people who’ve had 
records of violence or anything of that nature in the past, we just don’t have a major concern. 
 
I think really your thinking here is in the ‘60s; the idea of, you know, of liberties and that we have our 
total privacy. But I mean there was not nearly the privacy that people imagine. And I really don’t know 
what this paranoia about privacy is about. I know that in the ‘60s there were people at the university that 
I went to university with were kind of paranoid about that the state was watching them and that maybe 
somebody knew they were taking drugs, things like that. 



 
But basically I stand by the statement: honest people have nothing to hide. There’s nothing wrong with 
this process. And unless you can convince me that there’s some great detriment, we don’t really intend to 
change it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, I guess the issue is simply one of credibility. It would seem to me that 
an operation like the Workers’ Compensation Board, which by its mandate is designed to provide 
financial security to workers, people of Saskatchewan who are injured on the job, does not required this 
kind of information. It’s the kind of information that’s intended for law enforcement. That’s what it’s 
intended for. And I simply do not see any justification at all to have that kind of information available to 
investigators at the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
How can that in any way be relevant to determining whether a worker is eligible for compensation and 
what the amount of that compensation would be? I just don’t understand the remotest possible 
interpretation as to why that might be relevant. 
 
Your only explanation has been to assist with the investigation of threats which implies to me that the 
police aren’t being consulted, which is an abrogation of your responsibilities to provide security to 
employees of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
(1045) 
 
My God, the Workers’ Compensation Board should not be investigating those kinds of things; they 
should be turned over to the police. And the employees of the board should be provided protection by 
police not by the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
There simply is no was of justifying the need for that information to Workers’ Compensation Board that 
I can understand, and I note that you haven’t attempted to clarify that any. And I would simply ask that 
you would do the correct thing and that is to withdraw the access too CPIC information by Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Muirhead - I don’t think the word that the member used should be used in this House, when he used 
the word, God, taking God’s name in vain, in the House should be used. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - I remind all members that, yes, there is regulations in the House that we use language 
that is acceptable. I never head the statement, and I ask the member to continue with his questioning. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, let me continue then. First of all, I want to make it 
clear had I not intended to raise any workers’ compensation questions with you in these estimates, I 
would have advised you of that, and I’m not sure just on what basis you chose to not have those officials 
here. 
 
One final question there and then three more to wrap up, Mr. Minister, the estimates. 
 
Related to workers’ compensation, are they any thought being given to introducing an experience rating 
system for workers’ compensation rates for Saskatchewan employers? It’s a system that does not exist in 



Saskatchewan, in my view, should not exist, but does exist in some other provinces. And I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if there is any thought being given to moving in that direction in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - The answer, Mr. Chairman, is no. We do have though a surcharge for some 
employers who have a poor safety record. I think it started a long time ago under the NDP government 
when the city of Regina had a poor safety record. The fact that they were surcharged several thousands 
of dollars - I think it was over a hundred thousand dollars - turned the city of Regina into a model 
employer. 
 
And accidents cause pain, but they also cost the employer money, and so we will continue with the 
surcharge for those employer who have a very poor safety record. But in an insurance scheme, you have 
to spread the risk. So basically the answer is no, but we don’t intend to stop the surcharging where they 
have a poor safety record. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - I appreciate and concur with that answer, Mr. Minister. Thank you. 
 
Just three final questions I would like to ask regarding Acts for which you are responsible. Mr. Minister, 
you had introduced the employment benefits Act in the previous session in 1988, had indicated it was 
planned to be introduced in this session but has not. And I simply ask, Mr. Minister, what your 
intentions are regarding the introduction of either the employment benefits Act that was introduced at 
one time, or some variation thereof, as a replacement for The Labour Standards Act which currently 
exists. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, we had intended to introduce the Act this session. The session got 
rather busy and lengthy and we haven’t introduced it as yet. Whether we introduce the Act or not is a 
matter for consideration. 
 
I notice that the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is proudly boasting that they have stopped this Bill, 
and it’s possible that they might have stopped this Bill because this Act had many benefits for 
employees, was generally beneficial to workers, did one or two things for employers that would not harm 
employees. The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour took it upon themselves to try to stop this Bill. We 
could pass it and they can’t stop this Bill. But I have to weigh whether if the Saskatchewan Federation of 
labour goes around Saskatchewan lying bout this Bill, whether it is worth the aggravation of helping 
employees that have the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour lie about the Bill and denounce it as not 
being appropriate. Maybe I should allow them to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: - Order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Members opposite call for order. 
 
An Hon. Member: - He used the word “lie” three times in the last paragraph. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. I used the word “lie” three times. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. I’d ask members to refrain from using unparliamentary language. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, it is not unparliamentary to refer to the actual lies that are in the 
public. 
 



Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. I’d ask the member to withdraw that last statement, and I ask the member 
to refrain from using the word “lying or lie” in this House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, I withdraw any implications that anyone was lying in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. I ask the member to withdraw the statement with an unequivocal apology 
to the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - I unequivocally apologize to the House, Mr. Chairman, for whatever I’ve done. I 
mean, I know not . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - I have asked the member to withdraw the statement and apologize to the House, and I 
will accept nothing less. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, I withdraw the statement, I apologize to the House, and I ask for 
leave to continue. 
 
Let me say to the members opposite that if we are purposing a Bill that is not appreciated by the people 
who speak for workers. And if that Bill, as I contend, does a lot for workers, it becomes questionable 
whether you should do this for workers when you receive no thanks from the people who suggest that 
they speak for workers. And does the loss of those benefits then hang upon the heads of those people 
who are practising politics ahead of what’s good for the workers? 
 
Now I cast no aspersions on the members opposite, because the members opposite have not led the 
charge. And I think they understand that the employment benefits Act benefits workers. Now despite the 
opposition out there by certain parties, this government has to make a decision whether we are going to 
implement these benefits for workers despite the opposition of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 
or whether we say, all right, if the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is against a Bill that helps 
workers, then maybe they should have their way. 
 
I have to weigh what’s best for workers, and if we have to put up with what I’ve seen in public in the last 
six months with respect to this Bill, Mr. Chairman, then it really is questionable whether the government 
should be firm and ram through this Bill for the workers, or whether the government should accept the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour’s argument and not ass the Bill. And that is a decision we’ll have to 
make. And we will see whether, despite the kind of opposition that has been out there - that I can’t refer 
to specifically - that despite that kind of opposition, we may have to pass this Bill anyway. But we will 
give it some consideration. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, let me simply indicate to you that if it is your intention to proceed with 
the Bill, I would be happy to debate the merits and the demerits of the proposed Bill with you, as it was 
printed in June of 1988, and debate with you, including your own riding, Mr. Minister, as had been 
scheduled for us to do. Unfortunately you were not able to be there, but at any rate, Mr. Minister, I gather 
that you’re still giving some thought to the introduction of that Bill, but that’s not clear at best what your 
intentions are right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, your intentions regarding either amendments to or a new occupational health and safety 
Act? 
 



Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - The answer to your last question is we’ll await the review and then see what the 
report is. With respect to the employment benefits Act, Mr. Chairman, the Bill is good for workers and 
brings in new benefits for workers that would make it the best Bill in Canada. And I have no doubt that 
that Bill is to the benefit of the employees of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we will, yes, consider implementation of this Bill, but it it’s going to be misrepresented in the 
public by people who are more politically motivated than they are motivated towards the benefit of 
workers, then we have to weigh whether that kind of a debate in public is healthy for the workers in 
Saskatchewan and we’ll have to weigh all the implication. 
 
But certainly, the members opposite are disappointed because they believe only they can bring in a Bill 
that will help workers. When we bring in a Bill, they cannot tolerate it and behave in a conduct that is 
not befitting politicians in Saskatchewan. And we’ll consider the employment benefits Act which I 
believe is good for workers. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Minister, I was not intending to get into a debate of the Bill in these estimates. You 
seem to want to do that. Let me simply put on record that in my view, after having taken a very close 
look at that Bill, it is: number one, regressive for workers; number two, unfair to scrupulous employers; 
and has a number of loopholes that you can drive a Mack truck through, Mr. Minister, that put 
unscrupulous employers at a distinct advantage over scrupulous employers, particularly in the tough 
economic times that we’ve got under your government now. 
 
However, let’s leave it at that. This is not to debate that, and that’s not what I was asking. I gather then 
you’re stilling giving some thought to introducing the employment benefits Act. I gather that you’re 
intending to introduce amendments or a new occupational health and safety Act at some time. Minister 
nods to indicate yes. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, finally then, one of the other major Acts under your jurisdiction in this department is 
The Trade Union Act. Do you have intentions to introduce amendments or a new trade union Act at 
some time in the foreseeable future, in this term of your office, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, we have drafted a modern trade union Act. Whether the agenda will 
be such that . . . this House has been grinding along so slowly, I don’t know if it will be high enough on 
the priority list to get before the Assembly. It’s possible that we might have a small amendment . The 
law as it now stands is quite inadequate; it was designed for the mid-1940s or maybe even the mid-
1900s. 
 
But employers and employees have in the last year or two realistically tried to work under the current 
law even with its flaws, and whether we introduce amendments at this stage or not is a difficult situation. 
Certainly we have a concern about ensuring the democratic rights of union members and will look at 
some of the amendments in that regard. But I can’t say for certain whether they’ll fit into the timetable. 
 
The members opposite believe that there will be an election called this fall, and I don’t think then we 
would be able to pass this amendment. If members opposite believe there will be one next spring, I don’t 
know if we’ll get around to it. But it depends on the agenda and a large extent on what the Premier does 
in the next few months. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Well, Mr. Minister, I would concur with you on that final statement. Mr. Chairman, I’m 
looking at the clock and am ready to just make a final wrap-up comment and proceed to note on the 



estimates. If you’re willing to stop the clock for a few minutes, we can conclude Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment estimates before adjourning this morning. 
 
Mr. Minister, as we have reviewed the performance of your department this morning, it’s left a number 
of questions unanswered, but more important that that, Mr. Minister, it’s left those who depend on the 
Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment to provide security and opportunity for the 
future to the people of Saskatchewan, feeling that things are a bit amiss. 
 
I think as we’ve gone through these estimates this morning, Mr. Minister, there are a number of specific 
questions that I don’t mind admitting that I’ve been disappointed with the answers. I didn’t come to this 
Assembly expecting that you and I would agree on everything, but after all is said and done, it seems to 
me that the mot significant characteristic of the performance of your department within the contact of 
your government’s framework, and yourself as a minister, Mr. Minister, are the way that it’s dealt with 
the big pictures. 
 
And the big picture, the big issues in Saskatchewan today are clearly employment, employment 
opportunities, and reversing that terrible out-flow of human resources that are going . . . that we’re 
experiencing in the province of Saskatchewan today. It is absolutely a crisis that all of us in this 
Assembly must seriously address when the facts of the matter are that we’ve had a net loss of 50,000 
people over the last four and a half years. 
 
(1100) 
 
And let me just put that into context again, Mr. Minister. Just run through the lists of . . . numbers of 
towns and cities that 50,000 people makes up. We have lost in the last four and a half years the 
equivalent of every man, woman, and child from the communities of Lloydminster, Melfort, Melville, 
Assiniboia, Biggar, Carrot River, Carlyle, Davidson, Esterhazy, Gull Lake, Herbert, Indian Head, 
Kamsack, Kerrobert, Kindersley, Leader, Lumsden, and Meadow Lake. Mr. Minister, that’s a tragedy; 
it’s a tragedy. And surely it is the responsibility of your department, given the mandate that you have to 
deal with migration of people to our province, and employment opportunities for those who live within 
our province, surely your department has one of the most onerous responsibilities to address the issues of 
the future for Saskatchewan people. 
 
We will have our differences as we come to this Assembly, and that has always been the case; it will 
always be the case. And we’ll have different views as to how those objectives should be reached. I 
simply want to, and I say this very sincerely, Mr. Minister, I want to wish your department every success, 
and the officials in your department and the employees of your department every success at addressing 
those two absolutely critical major issues that impact on the province of Saskatchewan today creating 
meaningful employment opportunities for our citizens of all age, and particularly our young people, 
because we’re simply losing a great deal of energy and creativity and commitment to the very future of 
the province of Saskatchewan to build to make this province a better place for all of us to live. It’s 
addressing that out-flow population that is absolutely critical, and the key to that of course is addressing 
the economic issues of the day. 
 
I don’t share with you the view that we’re on the right track. I hear clearly you say that you are. I suppose 
ultimately in a democracy, times will come when people will make their own decisions and so be it. 
However, in spite of our difference in philosophical approach to management of economy, despite our 
difference in the historical track records of the successes of both of our parties in providing leadership to 
the province of Saskatchewan in all sincerity, I do hope that your department is able to stem the tide, to 



reverse the out-flow of people, and to provide opportunities for meaningful employment creations in the 
future. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 o 10 inclusive agreed. 
 
Item 11 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Chairman, just one question to the minister on item 11, payments to the property 
management corporation. Mr. Minister, I note that there’s been an increase of $77,500 from 1.4775 
million to 1.555 million, an increase of some 5.2 per cent in the amount that your department is paying 
to the property management corporation. Mr. Minister, I would appreciate any brief explanation you 
could provide this House as to why that increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: - Mr. Chairman, we leased additional space for a training conference room at the 
Circle 8 Building, and the balance of the increase of $44,000 is for a rent increase over last year, which 
explains the total sum. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Items 12 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Items 16 and 17 - Statutory. 
 
Item 18 agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - I’d like to thank the ministers and his officials. 
 
Mr. Hagel: - Mr. Chairman, I would simply like to thank the minister for his answers today and also to 
say thank you to the officials for their assistance in providing that information. And at the same time, 
Mr. Chairman, to wish the officials and the employees of that department every success in the year and 
years ahead in meeting some very important challenges that affect the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Being past 11 o’clock, the committee will rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 
 


