


















































June 16, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 16, 1989 
 

1957 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me indeed great pleasure today to introduce a group of school 
children from my home town of Young, Saskatchewan, from 
McClellan School. They're seated in your gallery. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Bill Watson; bus driver, 
Lillian Sather; and chaperons, Cheryl Schaan, Diana Shout and 
Joyce Hryniuk. 
 
Like I said, I am pleased to have the people from my home 
community come down here. I know all the people and all the 
kids. I see their shining faces. I hope they enjoy proceedings 
today, and I'd like all members to give them a warm welcome to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
welcome 38 grade 6 students from Indian Head, seated in the 
west gallery. They are accompanied today by their teachers, 
Ellen Muir and Tony Colley, who were colleagues of mine 
when I was teaching in Wolseley. It's nice to see you here with 
chaperons, Bill Schroeder, Linda Taylor, Ed McCann and 
another ex-teacher, now a bus driver, Ron Rushbrooke. 
Welcome to the people from Indian Head. I look forward to 
seeing you later for pictures and refreshments. Welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Meeting between Premier and Guy Montpetit 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to direct a 
question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, and I want to return to 
the GigaText scandal. I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, your 
involvement in the negotiations in respect to what has cost the 
taxpayers a lot of money. On April 18 of this year, Mr. 
Montpetit testified that in the late winter of 1988, probably 
February, he met with you in Montreal, Mr. Premier, spent the 
better part of the afternoon discussing with you his 
semiconductor project and his automatic French translation 
project. 
 
On April 27, Mr. Premier, he testified further that when you 
were in Montreal in February of 1988 to meet with Premier 
Bourassa, that he provided to you a chauffeur driven limousine 
and ferried you and your officials throughout Montreal. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, can you confirm that you had a major 
discussion with Montpetit regarding the investment of your 
government into these projects? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that I met 
with Mr. Guy Montpetit in Montreal, and I had the  

opportunity to discuss the whole industry related to microchips 
and, in fact, translation. And he briefly described to me where 
he thought the industry was going and some of the potential 
with respect to translation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
since all indications are that you were one of the first officials 
of this government to enter into discussions with Mr. Montpetit 
to discuss his grandiose schemes, I want to ask you further 
whether or not it was Mr. Ken Waschuk that also approached 
you initially in order to get your government involved in this 
project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn't among the first 
people to talk to Mr. Guy Montpetit; and the answer is no, to 
the latter question. I wasn't approached by Mr. Ken Waschuk to 
do anything with respect to Mr. Guy Montpetit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the Premier. I'd like to ask the 
Premier whether he has any conversations, any discussions with 
Ken Waschuk in respect to the project that your government 
invested in, and whether you have had further discussions with 
Mr. Terry Leier in respect to the advisability of proceeding with 
that project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I've had very little to do 
with the project at all, as you know, and as the Deputy Premier 
has said here in the legislature that he has been spearheading the 
project with respect to technology. I looked at it and I talked 
with him about the process of trying to get the best technology 
possible to translate, because we were asked to translate, and I 
believe as a result of a court decision, make sure that in fact that 
we do. 
 
So I'll only say, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of our attempt to 
get the very best technology, that I've relied on the Deputy 
Premier and his staff to provide that information. And in fact 
we hope, Mr. Speaker, in the next few days that in fact the 
technology will be proven to translate, and it will be a valuable 
asset in terms of our capacity to translate from French into 
English all the statutes that we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, what we're discussing here is the 
accountability of your government and the involvement in the 
deal that has cost the taxpayers literally millions of dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment with Montpetit Companies 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you further a new question, Mr. 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. On Monday of this week I'm  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1958 
 

advised that in Montreal a Dr. Alex Voschenkov, an American 
scientist and business associate of Mr. Montpetit, testified that 
he was invited to come to Saskatchewan in January or February 
of this year, without Mr. Montpetit, to discuss further the 
superconductor project. He further testified that he met with Dr. 
George Hare, Mr. Montpetit's associate, Dr. Fabian, the Toronto 
consultant hired by the government, and Mr. Terry Leier. 
 
I want to ask whether as late, as indicated in the testimony, as 
January-February of this year, whether that meeting took place 
and further discussions and involvement of this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea, and I'll let 
the Deputy Premier respond. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I'm afraid I can't allow the 
Deputy Premier to respond unless, you know . . . but you can't 
do it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I therefore address to the super 
investor for this province, the Deputy Premier, that same 
question in order that we can get a stimulating, stimulating, 
intellectual answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I'm flattered. I'm flattered, Mr. 
Speaker, and I'd like to talk about super investment for the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I talk about it, I'd like to take you back, I'd like to 
take you back to 1981, Mr. Speaker, 1981 when the New 
Democratic Party government of that day, members of the 
board of CIC (Crown investments corporation of 
Saskatchewan) — Cowley, Cody, Smishek, Tchorzewski, and 
so on, Mr. Speaker — invested $5 million — that's equivalent 
to about 8 million today, Mr. Speaker — in an outfit called 
Nabu. 
 
Now what is Nabu? Nabu is a technology company, Mr. 
Speaker, from central Canada, from central Canada — not one 
job. They were the major minority shareholder — not one job, 
not one ounce of technology moved to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And do you know what the return was on that 
investment? Does anybody know? Zero, zip, nothing. And the 
whole investment was written off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These technological wizards over here, Mr. Speaker, blew five 
million 1981 dollars without one job or one ounce of 
technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That investment genius . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the Deputy 
Premier didn't listen to the question. I asked you whether in 
January and February, after the investigation was taking place 
in respect to the scandal that this  

government is in, whether or not there was this important 
meeting for further investments with the Montpetit chain of 
companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And in addition, Mr. Speaker, in 
addition, that same minister — I believe he was the minister of 
Finance at the time — decided, Mr. Speaker, that Nabu should 
be offered as one of the pool that they were going to offer under 
their share program. But the comment was, relative to Nabu, a 
good possibility but will not yield early returns. 
 
Now let me deal with the question of Dr. Voschenkov. Dr. 
Voschenkov happens to be one of the leading scientists in the 
world in micro/gigahertz, in high-speed silicon technology, Mr. 
Speaker, and if I can find a way that is reasonable to get Dr. 
Voschenkov and his technology into Saskatchewan, I would 
like to do it, Mr. Speaker, because this man has excellent 
credentials and excellent technology and offers an excellent 
opportunity for Saskatchewan, assuming that we can do it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the reason that we're dealing with Dr. Voschenkov is 
because the whole Giga empire is tied up in a civil action in 
Montreal. These people don't understand that the reason the 
civil action is going on is because there is a dispute as to fact. 
They say, Mr. Speaker, that simply because something is filed 
in evidence it is fact. I mean, that member is a lawyer; he 
should know better. I don't know how he got through law 
school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Premier, it was your Justice 
minister that stood in this House and indicated that he had sent 
the RCMP investigation into one of the business associates that 
you blew for $5 million. I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . also Dr. 
Voschenkov testified the other day that at a meeting, at this 
meeting here, that he met with these officials that I indicated, 
that he indicated that the cost of the project and the involvement 
of this government was more than 125 million; that it was going 
to be $200 million. 
 
I want to ask this genius of investment of Saskatchewan, which 
has put this province in the most financial debt that any 
government in Canada has done, whether or not you are 
continuing your negotiations to enter into the further investment 
of $200 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, once again the member is 
trying to indicate that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. The hon. 
member has asked the question; he seems to be giving the 
answer at the same time. I believe the Deputy Premier has been 
asked to give the answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member tries to suggest that  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1959 
 

simply because it's filed in evidence, it's fact. Mr. Speaker, at no 
time, at no time has the Government of Saskatchewan indicated 
that it would invest anywhere near those kind of sums. What the 
government did indicate, Mr. Speaker, was that it was interested 
in the technology, interested in the technology, Mr. Speaker, 
subject to scientific verification, subject to commercial 
viability; that is, will it get into the market-place successfully? 
And those analyses are still being worked on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, only when those two things are taken care of do 
you look at the financial package, Mr. Speaker. And we have in 
fact looked at possibilities of investment from offshore and 
from United States, and there is a lot of interest, Mr. Speaker. 
Now he raises the question of Rafferty, and he raises the 
question of SaskEnergy; he raises the question of 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Results of RCMP Investigation 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, your government has said time and 
again that we should wait until the police report on this case has 
been concluded, the police investigation. We're quite anxiously 
awaiting that report just as the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan are anxiously awaiting the report. On this very 
serious issue, will you tell us when you expect this report will 
be presented to the Justice department; and will you give us 
your undertaking today, sir, that you will present all the facts of 
the investigation to this legislature at the earliest possible date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have said in the past, 
and the Minister of Justice has said in the past, that the 
indications from the RCMP are that they are in the final stages 
of preparing their report to be filed by the Department of 
Justice. 
 
I find it a little strange that that member, Mr. Speaker, would be 
asking for the report or even be interested in the report. Because 
he's the guy, as I recall, that stood up in his House and said that 
the RCMP report is just another whitewash, Mr. Speaker. That's 
the member that said that, Mr. Speaker. And I think that's 
totally incredible and unworthy of any member to suggest that 
of the RCMP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, new question. You have just 
uttered words that are misleading the House. The record of 
Hansard will show that you are totally inaccurate in what you 
say. In fact you have just laid down a case for a matter of 
privilege in this legislature, Mr. Minister. 
 
I'll ask you very simply: we want to know, Mr. Premier, when 
the RCMP report is presented to the Justice  

department, will you report to this legislature the facts of the 
RCMP investigation so that we in this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan know about the RCMP investigation. Will you 
do that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think if you want to 
make a case for privilege, that member knows better than to 
even ask for a confidential police report, or at least he should — 
at least he should. 
 
The Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, has already indicated that 
when the report is filed with him, he will take all appropriate 
action, and that's the normal course in such situations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the reasons given for these 
technological wizards to invest in Nabu, Mr. Speaker, was, as 
they say here: 
 

 One of the most attractive features of Nabu is its management 
and its technical capabilities. 
 

They managed it into bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker, and there wasn't 
5 cents worth of economic benefit, not one job, not one ounce 
of technology moved to Saskatchewan, and they blew $8 
million in today's dollars, Mr. Speaker. They blew it. They 
knew nothing of what they were doing. 
 
I will compare that with GigaText any day, Mr. Speaker, and I 
have a high degree of optimism in the capabilities of that 
technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm sure that the Premier must have heard my question because 
obviously the Deputy Premier did not. Mr. Premier, a 
government which has acted above-board and in good faith and 
in a prudent manner in this case would have no qualms about 
telling this House and the people of Saskatchewan the facts 
about the RCMP investigation. We don't want to see the report. 
We trust you, Mr. Premier, to tell us the truth. 
 
It has been indicated by your ministers of Justice and SEDCO 
that Waschuk and Leier are part of the RCMP investigation. In 
fact the Minister of Justice went so far as to state that Mr. 
Waschuk was being investigated for possible influence 
peddling, a very serious charge. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you tell this House whether or not Mr. 
Waschuk is still conducting business with your government 
while the investigation is going on, since last fall, and according 
to the Deputy Premier, whether or not Mr. Leier continues to 
act as solicitor for Crown investments corporation while the 
investigation is going on? And could you maybe tell us who 
else is being investigated by the RCMP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know 
whether or not Ken Waschuk is doing business with the 
government or any branch of government at this particular time. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1960 
 

But let me say this, Mr. Speaker, let me say this, because I think 
what we're seeing develop here — and it's more then being 
developed, it has developed. These members, Mr. Speaker, 
these members, on the basis of what they allege to be fact filed 
in a civil action in a court in Montreal, they want to hang these 
people — they want to hang these people. There is no question 
yet, there's no decision yet as to innocence or guilt, Mr. 
Speaker, but they want to hang these people — prejudge. 
 
They don't want to wait for the RCMP report. They don't want 
to wait for the outcome of the civil action in Montreal. They 
simply want to hang these people, Mr. Speaker, and they don't 
give a damn about how it impacts on them or their lives, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I don't believe that that's 
language that we want to become accustomed to using in this 
House, and I'd like to ask the hon. member to withdraw. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Certainly I withdraw that remark and 
apologize to the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, it's your mismanagement, it's 
answers we want about blowing over $4 million of our 
taxpayers' money in the province of Saskatchewan, and when 
you say that we're not dealing with facts, what I was asking for 
is the RCMP report on the investigation to this House — the 
facts. And you say we're not dealing with facts? How dare you 
call into question the integrity of the RCMP in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Very simple, watch my lips, Mr. Deputy 
Premier. Will you tell this legislature, will you tell us the facts 
of the RCMP investigation in this legislature so we know the 
facts about this scandal in the province of Saskatchewan — the 
RCMP report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This is the same group, Mr. Speaker, 
that has slammed Dr. Lloyd Barber . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, that he can't run a university. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He can't run a university, as alleged by 
them. He can't run a university. They think he's an incredible 
kind of a person to have on the Barber Commission. They're 
alleging that it would be a whitewash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, their only expert ability, Mr. 
Speaker, is to slander and defame people. I have already said, 
Mr. Speaker, that when the Minister of Justice, when the 
Minister of Justice gets the report from the RCMP, he will take 
all appropriate action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Population Loss in May 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
painfully obvious to the people of Saskatchewan that the waste 
and mismanagement and corruption by this PC government 
knows no bounds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: according to 
Wednesday's figures from your Bureau of Statistics, we lost a 
further 1,134 people through out-migration in the month of May 
— equivalent to the town of Carnduff. That takes our total net 
population loss through migration to almost 12,000 people for 
the first five months of this year. 
 
Mr. Premier, when is the hollow rhetoric stopped, and the 
policies to build our province's economy begin? How many 
young people do we have to lose before people on your side of 
the House get the message that privatization and megaproject 
mania isn't working for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
the forecast for the province of Saskatchewan, because of 
diversification, processing and manufacturing, and as a result of 
the average normal rainfall in this year, that our province will 
lead the nation in economic growth which could run anywhere 
from 7 to 9 per cent, maybe even double digit, Mr. Speaker. 
Now that will not only lead western Canada, but will lead the 
province of Ontario, the province of British Columbia — the 
whole nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The combination of a strong agricultural sector, plus the 
diversification, will see the expansion of many new economic 
opportunities in towns and in villages and the city of Saskatoon. 
I mean, just this last 10 days, Mr. Speaker, we've had the 
opportunity to announce many new jobs and new projects and a 
great deal of expansion with respect to tourism as a result of the 
turnaround in the economy. 
 
I am very happy to see that oil prices are coming up, grain 
prices are coming up, the productivity's improved and in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, if we lead the nation — and I believe we will — 
in economic growth, then, Mr. Speaker, the province of 
Saskatchewan will be as it can be, one of the most exciting 
places any place in Canada to live, invest, and build a home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, those are old lines. The fact of the matter is people are 
leaving. Stop talking about what you will do for the province of 
Saskatchewan. You can't use those phoney lines any more. 
Your policies are failing. Why don't you admit it? 
 
Mr. Premier, according to StatsCanada, Saskatchewan suffered 
the worst loss of population of all Canadian provinces last year 
— about 15,000 people, double the loss of Manitoba, which 
was the second worst province. And already this year we have 
almost surpassed last year's numbers. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1961 
 

Now a good government and a responsible government would 
be deeply concerned . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I've given the hon. 
member quite some time to set the stage for his question. I'd 
like him to now get to the point. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, if this 
present trend continues, we will lose close to 30,000 people this 
year, almost equivalent to the population of Moose Jaw or 
almost one-third of our total population of the province. How 
long does this have to go on before you start taking the problem 
seriously and doing something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have people visiting the 
legislature today from rural Saskatchewan, and certainly the 
hon. member knows that over 60 per cent of the population in 
this province is rural. They live in towns and villages and on 
farms across the province. 
 
Now the hon. member knows that when net farm income goes 
to zero, that it can be extremely difficult in rural Saskatchewan. 
We have almost half the farm land in Canada; we have over 50 
million acres of agricultural land. And, Mr. Speaker, when the 
net farm income goes to zero, then people's income generally, 
and the average of the province of Saskatchewan, must decline. 
 
So when you're doing your statistical analysis and you find that 
you have no net farm income at all except that which comes 
from government, then as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, you see 
the possibility where . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The Premier is 
attempting to answer the question. He's being interrupted. As 
hon. members know, that's out of order. He should have the 
right to answer without a constant stream of interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
facts are that when you have drought and severe drought in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we've seen and statistically it 
shows up, net farm income almost collapsed to nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As a matter of fact, the government that comes out — our 
programs along with the federal government's . . . and I was 
happy to hear the announcement that they have allocated 
another billion dollars for rural Saskatchewan and western 
Canada in particular. We will receive about 450 to $500 million 
to help farmers, which will help raise their income, which helps 
the averages. 
 
Now when you look at the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, the 
populations have grown, Mr. Speaker. And we see that. The 
major cities are continuing to grow: Prince Albert, Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw, Regina. The difficulty has been in rural 
Saskatchewan, and that's why we stuck up for rural 
Saskatchewan and will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Stray Animals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Stray Animals Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The 

Homesteads Act, 1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting 
from the enactment of The Homesteads Act, 1989. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be a read second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Uniform Building and Accessibility 
Standards Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, before we go on to orders of the 
day, I want to rise on a question of privilege. 
 
Today during question period, the Deputy Premier referred to 
me directly, and I'll quote as best I can. I haven't seen the record 
yet but I'll quote as best I can from his comments. The Deputy 
Premier, referring to me, said: "That member called the RCMP 
report nothing more than a whitewash." 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Erskine May, on page 159, I'd just like to go to 
part of the section: 
 

. . . (it's) resolved that to print or publish any libels 
reflecting upon any Member of the House for or relating to 
his service therein, was a high violation of the rights and 
privileges of the House. 
 

I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask you to find a prima facie 
case of privilege on this point, that when Hansard is printed it 
will show in Hansard that the Deputy Premier has accused me 
of calling the RCMP report a whitewash. 
 
Any person in the province of Saskatchewan that would read 
that, including the RCMP, including my constituents, would 
take from an hon. member that that would be a correct 
statement. That is an inaccurate statement, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would ask that you find a case of privilege, and further that you 
ask the Deputy Premier to please withdraw those remarks, and 
if necessary, apologize. I don't care if he apologizes or not, Mr. 
Speaker, but I want the Deputy Premier to withdraw  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1962 
 

those remarks because they are totally and absolutely 
inaccurate, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of any 
specific evidence, I am more than delighted to withdraw those 
remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There's a question of privilege, 
and I've heard the hon. member's response. And we know that 
question period, and throughout the House, members, of course, 
they make emotional statements. This is common on both sides 
of the House; however, the hon. member is claiming in the 
House that the Deputy Premier libelled him. That is not a prima 
facie case of privilege because we do have freedom of speech in 
the House. And secondly, a dispute arising between two 
members as to allegations of facts does not fulfil the conditions 
of parliamentary privilege. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in the 
time we have before us this morning in your estimates, I want to 
spend a good portion of that time talking about your 
government's intentions regarding gambling in the province and 
the proposed charity tax of your government. 
 
But just before we move into that subject, Mr. Minister, you 
made a number of commitments last night to my colleagues to 
provide some information to the House this morning. Do you 
have that information with you, and can you present it now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, I have it here and I'll be glad to 
send it over. With regard to your question, we'll be going into 
the estimates on the gaming commission as soon as we 
complete Consumer Affairs. So if you'd like to keep your 
questions for that time, that would be fine. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, if I can just refer to the letter that 
you've provided this morning, which you wrote to the Hon. 
Dick Johnston and the Government of Alberta regarding the 
Alberta government's failure in this most recent pay-out to the 
Principal Trust investors to provide for Saskatchewan residents, 
I note this letter was mailed June 1. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you had a response from your colleague in 
Alberta to this letter? 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, we have not. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — When it comes, if it comes, Mr. Minister, will 
you share a copy of that letter with myself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well whether or not the letter is 
given in confidence, that's what's going to determine whether 
we share the contents with you. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, why in the world would your 
colleague in Alberta, regarding this matter of Principal Trust 
and Saskatchewan investors in Principal Trust who have lost 
life savings, why in the world would any of that correspondence 
be in confidence from your point of view? That is significant 
and valuable information to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's the least you can do. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It is the very least you can do. You've done so 
little for the investors in this province, the least you could do is 
to provide them, through the opposition if not by yourself, the 
information that's coming to you from the Government of 
Alberta. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you provide that letter publicly to the 
opposition when it arrives? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maybe we should read about it in the 
press . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The member from Sutherland chirps 
from his seat again. And he made a lot of wild accusations last 
night and . . . some of which we know are misleading and not 
true, and I'll point that out here in a minute. I would simply say 
again that depending on the contents of the letter as to whether 
or not it's indicated they're confidential, that will be the 
determining factor whether we are going to release that 
information. 
 
To this point we have not held back any information that has 
been forthcoming. We've been totally open and above-board 
with this particular situation. 
 
And I would point out that some statements that were made by 
your colleague last night, which is just another example of some 
of the misleading statements that are made by members on that 
side of the House. He made a statement that some $200,000 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The loose jaw from Moose Jaw, if 
he has questions, Mr. Chairman, he certainly can stand in 
his . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. All members get an 
opportunity at any time to get into the debate. They can 
certainly rise in their place and ask their questions, then their 
questions will be recorded. I'd ask members not to enter into the 
debate unless they're willing to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The comment was made last night 
by the hon. member from Saskatoon Sutherland that the 
province of Nova Scotia had given some $200,000 to the 
investors in that particular province, which is totally untrue. The 
fact of the matter is that in late 1987, the province of Nova 
Scotia, Department of Justice, paid $35,000 to the association, 
Victims of Principal, to offset legal expenses. This sum was 
paid direct to the  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1963 
 

association; it did not go to the investors. 
 
In 1987 the Government of Nova Scotia also established a 
program where they would pay the interest only, to a maximum 
of $1,000, to any Nova Scotia residents that obtained loans 
pending payment from Principal or the receiver. 
 
This program was certainly not heavily utilized by the citizens 
of Nova Scotia. To date the province has paid out 
approximately $400 on this program, and there are no 
indications that there will be any further expenditure. The above 
is the extent of Nova Scotia's assistance in this matter. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, that's a far cry from what the member 
opposite would have had the House believe last night when he 
was talking about the fact that investors supposedly had 
received in the neighbourhood of $200,000. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I have with me this morning an 
article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dated February 2, 
1989. In that article it reads, and I quote: 
 

The province plans to introduce legislation this spring 
which would allow it to operate slot-machines and a host 
of other electronic gambling games, Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs Minister Ray Meiklejohn said in an 
interview Tuesday. 
 

Quote, to yourself, sir. 
 

We are looking at legislation which would allow the 
government to get into such things as electronic games, 
including slot-machines. Meiklejohn said he believes the 
provincial government has to look at such things as 
electronic games, including bingo and keno, to finance 
such services as health care. A change in legislation would 
allow the province to operate various (quote) "lottery 
schemes" which would include Las Vegas type casinos. 
 

Mr. Minister, we have not yet seen that legislation. Can we 
expect to see that legislation soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, you can. The legislation will be 
introduced, I would think, either next week or the following 
week. I would point out to the member that it was not my 
comment that we would be introducing Las Vegas style casinos 
or slot-machines in this province. You're quoting from an 
article; those are not my statements. As I indicated earlier . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . If you want me to answer questions 
now pertaining to the gaming commission I can do that, but as I 
indicated earlier we will be going into their estimates after, and 
I'd be happy to answer the questions then. If you want me to do 
it now, that's fine. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There is a separate vote on page 77 
of the Estimates, for the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission, so 
I would ask members to keep their  

questions and answers related to Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, and after that is dealt with, certainly the gaming 
commission will be dealt with later . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Order, order, order. Does the member from The Battlefords 
have a point of order? I'd ask him to rise and make his point of 
order or not make any comments from his seat. The Chair has 
ruled that Consumer and Commercial Affairs are under 
estimates now. The Saskatchewan Gaming Commission will 
come up later, and for now I'd ask members to keep their 
questions and answers related to Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are going to be 
talking about gambling this morning whether it's under the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial or under the Gaming 
Commission. I am happy to discuss it under the vote for the 
Gaming Commission. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The minister does not have his 
Gaming Commission officials with him so I would ask the 
member to keep his questions to Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I intend then to be discussing 
gambling under the Gaming Commission, even though you only 
moments ago suggested we could do it now. 
 
Mr. Minister, one or two further questions then regarding 
specifically your role as the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. Mr. Minister, you have indicated publicly, 
you have indicated in correspondence to myself that we should 
see soon in this House, legislation regarding agricultural 
implement dealers. Mr. Minister, where is that legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That legislation is in legislative 
review, and I would hope that we will also be introducing it 
within the next couple of weeks. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, in past you have talked about 
legislation regarding fair trade practice in the province. Do you 
have plans to introduce legislation in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We're still working on it but it won't 
be ready for this session. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if I could have 
leave of the House to introduce a special guest in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just draw to the members of the Assembly 
that we have in the gallery a very important person in the 
political field. We have the new leader recently elected to head 
up the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan, Ms. Linda Haverstock. 
Would other members join with me to give her a warm 
welcome to the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1964 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, you will have received this 
spring a copy of the study I did of the new home warranty 
program of Saskatchewan with recommendations for the new 
home warranty people, individual home owners, and the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Have you acted on any of the 
recommendations I made with respect to the Government of 
Saskatchewan Department of Consumer Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well we haven't implemented the 
suggestions that you have made. We're in consultation with the 
new home warranties program people, and they have taken on 
the responsibility of that. We don't have any jurisdiction in 
there, other than to offer our services as a mediator, which we 
have done on several occasions. 
 
And as I understand it, that the program where they're now 
using independent conciliators to resolve disputes has been 
very, very effective. They've reduced the number of concerns 
substantially — I believe something in the neighbourhood of 31 
per cent over the last year — and that as far as we know the 
program right now, as it stands, is working fairly well. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So, Mr. Minister, have you done even so 
basic a thing as to mandate your department to deal with new 
home warranty complaints, which has not been the case to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The new home warranties program 
is an insurance type of program that's been set up by the 
builders, and that of course gives the home owners the 
protection that they require. So the Department of Consumer 
Affairs, other than playing a conciliator's role, does not have 
any other involvement with it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we will shortly be prepared to 
move through the vote on the department so that we can move 
over to the Gaming Commission. Mr. Minister, I have one very 
short question to you: why is it that you and your department do 
not provide to the consumers of Saskatchewan a toll-free 
number to your department, to your investigators, to your 
offices, that consumers in the province, when they run up 
against a consumer problem, might easily access your 
department and its resources? Why don't you provide a toll-free 
number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That's a very good question, Mr. 
Chairman, that the member puts forward, and we are doing a 
study on that right now. We have made some changes in the 
department in the last couple of years in that a lot of 
information was made available to consumers through the 
library system throughout the province. We also, of course, 
have . . . It's really difficult to understand . . . 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order! It's very difficult to 
hear the minister when the member from Moose Jaw North and 
Regina Rosemont are hollering across the floor . . . Order, 
order, order. And the member for Regina South. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I would also point out to the member 
that consumers can receive information through the inquiry 
centre, so there are a lot of channels open to them right now, but 
as I said, we are reviewing the idea of the toll-free number. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, will you explain to the House 
this morning why payments in the current estimates to the 
Property Management Corporation have increased some 
$50,000; why the payments to the Property Management 
Corporation have gone from 625,300 to 675,000; and a 
breakdown of those costs. Would you provide that this morning, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The answer to that question, Mr. 
Chairman, is the fact that some money was spent on capital 
improvement, $37,000, and we have also taken over additional 
space in the Revenue Building that was formerly used by the 
Rent Appeal Commission and the mediation board. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I noticed in the information that 
you provided to the House last night, there is a charge of 
$93,597.57 to the property management corporation for 
advertising costs, I take it. Mr. Minister, is that figure included 
in this budgeted figure to property management of 675,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That money was for the printing of 
new notices with regard to new businesses that have been 
incorporated in the corporations branch. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I asked if this figure which 
you're paying to property management, this almost $100,000 to 
have those notices printed, is that figure included in the 
budgeted figure to property management, or does it come from 
some other portion of your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It's not shown in that figure. It's 
shown in the corporations branch, code 6. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Minister, are there other payments 
then made to property management corporation that come from 
other portions of your budget? We've discovered now that 
$93,000, or almost a hundred, is taken from some other portion 
of your budget to property management, so now the payments 
over to property management from your department total 
almost $770,000. Are there other payments to property 
management from other portions of your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — No, it's only those two items. 
 



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1965 
 

Mr. Calvert: — So then, Mr. Minister, the mail delivery 
services that you use from property management are included 
therefore in the $675,000 figure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well then, Mr. Minister, I do want to ask 
because the auditor did raise this issue. Do you now have with 
property management a written agreement or an arrangement 
for these mail services for this more than a quarter of a million 
dollars in mail services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The information that I have that a 
committee has been struck from right across the government 
departments that is now looking at that issue to see if there's a 
better way of making sure that the information is detailed 
properly. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, the auditor says for sure 
there is a better way, and I'm surprised that you have not, by 
this point, addressed this issue in a more specific way. How 
soon do you expect, Mr. Minister, to have an arrangement, a 
written agreement in place, so that the Provincial Auditor can in 
fact verify the accuracy of charges to your department regarding 
mailing from property management? How soon will you have 
that in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I would expect it will be before 
too long. But I would also point out to the member opposite that 
the departments are continuing the same practice that has 
always been in place, even when your party was in power. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have been in office in 
this government for some seven long, lean years and I do not 
recall the Provincial Auditor raising this as an issue when we 
were government. Apparently there's something wrong over 
here, and it wants to be fixed and it should be fixed very 
shortly. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I thumb through the entire Estimates book, I 
notice in department after department after department, the one 
large increase in departmental spending is payments to property 
management. Mr. Minister, it leaves me to surmise that money 
is being taken from departments and placed into the property 
management corporation for some future political purposes. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you assure the House that no money from the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs is going into 
property management as some kind of a political slush fund for 
the next election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, your allegations are totally 
incorrect. I've indicated to you in so far as Consumer Affairs is 
concerned where the increases have gone as far as property 
management were concerned, the fact that $37,000 was for 
capital improvement on a space that we took over from the rent 
appeal board and also the mediation board. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if I  

may be granted leave to introduce a guest please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Chairperson, through you and to the members of the Assembly, 
I'd like to introduce a noted Saskatchewan musician and 
someone that's been long involved in the Saskatoon Jazz 
Society and organizing the Saskatoon Jazz Festival. 
 
He's seated in the east gallery here. His name is Mr. Skip Cutts, 
and he also happens to be related by marriage to the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. And I'd like to ask all members to give 
Mr. Cutts a warm welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just would like to 
take this opportunity quickly, because this is an item of the 
grant to the consumers' association, to raise with the minister 
one question. The consumers' association is doing a lot of the 
educational work that is needed in the area of consumer affairs, 
and in their magazine for March of 1989 they were 
recommending that the provincial government . . . And also 
they announced to their membership that the provincial 
government is considering legislation to control deceptive and 
unscrupulous business practices in Saskatchewan. 
 
The government is funding the consumers' association in order 
to do this lobbying as well as the educational work. They say in 
their newsletter that there are some persons in our society that 
are more vulnerable than others. They say they are particularly 
concerned about sales schemes that prey on elderly people or 
those who speak very little English. 
 
We hear of many high-pressure and particularly shabby tactics, 
and the minister knows that even the RCMP and the local police 
are concerned about what's happening to the senior citizens in 
terms of shady practices and the kinds of schemes that they've 
been vulnerable to — Principal Trust being just one among 
many — and particularly in home repairs. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, my question to the minister is regarding 
this proposal to bring in a trade practices Act or a fair business 
practices Act which the consumers association has been 
lobbying for. I see they don't get any increase in their grant, so 
they're not going to be able to  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1966 
 

mount much more of a pressure than they have, but they have 
been raising that issue with you. 
 
And as the critic for seniors' issues and on behalf of the 
consumers association, I would like to ask you where that trade 
practices legislation that's so urgently needed in the province, 
what stage is that at in terms of development? It seems to me 
you've been promising that would come forward. Are you going 
to bring it forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well as I indicated earlier, Mr. 
Chairman, we are going to be bringing trade practices 
legislation forward, but it will not be in this session. 
Discussions are still ongoing. 
 
You make a good point about the consumers association and we 
certainly work very closely with them. We upped the grant that 
they were receiving by 25 per cent either last year or the year 
before, and we work very closely with them, as we do with the 
Better Business Bureau and other groups. 
 
We had a very successful seminar last December where we had 
90-some people in from various groups and professions around 
the province, and from business, to discuss this whole area of 
trade practices legislation. And the majority of the groups I 
would say are very strongly in favour of it. There are some of 
course that are not in favour of it. They do not want to see an 
increase in legislation. 
 
Maybe what we have to do is look at some of the legislation 
that's already in place, and that is in fact what we are doing, so I 
would certainly want to be bringing that legislation forward for 
the next session. 
 
But you mentioned about consumer education, and I would 
point out to you that we're very proud of the fact that 
Saskatchewan leads all of the Canadian provinces with regard 
to consumer education. That's a very proud tradition that we 
have had and have maintained. 
 
And we put forward a lot of good information. We work 
through our facilitators program. We provide workshops and 
informational seminars around the province by groups of 
volunteers that we train. And we are reaching many, many 
hundreds of people throughout the province, giving them 
consumer education, the type of things that you're concerned 
about. 
 
And there are lots of problems out there, whether it's to do with 
home repairs or whether it's to do with hearing aids. We are 
continually putting out information, and that's one of, I think, 
the strong points as far as our particular department is 
concerned. 
 
We have put out, for example, we have the mandate as far as 
consumer education is concerned in the school system. And 
we've just released not too many weeks ago a piece of material 
known as MoneyPenny, which is very good consumer 
education. We've also put out information on life insurance 
basics and also on financial planning. And these are materials 
that have been very, very well received and are certainly out 
there meeting a need. 
 
I think that for the most part the motto of the department  

is, "Educate rather than legislate." And we certainly try to do 
that in every way that we can, and it's been very, very well 
received. It's unfortunate when we have situations such as the 
First Investors and the Associated Investors situation is 
concerned. And we know that from time to time that there are 
unscrupulous individuals out there that will take advantage of 
consumers. 
 
We heard last night, and I certainly agree with that fact, that 
there were salesmen for these particular companies that were 
giving misleading information to the consumers as they visited 
them. And we know that today that that's something that we 
have to face. It is reality. And I know that the members opposite 
should be well aware of the fact too, because from time to time 
we see cases where they use misleading information, whether 
it's closing hospitals in Assiniboia 
_Gravelbourg or talking about SaskPower or whatever the case 
might be. 
 
So this is a fact of life, I guess, we have to deal with. We have 
people out there, such as yourselves in some cases, that do give 
misleading information, but we are doing as much as we can to 
ensure that consumers are fully warned about some of the 
practices that are going on and getting information out to them. 
 
The unfortunate part, Mr. Chairman, is that sometimes the most 
vulnerable people are the hardest ones that we can get to as far 
as putting this information out. We know that seniors in some 
cases are very vulnerable, and it's very difficult to get 
information to all of them, but we are working through seniors' 
organizations and trying to establish a good working 
relationship with them so that they know what information we 
have available for them to help them out in whatever way we 
can. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Chairman, just to put this on the record, it 
was the New Democratic government that set up the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs because of 
the concern to protect the consumers. We have an ageing 
population in Saskatchewan; the seniors are vulnerable to the 
fly-by-night salesmen that go across this province, as you 
yourself have said in newsletters. They need the protection of 
good government. It's obvious that you are not providing that. 
You will not come forward with legislation. You do not support 
legislation and having legislation in place with the enforcement 
necessary to see that people don't get hurt. 
 
You're passing the buck. You have not strengthened the 
Department of Consumer Affairs. You have not raised the 
money for the consumers' association, and you are not listening 
to their recommendations. You are failing the people of 
Saskatchewan in terms of consumer protection, Mr. Minister, 
and that's the point I want to make. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is 
totally off base when she says that we're not improving what 
was started by the members opposite. We certainly have. We 
have a very good working relationship with the consumers' 
association, not as you're suggesting at all. We have a very good 
working relationship with them. 
 
And we certainly feel very strongly that no matter how  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1967 
 

much legislation you bring out, you're never, ever — you're 
never, ever going to be able to protect everybody. You just 
think that it's possible to pass laws and that everybody's going 
to be protected; you know, let the government look after 
everybody. Well it doesn't work that way. And we're certainly 
going to bring trade practices legislation in as soon as we can, 
but it won't be during this session. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I'd like to say how I view how it 
does work when you have legislation. What you need is a 
government that will enforce it's own legislation and follow its 
own laws. We obviously wouldn't be into this Principal Trust 
discussion today if that had been the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, talking about consumer education and the 
consumers' association, as you know, consumer . . . the 
provincial consumers' association and the national body are 
now looking carefully, as many of us are, at environmental 
concerns, recycling and so on. That was the theme of this year's 
meeting, as you know. 
 
In regard to education being prepared by your department, are 
you now preparing consumer information regarding 
environmentally friendly products? Do you have some 
information and education being prepared in that regard, and 
how soon might we expect it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — We're in the process of producing 
that information and I'm informed that it should be out first 
thing this fall. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Item 10 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well firstly, Mr. Chairman, I would 
like to thank my officials from Consumer Affairs. I certainly 
feel that they're doing a very, very good job, and we are making 
a lot of progress with regard to consumer education in this 
province, and we're certainly going to continue on with that 
tradition. And I certainly want to thank them for all their 
support, not only during the estimates but also during the year. 
So thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, let me add my own thanks to 
the officials of the department. Unfortunately I could not be in 
the House last night. I congratulate the officials for their work, 
and also all of the employees of the department across the 
province. 
 

Mr. Chairman: — I'm sorry for my error for not thanking the 
officials. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 58 

 
Mr. Chairman: — And I would now ask the minister to 
introduce his officials for the Gaming Commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 
introduce the officials from the Gaming Commission. Beside 
me is Dr. Bill MacRae, who is the chairman of the Gaming 
Commission. Immediately behind him is Ron Robinson, who is 
executive director of the commission. And behind me is Al 
Dwyer, who is the director of administration and human 
resources with Consumer Affairs but also has been very closely 
involved with the Gaming Commission. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I hope in our discussions today 
we can clear up a number of questions which people all over the 
province are asking regarding your government's intentions in 
the gambling field, and very specifically about your intentions 
regarding the new charity tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier today I quoted from an article from the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. I'll quote now from an article that 
appeared in the Leader-Post on February 23, 1989. This article 
says, and I quote: 
 

Meiklejohn told a news conference Tuesday in Saskatoon 
that legislation will be introduced this spring to allow 
slot-machines, electronic bingo, and a range of other 
computerized gambling devices, all of which are legal 
under the Criminal Code only if operated by government. 
 

Mr. Minister, I want to also read from an editorial which 
appeared in a Moose Jaw newspaper on Friday, February 24 of 
this year. That editorial reads: 
 

The Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, 
whose job includes supervision of gambling in the 
province, said his government will now introduce 
legislation to allow electronic gambling — slot-machines. 
Just nine months ago, this man's boss, the Premier himself, 
pronounced quite vigorously that slots will not be allowed 
in the province. The word "never" crept into his language 
when the Premier said there would be no gambling 
changes (no gambling changes). The Premier either misled 
us or another cabinet minister is laying his job on the line 
by dealing from less than a full deck. 
 

Mr. Minister, what are your intentions regarding the 
introduction and the expansion of gambling in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
touched on several issues. And let me point out firstly that it 
was not a news conference in the city of  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1968 
 

Saskatoon where any comments were made with regard to 
electronic gaming. I was asked by a reporter with regard to the 
new casino that was going to be set up in Winnipeg, and he 
asked me if Saskatchewan was planning a similar facility. 
 
And I indicated to him that we were not, but we would be 
introducing legislation in the spring session of this legislature, 
which we will be, which will include electronic gaming. I also 
had pointed out that electronic gaming which would be 
specifically electronic bingo and possibly keno. 
 
The fact of the matter is that under the Criminal Code, 
electronic gaming also includes slot-machines. But I can assure 
the member opposite we are not including slot-machines in the 
legislation that we are going to be introducing. 
 
(1115) 
 
And as I said earlier, but I'll repeat again at this time, that this 
legislation is nearing completion now, and I would hope to be 
introducing it in the House either next week or the first part of 
the following week. But we will be looking at new ways of 
gaming. 
 
Gambling is legal in this province now. I'm sure the member is 
well aware of that. Whether you're playing bingo or buying a 
lottery ticket, that's gambling, and it is totally legal. 
 
The fact of the matter is that when you want to make some 
changes, such as electronic bingo, that you require legislation to 
do that because the government has to be involved. And it's not 
that it's anything great, other than it's a new way of playing an 
old game. So that will be included in the legislation, but I can 
assure you that slot-machines will not. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then I take it that you are saying 
to the House this morning that in your term of government, 
which may not last too much longer, but you are saying 
categorically that slot-machines will not be introduced in the 
province of Saskatchewan, either at Queensbury Downs, or 
Marquis Downs, or the Centre of the Arts, or at any location in 
the province of Saskatchewan. You are saying this morning that 
slot-machines, categorically, will not be introduced in 
Saskatchewan. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, that is correct, and I would 
point out again that the Criminal Code makes it very, very clear 
that the only way that any type of gambling of this nature can 
be operated in a province is if the government operates it. And 
that is not going to be included in this legislation, so it will not 
be possible for that to be introduced at Queensbury Downs, or 
any other casino in the province. 
 
At the present time, the only ones that operate casinos in the 
province are the exhibition boards. They have the sole authority 
to do that. So we have about eight boards around the province 
which do have casinos, varying in time from maybe three days 
during their local fair to maybe 100 or 120 days in the larger 
cities of Saskatoon  

and Regina. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we're going to talk about those 
casinos. We're going to talk about this whole range of issues, 
and yes, we're going to talk about the government ownership 
and operation of electronic bingo outlets. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to go back to your comments in 
February. I would submit that in fact, at that point in time, you 
were thinking of slot-machines, because for some unexplained 
reason it took you two full weeks, two full weeks to respond to 
these comments. And if those comments were clearly wrong, 
explain to this House why it took you two full weeks to then 
respond again to the press saying that you'd been misquoted? 
Why the two-week delay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I don't have any difficulty 
doing that whatsoever, and I did it with the media when I met 
with them at that time. And I indicated to them that my 
involvement with other duties at the time, plus the fact of the 
matter that I was out of the country for five days, certainly did 
not make it possible for me to do anything further with it at that 
time. And that was made quite clear at the time as to why it 
took so long. But there was never any indication . . . in fact, in 
discussing this with reporters or journalists on different 
occasions, they had gone back through the text and found that 
there was in fact no case where I had indicated that we were 
going to be having slot-machines. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you've assured the House now 
that there will not be slot-machines introduced into the 
province, but you've also indicated this morning that it is your 
intention to introduce legislation, and soon, that will permit 
electronic gambling, including electronic bingo and keno. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've also indicated to the House this morning 
that because of the Criminal Code provisions, these electronic 
gambling experiences must be operated by government. Is it 
then your intention through the legislation which is to come, is 
it your intention that your government will be going into the 
bingo and keno business? Is it your intention that the 
Government of Saskatchewan will now begin to operate bingo 
halls and keno halls and the like? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I would point out to the 
member that the Act or the Bill is going to be introduced in the 
House before too long, and we'll have debate on it at that time. 
 
It's certainly not the intention of the government to be involved 
in operating bingo halls and keno set-ups, but we may have to 
be involved with regard to supervision in some cases. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, did you not say but 
moments ago in this House that the Criminal Code requires that 
electronic gambling be operated by government? Have you not 
said to the people of Saskatchewan over and over again . . . And 
this is not a misquote, Mr. Minister, this is your own letter 
which was published in weeklies around the province. You said 
in  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1969 
 

your letter to the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

We would be introducing legislation during the spring 
session which would enable (and I quote — enable) the 
government to operate (to operate) electronic gaming, 
specifically electric bingo and keno. 
 

You're saying, on one hand, the Criminal Code says it must be 
the government that owns and operates. You're saying in your 
letters to the people of Saskatchewan and in other comments, 
the government will operate. Now a moment ago you're saying 
the government's not going to operate. Why, then, the 
legislation? If we're changing the legislation, who will be 
operating the electronic game? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — What we're going to be looking at is 
probably doing something similar to what they have done in 
B.C. with regard to electronic bingo. The Government of B.C. 
does not directly operate the electronic bingo, and they're doing 
this on a pilot project. 
 
And if in fact we are going to go that route, and that will have 
to be a decision of cabinet — it's not automatic that it's going to 
happen — so if you're thinking that we're going to have 
electronic bingo going on in all the bingo halls around the 
province, that's totally inaccurate. We are going to have to look 
at a pilot project situation to see whether or not it is readily 
accepted here. 
 
But as far as the province of British Columbia is concerned, 
they supervise the operation, but the government doesn't operate 
the bingo operation itself. They are simply there to supervise. 
 
And with regard to the equipment, they may in fact own some 
of the equipment at that point, but we're not — you're talking 
about owning bingo halls — we're not going to be getting into 
that, such as the province of Manitoba has done. They've taken 
over the total operation of the main bingo halls in that province. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you and I are both aware that 
there's a body of legal opinion in British Columbia that suggests 
that in fact what is happening in British Columbia is in violation 
of the Criminal Code. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you're saying that you are as a government not 
going to get into the operations of bingo, then what about your 
statement that is reported — and maybe this was a misquote too 
— but what about your statement in the Star-Phoenix article of 
February 22 where you said you believe that the provincial 
government has to look at such things as electronic games, 
including bingo and keno, to finance such services as health 
care. 
 
Were you only talking about your charity tax or were you not in 
fact talking about the government getting into the business of 
gambling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well you're actually getting into 
debate on the Bill, and I'm not going to continue debate on that. 
When the Bill is introduced in the House, then we'll have the 
debate. 
 
But I would point out to you that we are going to be  

involved . . . if in fact this is the route that we're going to go, we 
will be involved with regard to the supervision of these types of 
bingo operations. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we are here talking about the 
policy of your government; the policy of your department; the 
policy of you as minister; the policy which is going to be 
worked out in practice by the Gaming Commission. These 
questions I think are entirely appropriate in this forum. And I 
know, Mr. Minister, for a fact, there are people across this 
province that want to know precisely what you intend to do, and 
precisely what your policy direction is. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are looking at an estimate for the Gaming 
Commission. On March 22 of this year your government 
created of the Gaming Commission, a Crown corporation. Mr. 
Minister, why, why did you take the Gaming Commission out 
of your department and create of it a Crown corporation? 
What's the rationale and reason for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I'm sure as you're well aware, 
gaming in this province has become a very, very major 
industry. Probably this year we'll see in excess of 250 millions 
of dollars spent on gaming in the province, and that's through 
bingo and the casinos and the different lottery tickets and raffles 
and so on, so it is a very, very big industry. 
 
It's something that we have acted on. The bingo inquiry which 
was held a couple of years ago, which indicated certainly that 
the government should be taking greater responsibility with the 
overall operation of gaming that was going on in the province 
and getting control of it, and doing some regulating of it — so 
that's the fact as to why the Gaming Commission has been set 
up. 
 
We're dealing with a very, very large industry and with many, 
many different groups that are involved in it. We've got 
something in the neighbourhood of 4,200 different charitable 
organizations that are involved out there in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We've got the exhibition societies that are 
involved with the operations of the casinos. We've also got 
many raffles that are held throughout the course of a year. 
 
So it is big business, and it's something that was felt that the 
Gaming Commission is an organization, or a corporation in this 
particular case, that is necessary to solely look after the 
operation of this particular industry. And this is very much the 
same as all the other provinces across the country are doing 
because of the growth in this particular industry. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, in what you've just said you 
haven't given me one good reason why we now have a Crown 
corporation called the Gaming Commission. Of course we had a 
Gaming Commission; of course there should be a Gaming 
Commission. 
 
But the work of that Gaming Commission, Mr. Minister, ought 
to be available for the scrutiny of this House. And you know, 
and I know, that as a Crown corporation that scrutiny is lost. 
The only possible way now the Gaming Commission will be 
reviewed is in the committee of  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1970 
 

Crown corporations, and we'll only be reviewing the activities 
of the Gaming Commission a year or two years after the fact. 
Mr. Minister, what you have done is to create a corporation that 
removes legislative scrutiny over the Gaming Commission. 
 
Mr. Minister, I submit that what in fact is going on here is that 
we're creating an independent body, a Crown corporation, at 
least at arm's length from the legislature, that will in fact allow 
your government to move directly into the operations of 
gambling in the province. I submit to you that's what's going on. 
We've seen, Mr. Minister . . . Perhaps you can explain this: why 
have we seen in two years more than doubling of the money, 
the funding to the Gaming Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Your concern about why we have to 
have a separate corporation, I've already indicated because of 
the size of the industry. It's also, of course, a prelude to the 
legislation that's being introduced that will give the corporation 
the authority to register and control the commercial halls, 
commercial bingo halls. 
 
We haven't had that authority in the past. The only way that we 
had any control over the commercial bingo halls, if anything 
was going wrong, was to cancel . . . the only thing that we could 
do was to cancel the licences of all the charities that were 
utilizing that hall for raising funds. 
 
That, we feel, is totally unfair. If a bingo hall operator is doing 
things that he shouldn't be, then there should be some other way 
of controlling the situation. And of course the only way you can 
do that if you have a separation situation such as we're into right 
now with a separate corporation. 
 
The other thing also has to do, Mr. Chairman, with the 
legitimacy of collecting fees. That's another matter that has to 
be dealt with. Without having this particular corporation, you 
can't do that. 
 
And another reason, of course, as I indicated earlier, if we are 
going to look at electronic gaming, that that's the only way it 
can be done, if you have a separate corporation. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, you have gone from a funding to 
the Gaming Commission of $400,000 in ’87-88, to your 
budgeted amount this year of $933,000. Mr. Minister, explain to 
me, explain to this House, how the Gaming Commission is 
consuming this much of public money, unless, Mr. Minister, 
you predict a broad expansion of gambling in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It seems to me the only feasible answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I would just be happy to give 
the member the reason for the increase in the expenditures in 
this particular area. Keep in mind that the Gaming Commission 
was only formed on September 1, 1987. The staff, up until this 
point in time, has been 15. 
 
Now to control an industry or regulate an industry of the nature 
that we've got in this province, it is impossible for that number 
of people to keep up with the daily work that is necessary, so 
the staff is being increased to 27 positions. These positions, 
largely, are going to be in the city of  

Regina and in the city of Saskatoon, but with also satellites in 
Prince Albert and North Battleford. But it's just . . . if we're 
going to be able to regulate the industry, then we have to have 
more staff. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they'll be all Tories. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — And the member from Quill Lakes, 
he likes to get into his same old story about more Tories. You 
know, nobody had more jobs when the NDP were in power than 
the Koskie family. I don't think the member from Quill Lake 
has much room to talk about that because we aren't going to be 
probably hiring any Koskies in the Gaming Commission this 
time anyway. But that's the reason, Mr. Chairman, for the 
increase in the expenditures. But probably not hiring any 
Koskies. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, if you want to 
talk about patronage, we can be here a long, long time, I'll tell 
you that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you saying then this morning that the Gaming 
Commission will be the commission responsible to administer 
your charities tax? Is it going to be the job of the Gaming 
Commission to administer this 10 per cent charities tax that 
your Minister of Finance has levied. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, that is correct. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — So it will be the Gaming Commission who 
will be responsible for the collection of revenues. Is that 
accurate, Mr. Minister? You nod your head and indicate that's 
accurate. 
 
Well then let us move into that whole area because there is a 
great deal of uncertainty in the province today about this charity 
tax that you've established, or proposed to establish, in just a 
matter of a couple of weeks now, come the first of July. And 
we've asked some of these questions of the Minster of Finance 
and can't seem to get a straight answer from him. He indicates 
that we should talk to you, so that's what we'll do today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to go through the list and ask 
individually regarding the various forms of gambling in the 
province. Mr. Minister, what is your proposal to apply the 10 
per cent charity tax on the lottery tickets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going 
to be divulging those figures at this time. The Act that will 
legitimize the hospital tax will be introduced, I believe, next 
week, and the member certainly can ask his questions at that 
time and debate it at that time. 
 
The only indication that I would give to him with regard to the 
hospital tax, and my involvement with it, is the fact that we did 
have several meetings around the province, meeting with 
charitable organizations. We met also with commercial hall 
operators and also with the exhibition association boards to 
discuss the implementation of this new tax, and this was met, I 
think, with very, very good favour. 
 
No one argued with the concept. The concern that they  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1971 
 

had was with the implementation of it, and that's why we were 
there was to seek their advice and the best way to implement it. 
And we had very, very good meetings and we had a lot of 
positive input from all of the different groups that we met with. 
 
Once the Bill has been introduced in the House, which I think is 
going to be next week, then certainly, and only then, will all of 
this information be sent out. 
 
I think all of the charitable organizations, certainly the ones we 
met with, are aware of somewhere of what's going to be 
happening. But once the Bill has been introduced, then every 
charitable organization will be contacted in the province. They 
will be given the indication as to how it's going to be working, 
and also there will be all kinds of information put out in the 
media. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, there are groups in this province 
who are anxious this day to know what direction you're going to 
take in this tax. I can hardly believe that when we're this close 
to the date of effect, the date of effect intended to be July 1, that 
we're this close to the date of effect and that you have not got 
your act together yet to tell these people exactly how this tax is 
going to be administered. Mr. Minister, we're going to try and 
pursue this. This information is needed by groups and 
individuals in this province. 
 
Then let us go at this way, Mr. Minister. Is it your intention 
then, in regard to the lottery ticket, to place a direct sales tax on 
the lottery tickets so that a dollar ticket would cost $1.10 at the 
booth. Is that the plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well as I indicated to the member 
earlier, this information will be available once the Bill has been 
introduced. This is an Act that's put forward by the Department 
of Finance, not by the Gaming Commission. Our only 
involvement was the consultation meetings. So it is Finance 
that's in charge of this, so we're not going to be giving you any 
figures in that regard. We were involved at the consultation 
meetings and the best way to implement it. 
 
Just one other point I would make is that I believe we met with 
in excess of 200 different groups around the province, and 
considering the fact that there are 4,200 charitable organizations 
out there, it certainly wasn't possible to meet with all of them. 
But this information will be going out in ample time for them to 
know. It certainly in most cases should not have any significant 
impact on the revenues that they're now getting. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, there's a goodly number of 
charities in the province who do not share the view that you just 
expressed; that in fact this tax, this tax on charities, which is 
what it is, will in fact impact severely on some of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is very difficult to deal with because the 
Minister of Finance says, when we asked these same questions, 
he says talk to the Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs. We get the Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs here, responsible to the Gaming Commission. You say, 
well we can't discuss that because it's the Department of 
Finance. Like, who over there  

answers the questions? We're in essence two weeks from the 
implementation of this tax, and we can't seem to get any 
answers. 
 
I want to ask a very specific question, Mr. Minister, in regard to 
casino operations in this province which, as you know, are 
operated legally by the exhibition boards. Mr. Minister, what is 
your intention, what is your intention regarding the casinos and 
the collection of the 10 per cent charity tax in the casinos? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — I would give the same response to 
the earlier question. Once the Bill has been introduced, I will be 
very happy to enter the debate with regard to how the different 
groups are going to be taxed. But I would point out that in many 
cases there is not going to be any significant difference on the 
charitable organizations, any impact at all, when the hospital tax 
has been introduced. 
 
I just point out that the charitable organizations are getting 
much, much more money today as a result of the work that the 
Gaming Commission is doing than they were receiving even six 
months or a year ago. So there's been a very positive impact 
from that. And from the discussions that we had, and we 
pointed out with the charitable organizations and suggestions 
that they made, that in fact they could see that there was not 
going to be any impact the way this tax was going to be 
introduced. It's just maybe a change in adjusting the prize board 
or the prize package that's now being put out. 
 
So there's not going to be a great concern. With that, Mr. 
Chairman, I know that the member from Quill Lake would like 
to ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As the minister indicated, I would like to ask 
the indulgence of the House to introduce a group of students 
who are seated in the Speaker's gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I want to 
take this opportunity to introduce through you, Mr. Chairman, 
and members of the House, to welcome, seated in the Speaker's 
gallery, some 70 students from grade 4 to 6 from Quill Lakes 
elementary school in Quill Lakes. Along with them their 
teacher Avis Parker, Ken Litzenburger, and Betty Lengyel; 
chaperons Liz Nahorniak, Paula Marshall, Mrs. McEwen, 
Gertrude Hoesgen; and bus drivers Glen and Mrs. Nordmarken, 
and Eugene Herback. 
 
I just want to take this opportunity to welcome each and every 
one of you here. It's a real pleasure having so many of you 
come to the legislature and to have a visit. I hope you have a 
very enjoyable time during your trip here to Regina. 
 
At the present time, what we're doing this morning, actually we 
sit from 10 o'clock until 1 o'clock so the members can get back 
to the constituency. And what we're doing now is examining 
estimates, what we call, and our critic is examining the minister 
who has his officials here in respect to the expenditures in his  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1972 
 

department, and right now we're dealing with the Gaming 
Commission. 
 
I welcome you here, and I ask members to join with me to 
welcome the students. I'll meet with you a little later for 
pictures and also for drinks. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to join the 
member who just spoke in welcoming the people in from the 
Quill Lake School. I don't think I could have done a better job 
of explaining to them what's going on here or of going through 
the list of people, so I shan't. I'd just like to welcome you here. 
Enjoy yourselves; have a good time, and I'm sure that the 
member will be able to answer all your questions. I'll come 
along. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, it also gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to welcome the teachers and chaperons 
and students from Quill Lake, that being my home town. And 
some of the teachers up there I had the pleasure of working with 
for many years when I was with the Wadena School Division, 
and certainly I'm looking forward to going to Quill Lake 
tomorrow, as a matter of fact. 
 
The Quill Lake Kinsmen Club will be celebrating their 40th 
anniversary this weekend, and I had the honour of being the 
president of that club when they had their 10th anniversary, so 
I'm looking forward to getting back to Quill Lake this weekend. 
 
So I too, Mr. Chairman, would like to welcome the group that's 
here this morning. And I would point out with regard to the 
estimates that are going on now that you may have a little bit of 
difficulty understanding some of the questions that are being 
asked by the members opposite, but I can assure you that all of 
the answers are very clearly thought out and they're totally 
accurate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 58 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we will let the students decide 
for themselves on the accuracy of your answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we're talking here about the 
operations of the casinos in this province, the operations which 
are conducted by the exhibition boards, and you and I both 
know how significant are those casino operations to the 
functioning of the exhibition boards on a year round basis, and 
to the financing of those exhibition boards and to all of the 
work that the exhibition boards are doing in many communities 
around the  

province. 
 
You have just said again, in this House, you refuse to discuss 
the detail of how the tax is to be collected in the casinos. Mr. 
Minister, have you in recent days been contacted by exhibition 
boards, or members thereof of boards concerned, concerned that 
what you in fact intend to do is to put a head tax on the casinos; 
in addition to the other tax levied, and perhaps an increase on 
that side, in addition to that, that it's your intention to put a head 
tax on the door at the casino? Have you been contacted with 
that concern, Mr. Minister, in recent days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in answer to 
the member's question, we had, I believe it was three meetings 
with the exhibition boards with regard to casinos. Whether or 
not I've had discussions with them in the last few days, yes, I 
discussed this matter in Saskatoon last Thursday with a couple 
of members of the Saskatoon exhibition board. And for the 
most part, I would agree with some of your earlier comments, 
that there were some organizations or groups that are opposed 
to the implementation of the hospital tax, but the majority of 
people are in favour of it. 
 
The exhibition boards are certainly in some difficulty with 
regard to the charging of a head tax, or for people going in the 
door. But I think when we consider the fact that when people go 
to the horse races, that there is a charge when they go in the 
gate, I think it's $2.50; people that go out — and some people 
look at the casinos as being a method of entertainment — it 
costs you, I think, in the neighbourhood of 7 or $8 now to go to 
a show, so I don't think that when one considers the amount of 
money that is being spent in the casinos, that any type of head 
tax would not be readily accepted. 
 
I would just point out to the member that for the month of May 
of this year, the month of May 1989, that nearly $6 million was 
spent in casinos in this province — $6 million. Now I don't 
think if you went out and asked the average citizen around the 
province whether or not any type of a head tax should be levied 
on people going into casinos to gamble would be out of line, I 
don't think that they would suggest that it is. That's a 
considerable amount of money. 
 
Now the boards certainly are using those funds for very, very 
good projects. I know that here in the city of Regina, for 
example, that money that is earned from the casino is also used 
to help offset expenses from agribition and the farm progress 
show, and no one can argue that they're very involved with 
good projects. 
 
But at the same, when a hospital tax or a tax of this nature is 
going to be introduced, I think the government has to consider it 
being implemented in the fairest way possible, and it has to be 
put right across the board covering all types of gaming. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I take it from your remarks what 
we're looking at is a head tax on casinos. Will that head tax be 
in addition to the fee that you now charge? And as I understand 
that fee being charged on the casinos, it currently stands at 7 per 
cent of the hold, minus the direct wages. That becomes the 
taxable amount of 7 per  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1973 
 

cent. 
 
Is it your intention, one, to raise that 7 per cent to a 10 per cent 
in addition to the head tax that clearly you've said to the House 
is on the way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well I would suggest to the member 
that once the Bill is introduced next week by the Minister of 
Finance, then we can discuss the full details of it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, you and I both know, at 
least I know and you should know, that in regard to the 
operations of the casinos — and, Mr. Minister, we're not simply 
talking about a Queensbury Downs operation, we're talking 
about casinos that exist with agricultural societies and 
exhibition boards in Swift Current, in Prince Albert, in the 
community of Yorkton, in the community of North Battleford, 
in the community of Estevan, and of course in my own 
community of Moose Jaw — you and I should both know that 
the upcoming season is the exhibition season. It's the fair days 
which are coming. These casinos are trying to plan for their fair 
days. These are very important days in the life of the exhibition 
board and particularly the casino funding. This is their — to 
compare with a retail outlet — this is their Christmas season. 
 
Here we are, two weeks before the beginning of, essentially, 
their busiest season, they don't know what's going to happen. 
They don't know how to plan for this upcoming season. And, 
Mr. Minister, in talking to those people, they fear this head tax, 
and they fear the result that it's going to have on their 
operations, which therefore puts into question the viability of 
some of the exhibition boards in their overall work. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Minister, two questions. Is it in fact true that your proposal 
for the charity tax, this 10 per cent tax on the casinos, is going 
to be used on a trial basis? Is that true? Is it true that it will be a 
trial basis for four months, and that at the end of that four 
months you may want to review and change what you've 
started? Is that true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — There's been some indication given 
to the exhibition boards that this tax will be monitored very, 
very closely once it's been implemented, and if changes are 
necessary, if there is going to be a very severe impact on the 
revenues that they are taking in, that some changes may have to 
be made. But I would point out to you, and certainly we pointed 
this out to the groups that we've met with, that any suggestion 
that there is going to be a severe impact is pure speculation. 
Until it has been introduced and in operation for a while, no one 
knows whether or not there's going to be any impact. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, then exactly my point, and I say 
this in all sincerity, you have just admitted to the House that no 
one knows — or you suggest that no one knows. The people 
most intimately involved with this business fear this tax; they 
fear the results of it on the casino operations and therefore on 
the viability of the exhibition boards. 
 

You are introducing this proposal which you yourself admit 
may cause major problems. I ask you in all sincerity, Mr. 
Minister, will you consider a delay of the implementation of 
this tax until at least the fall season, when the summer fair 
season this year is past? Would you consider a delay of the 
implementation from July 1 until later this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, in the first place, Mr. 
Chairman, it's not for me to delay the implementation of a tax; 
that's for the Minister of Finance. I have not said that there are 
not going to be severe repercussions in so far as the 
implementation of this tax — I have not said that at all. Maybe 
you have a crystal ball of some kind that you're looking into 
that's giving you this indication, but we don't know at this time 
if there is going to be a major problem as far as casinos are 
concerned. As I've indicated with other groups that we've met 
with, we certainly don't see any problem at all with the 
implementation of the tax. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you once more. 
If it's not within your power to delay the implementation of this 
on the casinos, will you speak to the Minister of Finance, will 
you lobby on behalf of the casinos of this province to the 
exhibition boards, the agricultural societies — will you lobby 
on their behalf with your Minister of Finance for a delay? 
 
And you might just want to talk to the member from Yorkton 
because there's an exhibition board in Yorkton and they're 
going to be affected. There's an exhibition board in Swift 
Current and they're going to be affected. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you do that? Will you lobby for a change 
with your Minister of Finance, if that's who you need to talk to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well are you suggesting that we 
should have two different standards then with regard to the 
exhibition boards and the operation of casinos in this province? 
Because it sounds like it to me. It sounds like it to me. Because 
you are forgetting the fact that some of the casinos in this 
province don't just operate in the summer, they operate in 
different seasons of the year. And how can you treat some of 
them any differently than you would others? 
 
If you're going to suggest that we don't have the tax 
implemented for the summer but then put it on in the winter, is 
that going to be fair to those other casinos that operate in the 
winter season? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we haven't had an opportunity to 
talk about the tax that you're going to put on the bingo cards. 
 
I understand that what's going to happen is it's going to be built 
into the price of the card. So we're going to have a dollar card 
— 91 cents of the card will be the purchase, and 9 cents will be 
the tax. That's 9 cents straight out of the charities' revenues — 9 
cents straight out of the charities' revenues — unless, as you 
suggest, they lower the prize board. And many of the groups 
that I've been in contact with fear lowering the prize board, and 
you know  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1974 
 

what that will mean. 
 
There's concern with the lottery funding that goes to Sask Sport, 
that with your tax in fact there may be a reduction in lottery 
business. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are charities at work in the province today, 
volunteers at work, simply because your government has so cut 
back on social programming in this province that there is no 
option. Mr. Minister, there are food banks in this province who 
necessarily must go to the bingo hall to raise funds for their 
operations. They don't want to be there. They don't want to be 
there. 
 
There are hospitals in this province that are running lotteries — 
lotteries — to provide basic fundamental equipment in our 
hospitals. Now why is that, Mr. Minister? Because your 
government has cut back funding in health care. 
 
Now these volunteers, these charities, are out there working. 
The exhibition boards are out there working to provide facilities 
for our communities, and I can testify to that from the city of 
Moose Jaw, and other members could as well. They're out there 
giving of their time and their lives, their volunteer hours. And 
you, Mr. Minister, want to tax that. You want to tax that. Now I 
fail to see how that can be described as fair to the charities of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have one further question in this area, and that 
regards your proposal to go to one distributor for bingo. Let me 
phrase three questions here, or two at least. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many jobs do you expect will be lost in the 
province of Saskatchewan when you go from the small 
distributors to one large distributor? How many jobs do you 
expect will be lost? And two, what problems have existed up till 
now that would lead you to move in this direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well with regard to the bingo, again 
you're giving statements that are really not based on any fact 
whatsoever. You're talking about our government cut-backs in 
health spending. We have increased health spending 
substantially. 
 
You've got many charitable organizations that have been around 
this province which you don't seem to be aware of, but I'm sure 
there are a few of them over in Moose Jaw, in the same way 
that there are in every other community in this province, that 
have been raising money for very worthwhile projects using 
very varied methods. 
 
I would point out to you that during the last year that these 
charitable organizations have raised in the neighbourhood of 
$40 million through the different types of gaming that we find 
in this province. 
 
You're trying to suggest that those that are going to the bingo 
halls and raising money through that method, that the tax is 
cutting into their revenues. And that's totally inaccurate, totally 
inaccurate. I would point out to you that before the Gaming 
Commission came into being that the charities that were going 
into bingo halls were getting in the neighbourhood of 9 per cent 
— 9 per cent. Now they're getting about 18 per cent — 18 per 
cent because  

of the work of the Gaming Commission. 
 
We don't see that when the tax comes in that they're going to be 
receiving too much different from that. So for you to stand in 
your place and suggest that they're going to be receiving a lot 
less money than they're getting now is just totally accurate. It's 
because of the Gaming Commission and the regulations and the 
monitoring that they are doing that the operations are being 
operated in a much more efficient manner, and the charities are 
getting a lot more money than they were before. 
 
With regard to your question about paper distribution, there's no 
decision that has been made on that. But one of the problems 
that we have out there is the fact that to get control of the major 
bingo halls we are going to have to look at having some control 
over the paper distribution. 
 
No decision has been made yet as to how many companies are 
going to be involved. I think we have two companies in the 
province now that are involved with the production of bingo 
paper — only two. And we're not sure at this particular point in 
time whether or not those two companies will not still be 
providing it. 
 
But we are going to be setting some specifications and 
guide-lines as to what that paper must meet — the 
specifications the paper must meet. Because we are concerned 
about the security of the bingo. We are concerned about 
everything being fair in so far as the player is concerned and 
also in so far as the charitable organization is concerned. 
 
So no decision has been made in that particular area and we 
certainly would not see that there's going to be any loss of jobs. 
I don't know where you're getting that idea from. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well the idea simply is this, Mr. Minister. If 
you shut down a number of small distributors in order to go to 
one distributor who may or may not be in the province, we are 
going to see some job loss in this province. That's where I get 
the idea, and that's what's going to happen if you persist. 
 
Mr. Minister, in our discussion this morning I have heard 
nothing that allays my fear that it is your intention as minister, 
as Gaming Commission, and as a government, to move into the 
operations of electronic gambling in this province. And if you 
move into those operations, if you move into those operations, 
you're going to be in direct competition to the charities. 
 
Charities across this province are indicating that they fear this 
tax that you're going to put on them. They fear what's going to 
happen to their fund-raising potential. The casinos across this 
province are desperately afraid of this tax. 
 
I've asked you this morning, Mr. Minister, if you would 
consider delay in implementation, delay in implementation of 
the entire tax until you get your proposals out there on how 
indeed you intend to collect it, delay it until people have had a 
chance to look at the specific proposals, then come back and we 
can debate it some more. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1975 
 

Mr. Minister, will you do that? Will you delay the entire 
package, in consultation with your cabinet and the Minister of 
Finance, delay the entire package until those affected know the 
specifics and have a chance to respond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in so far as a 
delay is concerned, the only delay would be as a result of the 
17-day strike that the members opposite had in this House, 
because the plan all along has been that this tax would be 
implemented on July 1. 
 
Now the Act is going to be introduced probably next week, and 
considering the fact as to when this is passed, that's going to 
determine when this is going to in fact go into effect. At the 
present time we're still planning on implementing this new tax 
on July 1; we do not see any change with that. And we're going 
to continue with that unless there is some delay in getting the 
Bill passed. Other than that, everything is going to go ahead. 
 
You talk about the small distributors of bingo paper. I would 
point out to you that right now, those bingos where they . . . or 
charities where they only have one or two bingos a month and 
the total prize board is less than a thousand dollars, they're not 
going to be affected. They're not affected now by the 2 per cent 
fee that the Gaming Commission charges. 
 
So we're only talking about those ones that are distributing the 
paper to the large commercial halls. And I think right now in 
the province of Saskatchewan we've only got three companies 
that are doing that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 58 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials for their promptness in responding to the questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to 
thank my officials for their support. They've done a tremendous 
amount of work during the last year in bringing forward new 
policy and getting these regulations in place. It is a major 
challenge; there's no doubt about that. 
 
And I appreciate the member opposite raising the questions that 
he has, because we're certainly wanting to ensure that the 
Gaming Commission is going to operate effectively and 
efficiently. We are controlling a very major industry in this 
province where there have been a lot of concerns, and I 
certainly commend my officials for the work that they're doing. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I want to also thank the 
officials of the Gaming Commission for their work on behalf of 
the province, and I would encourage them to remain a conduit 
from those groups that they're meeting, to the minister. Please 
keep that communication happening. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials. 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
(1200) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hodgins that Bill No. 2 — An Act 
respecting Railways in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to outline to the House, from my perspective, some 
of the problems with this Bill. We have seen the government 
leaning towards their privatization agenda in the past and 
continuing to do so. This Bill continues that process to a large 
degree. 
 
What this Bill does basically is makes possible the operation of 
a railroad in Saskatchewan, a private railroad. That was possible 
before, but the difference is that now the responsibility is 
transferred from the legislature to the executive branch of 
government. What we have is a loss of the accountability to the 
public, and disclosure to the public of exactly what's taking 
place. 
 
In the past, the legislation, in order to have a private Bill put 
forward, which was necessary in order to establish a private 
railroad, you'd have to give notice of the private Bill, file it with 
the Clerk in this Assembly. You would have to publish it in two 
consecutive issues of the Gazette. You'd have to have four 
consecutive issues of the newspaper published and having 
circulated in the local area of concern. Then the private Bill 
would be examined by a (Standing) Committee on Private 
Members' Bills and then examined again a second time after 
second reading. 
 
So this process of accountability would be gone through. The 
people in those areas would know what was happening. Then 
the committee would report to the Assembly for the 
consideration in Committee of the Whole. Also, you would 
have to register the private Bill, which would be a registry kept 
in the Clerk's office with the names and the particulars of the 
persons applying for the Bill which is open to public scrutiny, 
which is very important. 
 
These are very important provisions for public disclosure and 
accountability, because through this process in the old Act, 
people would have to come before this legislature and have the 
issue debated. They would have to publicly publish it in their 
local papers in the areas of concern. 
 
Under this new provision in the new Act, that provision is 
totally removed. Therefore we can have a situation where a 
short-line railway could be established in an area without any 
input from those people in the local area, without any debate in 
this legislature, and without basically any scrutiny from 
anywhere. A transaction could take place before anybody knew 
about it. And with the history and record of this government 
regarding patronage, regarding giving sweetheart deals to their 
Tory  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1976 
 

friends, I think that is a very dangerous step to make. 
 
I believe any provision for setting up a short-line railroad in this 
province should be debated in this legislature, should be 
accountable to the people in that local area, so that they can 
have input as to whether that was a good project or not. But 
now the cabinet can make that decision, the minister. 
 
I would like also to say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is a totally 
inadequate response to the problem of rail line abandonment. In 
Canada now we are seeing where the federal government is 
continually cutting back the number of dollars that they're 
putting into western Canada. 
 
We see the railroads, who have been paid for a subsidy on every 
line of branch line, not use that subsidy to improve that branch 
line, let that branch line be run into the ground, run into the 
ground so far that the elevator companies then have to make a 
decision as to whether or not it is viable for them to put money 
into their elevator on that branch line. Is that the response? Is 
this the government's response to a failing branch-line system in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
They should be up and down in Ottawa, hammering at the 
federal government to say, look, we need a national rail 
transportation system in Saskatchewan that is going to produce 
the movement of grain from the farm to the port, a high quality 
system that is there for the benefit of the farmer. 
 
But this government, nor the government in Ottawa, has given 
the commitment to Saskatchewan farmers that they were going 
to make sure that the CNR (Canadian National Railway) and 
CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) used the money that was given 
to them by the taxpayers of this province to maintain and 
upgrade lines — an agreement that is there, that they use this 
money to upgrade lines — given to them, and they haven't been 
doing it. 
 
So how does this government respond? They think the answer 
is to allow short-line railways to be established in 
Saskatchewan. But what does that do? That simply transfers the 
burden from the federal government down through the 
provincial government onto the taxpayers of Saskatchewan — 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the farmers in a land-locked 
province that so critically rely on a transportation system to 
move their product to market so that they can earn a living. But 
not just them alone. 
 
This product is basically . . . this grain in this province is 
basically an export product and it benefits every living person 
in Canada. It's a resource. Whenever that grain goes outside the 
country, that's new money coming into this province and to this 
country. In fact, a few years back, grain exports constituted 
about two-thirds of the balance of trade. And this transportation 
company, CNCP (Canadian National and Canadian Pacific), 
were given taxpayers' money to make sure that that precious 
commodity could get through the elevator, along the railroad to 
export, to port. 
 
But what has happened? Through a government who  

turned a blind eye to the upgrading of many of these tracks, 
many of these branch lines, because the whole initiative was to 
call . . . so-called rationalize the system. We're going to 
rationalize this grain handling system. And normally that would 
mean improve it to such a degree that would be beneficial to all 
those people who were using it. A rational system, cost 
effective. 
 
But what it has meant is that the farmers in this province have 
seen, slowly, little by little, the rail lines deteriorating, the rail 
lines being . . . the elevator companies not upgrading elevators, 
and eventually the rail line being abandoned. It's the same 
process that we've gone through time and time again in this 
country on this transportation issue. 
 
And I say that this Bill is not a proper response to what we need 
in Saskatchewan, and that is a good transportation system, a 
national transportation plan to ensure that that resource of grain 
gets to market — benefits the taxpayers, benefits the farmers, 
and benefits all those people who have built towns around that 
elevator, communities, all the services. 
 
But this Bill takes the burden off the federal government, as I 
said, and puts it on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Because the 
question that is being asked by many people is what is the 
viability of a short-line railroad? Will these railroads be 
profitable? Will they be profitable enough to make sure that 
there are elevators along those lines to move that grain to 
market? And that question . . . I think the answer to that 
question is no, simply because the amount of money that is 
needed to run that short-line operation will only be there if the 
farmers fork over a lot of money to move that grain. 
 
And it all fits into the whole procedure that we have gone 
through of deregulating the system. First of all, changing of the 
Crow rate; secondly, implementing variable rates; and now with 
the variable rate structure process being gone through, we can 
have a short-line railway, and what will the rules be? Will the 
principle of equal rates for equal distance be maintained? I 
would say no. 
 
And this is just the opening of the door to allow this. I know the 
Bill is intended to help move coal for Manalta — and I'll get 
into that issue in a moment — but what we have to be 
concerned about is the financial viability of short-line railroads. 
 
Let's take it to an extreme for a minute. If someone, if a grain 
company — Cargill, Bunge, Continental, anyone — if they 
fronted or directly bought themselves a short-line railway, they 
could essentially control all the movement of grain from that 
location. They would have all their elevators on that track 
because no one knows what the rules are. And for any other 
company to put an elevator along that track would be a very 
major decision for them because the movement of that grain 
would be controlled by the person who owned the railroad. I 
mean, I'm taking this to an extreme, but we have to look down 
the road. 
 
Unfortunately, this government doesn't appear to be looking 
down the road in the interests of farmers to making sure we 
have a national rail transportation system to benefit them. They 
seem to be looking down the road  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1977 
 

for their big-business friends to ensure a profit, on the backs of 
the farmers, to those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what's happening here is we're putting 
again the taxpayers' dollars at risk. It's not simply to do with 
farmers, it's not simply to do with the rural communities, but it's 
to do with the management of the funds of this province. This 
government is now going to be guaranteeing loans apparently in 
a process of setting up a short-line railroad — taxpayers' 
dollars. Why is it necessary for Saskatchewan to go through the 
process of guaranteeing loans in order for someone to buy a 
short-line railroad? That is totally ludicrous. 
 
It is a national responsibility and this government should be 
down in Ottawa telling Brian Mulroney that it is your 
responsibility to provide a rail system in Canada that's suitable 
and accessible and equal rate for equal distance, to all those 
farmers in this province. But what are they doing? They're 
saying, well, can't do that; we'll just put it on the back of the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers — rolling over the taxpayers' dollar 
again as we have seen in so many cases, to big-business 
interests, the friends of the Tory government. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, falls in line totally with 
this government's blind-eyed initiative to privatization. 
Privatization, deregulation, let the chips fall where they may, 
and the only people that suffer are those poor taxpayers out 
there who have to fork over dollars year after year in order to 
have this Tory government go on their spending binges. And 
that's the problem. 
 
Instead of standing up for a national system that is 
acknowledged by everyone that is needed, they succumb to the 
pressures of the federal government because the federal 
government are trying to get out of spending money. And then 
the provincial government will just transfer that right onto the 
backs of the farmers. 
 
Privatization of railroads in this country — we've been there, 
Mr. Speaker. It didn't work. We've gone through that process. 
And this forward-looking government wants to go so far 
forward, they're back to where they started again. 
 
The same way with everything else that they're doing in 
agriculture, whether it be the Canadian Wheat Board, the 
deregulation of trucking, grain freight rates. They want to go 
forward to history. And that's the problem. 
 
We've been through the short-line railway; we found it didn't 
work in Saskatchewan . . . or in western Canada, because it's 
such a large area. We found that rail service, steel on steel, is 
the most cost efficient way of moving product. And what have 
they done? They're moving it into the trucking industry. They 
deregulated the trucking industry because the trucking industry 
was supposedly, they said, telling them that they could compete 
with these railroads. They can compete with these railroads. I 
don't think it was the total trucking industry, I think it was those 
few people who were trying to influence government, those big 
operators. 
 
(1215) 
 

And now what's happened . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the 
member says I'm trying to attack the trucking industry. In the 
trucking industry's own words, not a week ago, they were 
saying, deregulation is going to be the downfall of their industry 
because everything is thrown wide open. And what's happening 
is there was a number of small operators who got into trucking, 
but now they're finding that they cannot continue because the 
profit isn't there. And so what happens? Those small operators 
are falling off and the large trucking firms are taking over. 
 
And what does that do for anyone in Saskatchewan? What does 
that do for anyone in Saskatchewan? It is a proven fact that 
moving grain by rail is the most cost efficient, as I said earlier. 
Everyone knows that. It is a proven fact, and history shows us 
that short-line railways did not work in here, so we went to a 
national system, with some foresight from the people who were 
elected in years gone by in this country. And they want to go 
back to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this system . . . this government rather, cannot 
work in the normal system, it seems. Why do they want to tear 
things apart? Why do we not want to go and make our case 
saying, the best way to do things in Saskatchewan is to have a 
national rail network to move product to market. They're not 
doing that. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will also put elevator companies in a 
position where they have to decide whether or not they are 
going to put an elevator on that track. What's happening now, as 
I said, the branch lines are going downhill; they're not being 
upgraded. But when it comes to a short-line, if a private 
company has a short-line railroad, if viability is tenuous, then 
what decision will that elevator company make to establish an 
elevator or upgrade an elevator on that track? I would say there 
wouldn't be much incentive to do that. 
 
And so what is the next step? What is the next step that will be 
if the elevator companies don't want to put their money into the 
elevators to maintain that facility to move the grain? The next 
step that was started a few years ago by the government . . . I 
hate to give them credit for having a master plan, but it almost 
appears that way. Unfortunately, the master plan doesn't work 
for farmers; it works for other people in the industry. They 
started to promote producer cars. 
 
So what's going to happen is that if the elevator companies say 
that this, the life of this railway may not be more than 10 years 
or five or whatever it may be, so they don't put money in. Then 
they're going to be . . . the rail company, in order to maintain 
movement on that line, will be pushing harder and harder for 
more and more producer cars. 
 
And what is that? It's forward to history again. Because we've 
been through that system, the deregulated system where there 
was no allocation of cars and no orderly movement of grain. 
And it didn't work. So what did our forefathers do? They 
developed the Canadian Wheat Board and they developed a 
process of allocating cars to different areas based on their 
volume over a period of time. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1978 
 

But here we go forward to history. It just doesn't work. So I ask: 
what is the motive? Why would a government not be going in 
the other direction, trying to improve a rail system? In other 
countries of the world, the rail systems are very, very adequate. 
They're moving grain and people and other things at high 
speeds for profit because it's a system in which the government 
has some ideas, the idea being that they can move people if the 
system is efficient, and a product very easily and quickly. But 
you have to have that vision in mind before you will do 
something like that. And the powers of this country that control 
this Tory party do not have that vision so, therefore, the parties 
do not have that vision. They think that big business is the way 
to go. The profit motive is all we have to worry about. And it's 
destroying this province. 
 
What this Bill does also, it's another favour to Manalta Coal. I 
mean, it wasn't just good enough to give them all the coalfields 
down there and let them run the operation for their profit, where 
we could be keeping the profit, controlling our resource, no we 
had to give them a sweetheart deal and give it away to them. 
That wasn't good enough. Now we're going to have a system of 
guaranteed loans and everything — another deal for Manalta. 
 
I guess that's the motive — big business. Just keep pumping 
money into Manalta Coal because they're going to do it for this 
province; they're going to create the jobs; they're going to 
maintain our resource and manage that resource for the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan. Joke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does one other thing. It improves the 
existing legislation in terms of safety and standards, and I agree 
with that, because it's always important that safety regulations 
and standards be improved. But fudged in with that little section 
are all the negatives that I have just pointed out, the negatives of 
being able to establish a rail system without any consultation, 
without anybody knowing about it — no debate in the 
legislature, no debate in the community, patronage to big 
business. 
 
For the reason that we need a central national rail system to 
move product to market for our farmers, very cost efficiently, a 
system that if upgraded as it should have been with the money 
that was given to them, would today be a top-notch system. 
 
For the reason that we do not want to go forward to history. We 
have been through, as I said, in three cases: deregulation, the 
allocation of cars, Canadian Wheat Board, short-line railway — 
we've been there before. We do not have to repeat. You should 
always learn by your history and not make the same mistakes, 
but this government and the government in Ottawa are headlong 
into privatization — which is another good reason to stay away 
from this — are headlong into the control of big business 
corporations for the profit motive and are turning a blind eye to 
the people of this province. And we've seen it in many, many 
other instances, from scandals to patronage to just total 
incompetency, waste, and mismanagement of our funds. 
 
And they always talk about, oh the farm community this, the 
farm community that, we're going to be the saviours  

of the farm community. Well, Mr. Speaker, if they're the 
saviours of the farm community, why do we have $6.5 billion 
debt? Why do we have foreclosure actions taking place? And I 
had to smile to myself when I read the Premier's comments on a 
Bill that will be coming up, because people in this province are 
not being supported by this government; they're only being 
supported verbally. They are not being supported with 
long-term measures. 
 
This government's not supporting stability. Oh rhetoric says 
yes, yes, we're going to stabilize, we're going to help you out. 
And this is just another example of them not providing that 
stability that's so necessary in this province  
_- deregulated systems, different rules for different people, 
different costs for different areas. That is simply not acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If this government wanted to fix the old Act with regards to 
safety requirements and standards, that's fine; they can do that. 
But by putting all these other components in, Mr. Speaker, I 
simply cannot accept that Bill, because it is not a Bill that looks 
forward to . . . that the farmers can look forward to to have a 
more stable system. It's just another little chip away from 
stability. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons, I will not be able to support 
the Bill, and I would just hope that the government would 
rethink this. Improve the safety requirements and standards — 
that's fine — but please, for the sake of the people of this 
province, get rid of your privatization mode, get rid of your 
backward-looking policies and ideas; and for once, instead of 
rhetoric, do something that provides stability. Support a 
national rail system; support a national marketing system for 
grain to the Canadian Wheat Board; support equal rates for 
equal distances. And by doing that, you'd be supporting the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
But by Bills like this, another little chink in the armour, less 
stability and more headaches for farm communities. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Schmidt that Bill No. 7 — An Act 
respecting the Protection of Children and the Provision of 
Support Services to Families be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to enter 
into the debate on this very important piece of legislation that 
has been a long time coming in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It's some 17 years now since there was a major revamping of 
The Family Services Act in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
light of that, members on this side of the House certainly don't 
question the need for a new Bill. 
 
We certainly have some very serious reservations about a few 
of the provisions in this Bill. But I think our most serious 
reservation of all is that the Government of  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1979 
 

Saskatchewan, the PC government, simply don't have the 
resources in place in the Department of Social Services, nor 
have they given the resources to community based 
organizations to let this piece of legislation be effectively 
implemented even after it's passed. 
 
What I'm saying in short, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill won't 
work. It won't do the job that it's supposed to do in terms of 
protecting children and supporting families in the province of 
Saskatchewan, because the resources aren't in place either in the 
department or funded by the government in the community to 
let the Bill work. And that is perhaps its most serious shortfall 
of all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we've seen a government that in the last 
three years since being re-elected in 1986 has chosen to 
severely cut back support to community based organizations 
that are providing family services. Those cuts have been 
particularly severe in the larger cities of the province and, in 
effect, organizations that are in the family support business 
have found their budgets effectively frozen in the smaller cities 
and rural centres of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to just comment briefly on what some 
of those cuts have been. For instance, the mobile crisis 
intervention services, which are one of the most central 
elements in any plan of protection of children who are at risk. 
They found that their budgets by this government were cut 
some 20 per cent in 1987, Mr. Speaker. Those organizations 
have simply found that they're no longer, in some cases, even 
able to offer the 24-hour service which they are mandated to do 
because the budget cuts have been so severe, and they've in 
many cases had to lay off staff. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see in this year's budget that in addition 
to the cuts that many family support agencies experienced in 
1987, there is another cut in the category of the budget that is 
referred to as grants to family service organizations — a cut, 
Mr. Speaker, in excess of $800,000 between the 1988 budget 
and the 1989 budget. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that talks 
about supporting families on the one hand, and then turns 
around and implements a cut of almost a million dollars out of 
what was a $7.5 million budget in 1988, a cut of another almost 
a million dollars to the organizations in this province that are 
providing support services to families in crisis in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that demonstrates that this 
government is really not committed to supporting families in 
crisis and it's an example of why this family services Act simply 
is not going to work in practical terms. Because the provisions 
of this Bill, if they were to be implemented, would require more 
support services in the community, and more family services in 
the department. And in effect what you're doing in this budget 
is cutting back those services even further. 
 
(1230) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on what we  

believe on this side of the House the priorities of the 
government should be in this family services Act. And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that the first priority should be on 
providing preventative services to families. By this, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean things like expanding the parent aid program in 
the province of Saskatchewan to parents and families who are 
believed to be at risk, who need help, counselling, practical 
advice with respect to home skills. 
 
In the areas of Saskatchewan that have the opportunity to take 
advantage of that program, it's been a very important 
preventative program in terms of avoiding the sort of situations 
where families are at risk, where without support there may 
well be a breakdown of the family, where there may be the risk 
of a child having to be apprehended, where there may be some 
risk with respect to violence in the home. 
 
The parent aid program serves many families that are not at risk 
like that, but it also serves some families that are at risk like 
that, Mr. Speaker, and there are many parts of Saskatchewan 
that don't have a parent aid program. 
 
This government would do well to expand that program to all 
parts of Saskatchewan and to expand it in urban centres where 
there's a waiting list for service from parent aids. Mr. Speaker, 
the kind of human savings in terms of avoiding child 
apprehensions and in terms of avoiding violent situations in the 
home, that that kind of a program, if it was expanded, would 
prevent, would be well worth the investment, and in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, would save the taxpayers of this program a good deal 
of money. And yet, Mr. Speaker, it's the kind of program that 
this government has chosen not to make a priority in terms of 
expanding. So the first thing, Mr. Speaker, that we need is an 
expansion in preventative programs. 
 
The second thing that we need, Mr. Speaker, is a beefing up of 
protection services, child protection services in this province, so 
that we can have early identification of cases where if there isn't 
early intervention there may be a need for child apprehension. 
But by having early intervention, child apprehension can be 
avoided and the problem within the family can be resolved 
without having to remove the child from the family. 
 
But this government, Mr. Speaker, has chosen to cut back on 
child protection officer positions. Often when those positions 
become vacant it waits for months before it fills them, Mr. 
Speaker. And the result is that child protection officers are so 
overworked that they're not able to engage in early 
identification of problem situations and engage in a process of 
resolving those problem situations. Rather, they're constantly 
moving from dealing with one family crisis to another. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, we obviously need more foster homes 
and more group homes in this province, so that children are not 
kept in dangerous situations because of a shortage of services in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I often hear of cases, as the critic for Social 
Services, where children are not apprehended even though in 
the judgement of the child protection officer, apprehension, at 
least on a very temporary basis, is warranted, because there's 
nowhere to place that child.  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1980 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a very unfortunate situation and a 
very dangerous situation for the children involved, that the 
people of Saskatchewan should not tolerate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that brings me to one of my fundamental 
concerns with respect to this piece of legislation, and that is 
with respect to the provisions in sections 5 and 6 of the Bill, 
which I will not refer specifically to, Mr. Speaker, except to say 
that they make the provision of family services in this province 
optional. 
 
Those sections of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, which I think are very 
fundamental, say that the Minister of Social Services may 
provide family services to people in need in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, given this government's 
decision to consistently cut back on grants to organizations that 
provide family services in this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my seat mate and 
friend, the member from Shaunavon, I'd like to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, some visitors from McCord School. They're grades 
6, 7, and 8 students. Accompanying them are Hazel Blake, Leah 
Nogue, Verna Hiltz, and Jean Clermont. I ask all members of 
the Legislative Assembly to welcome my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — I will meet with them shortly for a picture and 
some drinks. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like 
to, on behalf of the official opposition, add our words of 
welcome to the guests in the gallery. It's very nice to have you 
here this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, one of our fundamental concerns 
about the family services Act that we're currently debating is 
that this Act makes it optional as to whether or not the Minister 
of Social Services will offer family services in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, given this government's 
record of cut-backs to family services in this province, it is very 
clear that making this provision of family services an optional 
matter is no longer acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be bringing forward an amendment to 
sections 5 and 6 of the Bill when it goes to committee, stating 
that the Minister of Social Services shall offer  

family services to people in need in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It's time to make the provision of 
family services in this province an obligatory matter for the 
Minister of Social Services and not something that he does at 
his whim, Mr. Speaker. And members on this side of the House 
feel very strongly about that matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's a good reason why we cannot continue to 
make the provision of family services an optional matter for the 
minister, and that is, Mr. Speaker, because at every turn this 
minister has failed the people of Saskatchewan when it comes 
to the provision of family services. 
 
You take, Mr. Speaker, the . . . if you look, for instance, at 
transition houses in this province, you look at centres like 
Saskatoon or La Ronge that are regularly having to turn away 
women and children who have been abused and who come to 
the transition house in a city like the one that I represent in 
Saskatoon, and find that the transition house is so badly 
underfunded that there is no space in the transition house for the 
women and children who have been abused. 
 
And they have to be turned away; they're placed in a motel. In 
some cases they return to their family home where abuse has 
taken place. It's clearly an intolerable situation which the 
Minister of Social Services has now, ever since he's held the 
post, done nothing to correct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have seen a situation in La Ronge that is very similar. We 
see, Mr. Speaker, that the family service bureaus in the province 
of Saskatchewan, which offer counselling services to families in 
crisis, they have a waiting list, Mr. Speaker, in excess of a 
month. You take Catholic Family Service (Society) bureau, or 
the Protestant Family Service Bureau in the city of Regina, it is 
not uncommon at all, Mr. Speaker, for a family in crisis to have 
to wait five or six weeks to get to see a counsellor at a family 
services bureau in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when you're in crisis you can't afford to wait five or six 
weeks to get in to see a counsellor. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
results directly from the Minister of Social Services' decision to 
underfund counselling services at the Family Service Bureau. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the transition houses and the family service 
bureaus of this province are central to the effective operation of 
this family services Act. If they can't do their job, then this 
legislation is not going to work, Mr. Speaker, and it is clear now 
that the Minister of Social Services, after three years at the job, 
is not willing to fund them accurately. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I say that one of the basic changes 
that is needed to this Bill is a provision that makes the provision 
of family services in the province of Saskatchewan to those in 
need, a mandatory provision, Mr. Speaker, and not one that 
depends on the whim and the good will of the Minister of 
Social Services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to give some other examples of the 
kind of cuts in services that clearly need to be  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1981 
 

corrected. And, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier the shortage of 
child protection officers in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I say that this matter has become so serious — so 
serious — that often child protection officers are unable to 
follow up on calls that they receive about a matter of family 
violence where an investigation is immediately required. 
 
I have people telling me around the province, Mr. Speaker, that 
it is not uncommon for them to phone into the Department of 
Social Services to complain about a situation in which a child is 
being abused, and to not get a call back from a child protection 
officer for several hours. Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 
That's outrageous that someone should call in reporting a matter 
of family violence, and find that they don't get a return call for 
several hours. That is an absolutely unacceptable situation, Mr. 
Speaker, and it reflects the fact that the Department of Social 
Services is chronically understaffed in this very, very important 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very unacceptable, when we have a situation 
where often child protection officers feel that they can't 
apprehend a child who is in danger and needs to be temporarily 
removed from the home, because there's a shortage of foster 
homes to place that child. And yet that's precisely the situation 
we have in some regions of this province right now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I wonder how the staff in the Department of Social Services in 
locations, for instance, like Fort Qu'Appelle in this province, 
where there are only two family service workers in that regional 
office, Mr. Speaker, how are they going to deal with the 
provisions in this Bill which require that in the event that a 
child is apprehended, that the case of that child and whether or 
not the apprehension should continue is to be placed before a 
family review panel within seven days, as this Bill requires, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That provision in the Bill is a very good provision, Mr. Speaker, 
but it'll never be implemented by this government because they 
don't have the staff in the regional offices to get cases of child 
apprehension before a family review panel within seven days. 
 
What this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is it adds again and again to 
the work of the staff in the regional offices, but there aren't the 
staff in the regional offices to do the job. So the Bill simply 
won't be implemented, Mr. Speaker, unless there's a major 
change in the funding policies of this government when it 
comes to social services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is another provision of the Bill that 
would be very good if the family services were in place but that 
won't work, and I want to point to that. It's section 10 of the 
Bill, which allows the Minister of Social Services to at long last 
provide residential services to 16- and 17-year-olds in this 
province who are in need of care and supervision, if their 
parents are unwilling to assume responsibility for them or if the 
child can't be re-established with their family. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have waited a long time for a provision 
in legislation which would provide services to 16- and 
17-year-olds in this province. Mr. Speaker, this age group for 
far too long has gone without services from  

the Department of Social Services. 
 
(1245) 
 
Many young people, Mr. Speaker, in this province are out living 
on the street today because of the Minister of Social Services' 
failure to provide them with help when they're 16 and 17 years 
of age. It's one of the worst parts of this government's record in 
social services, is your complete failure, your abandonment of 
the 16- and 17-year-olds of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So finally we have a proposal in this Bill that these teenagers 
are going to be eligible for some services at long last from your 
department. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask you to look at the record in 
terms of the provision of services right now to 16- and 
17-year-olds in the province of Saskatchewan. There simply are 
no services in place to make this Bill work even when the 
amendments in this new Act go through. 
 
I look at Moose Jaw, for instance, Mr. Speaker — the Gamin 
Abet group home, for instance, in Moose Jaw, which has to turn 
away any young person once they become 16 years of age; in 
effect, Mr. Speaker, often preventing these young people from 
pursuing their education past grade 10. 
 
You know, in the city of Moose Jaw, a young person turns 16 
years of age, they were in a group home funded by the PC 
government opposite, and they have to be turned out of the 
home because the funds . . . this government hasn't put the 
funds in place to allow them to stay in that group home, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You look at Saskatoon where there used to be a group home 
operating for teenage girls in trouble, the Sunstar Home. What 
did this government do? It stopped making referrals to that 
home from the Department of Social Services. In effect, the PC 
government closed that group home for teenagers down, 
through refusing to provide referrals and refusing to provide 
funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You look at the case of Bosco now, where the Bosco program is 
in disarray. There's very little help there for teenagers in crisis. 
 
You look, Mr. Speaker, at group homes around the province 
and you consistently find that young people past their 16th 
birthday, who are in serious trouble but who have not 
committed an offence, Mr. Speaker — a criminal offence, or 
have gotten into trouble with the law — but their life for one 
reason or another is in serious trouble and they need urgent 
help, they can't get into a group home facility, Mr. Speaker, 
because this government has refused to provide the services to 
teenagers that they desperately require. 
 
And so they end up getting into trouble, Mr. Speaker, and the 
taxpayer ends up paying a great deal more in the end, and the 
lives of these young people in their teens are often ruined, Mr. 
Speaker. And that responsibility rests squarely on the shoulders 
of the PC government and, particularly, the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the examples of  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1982 
 

this government's refusal to provide essential family services to 
the families of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, these are 
examples of why I say now that this family services legislation 
before us can no longer make the provision of family services to 
families in crisis an optional matter. It must be an obligatory 
matter, Mr. Speaker, by the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want, secondly, to comment on some of 
the provisions in the legislation that I believe require urgent 
change, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of the provisions in this 
Bill that concerns me most is the provision in section 57 of the 
Bill, and I will reserve my detailed comments on that section, 
Mr. Speaker, for Committee of the Whole. 
 
But what this legislation does, I think one of the most disturbing 
things that it does, is that it allows the Minister of Social 
Services to appoint child protection officers in the province of 
Saskatchewan that are unqualified. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that this is an extremely serious matter and an extremely serious 
shortcoming in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 57 in effect does this. It gives the minister 
the right to either appoint a child protection officer that is 
qualified under the regulations that are to be attached to this 
Bill, or alternatively, Mr. Speaker, section 57 of the Bill allows 
the Minister of Social Services to appoint as a child protection 
officer anyone who is, in his opinion, is qualified. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen in the past some of the people 
that the Minister of Social Services thinks are qualified. I recall 
last year, for instance, the appointment of Mr. Ron Crandlemire 
as an assistant social worker in the Yorkton region of the 
Department of Social Services. I'm sure the member for 
Yorkton, as well as the member for Melville, will recall Mr. 
Crandlemire's appointment, a matter by the way that hasn't 
received any public discussion in this House to date, so I raise it 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know Mr. Crandlemire only had a grade 
12 education, and yet the Minister of Social Services decided 
that Mr. Crandlemire was suited to be an assistant social 
worker, despite the fact that there are dozens and dozens of 
people in this province who have graduated with social work 
degrees from the University of Regina and who would be 
perfectly qualified social workers to have filled that position, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
But no, the Minister of Social Services, recalling that Mr. 
Crandlemire had been on his constituency executive and had 
helped his constituency association, decided that with his grade 
12 education he would be fit to be an assistant social worker in 
the Yorkton region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services overruled the 
advice that he received from within the department not to 
appoint Mr. Crandlemire, and he appointed him as an assistant 
social worker, a patronage appointment — blatant patronage 
and nothing less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services wants to be 
able to appoint child protection officers in the same way that he 
appointed Mr. Crandlemire. Mr. Speaker, a  

child protection officer is a very sensitive position. It requires 
people who fill those positions with a great deal of experience, 
with professional qualifications, and with a good deal of 
judgement. 
 
They, Mr. Speaker, make some of the most difficult judgement 
calls of any people in the public service. The question of 
whether or not to apprehend a child, and the decision about 
whether to move in to protect a child from a violent situation, 
and the decision about what can be done to try to reunite the 
family as quickly as possible — those require people with a 
good deal of experience and with sound professional 
qualifications. 
 
And the Minister of Social Services and the PC government 
opposite want to throw that process out the window, and they 
want to use section 57 of the legislation to appoint anybody that 
they think is qualified, Mr. Speaker, despite whatever the 
regulations say. That's what this section 57 does. 
 
It's an intolerable provision in the Bill, and I call upon the 
Minister of Social Services to remove it immediately, because if 
he doesn't, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt about what his agenda 
is, and that is an agenda that simply is designed to enhance his 
policy of blatant patronage in the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's another matter in this Bill that I want to 
raise before we run out of time this morning, and that is with 
respect to what we on this side of the House believe is one of 
the major things missing in this Bill, and that is the need, in our 
judgement, for a family ombudsman, or a child's representative 
in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a situation now where often child 
apprehension cases end up before the courts. Certainly under 
this Bill there will be a system, Mr. Speaker, in which child 
apprehension cases will be reviewed by the family review 
panels which are being put in place under this legislation. And, 
Mr. Speaker, in both those situations, both in the case of the 
family review panels and in the event that a child apprehension 
case goes before the courts, in both those situations, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe the time has come that we need in the 
province of Saskatchewan, someone who will be a voice for the 
child in those very difficult situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta has a child ombudsman, and the role of 
the child ombudsman in that province is that often when there 
are difficult and tense situations where evidence must be 
presented, and it's hard for either the child or the social worker 
to present that evidence, often the child ombudsman can come 
in, Mr. Speaker, and he can help to present that evidence on 
behalf of the child. He can, in effect, Mr. Speaker, give the 
child a voice in the proceedings that far too often children do 
not have. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that would be a very useful 
provision under this legislation, and it's something that is 
clearly missing in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that in addition to that, the family 
ombudsman, or the child's advocate, would have an additional 
role, and that is, Mr. Speaker, the children's advocate would 
have the ability to mobilize services on  
  



 
June 16, 1989 

 

1983 
 

behalf of families and on behalf of children in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The child's representative would be checking to ensure that a 
child does not get moved around constantly from one foster 
home to another while they are waiting for court proceedings to 
be completed. And that sometimes happens, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately, and I think that a child's representative could 
play a very important role in ensuring that the child's welfare 
was protected during the very difficult wait before a matter goes 
to court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that a child's representative could play a 
very useful role in terms of mobilizing services for families: 
when they see that a family is in a crisis situation; when they 
see that a family has been unable to get the kind of help they 
need from the Department of Social Services or from a 
community agency that is bogged down with a long waiting list. 
The child's representative would have the ability to move in and 
to mobilize services on behalf of that child. 
 
That's the kind of role that we envision for a child's 
representative or a children's ombudsman in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that positions such as 
those — probably initially three or four of them in the province 
of Saskatchewan could perhaps very well be located in the 
Ombudsman's office, Mr. Speaker, and in effect making those 
people independent and allowing them to report directly to the 
legislature in the way that the Ombudsman does now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that would be a very useful addition to the 
Bill, and in committee I will be questioning the Minister of 
Social Services and urging him to add that to the Bill. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, that the Deputy House Leader, I think, 
would like to adjourn for today. I am not done my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, so I will be picking this Bill up again next day. For 
now I would like to adjourn. I would like to adjourn the debate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member has adjourned the 
debate once. The rules of the House do not allow a member to 
adjourn the same debate twice. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well in that case, Mr. Speaker, I'll just call it 1 
o'clock, if I could do that. 
 
The Speaker: — If leave is granted I'll allow you to do that, but 
actually it isn't 1 o'clock. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


