


















































May 23, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 23, 1989 
 

1271 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present once more to the legislature a 
petition signed by approximately 400 residents of 
Saskatchewan, residents who are extremely concerned about the 
government’s intention to privatize SaskPower — the 
SaskEnergy part of it — and they have asked us to make their 
views known to the House in the form of these petitions, and 
asking the government to withdraw that legislation and not to 
pursue with it. 
 
These names, Mr. Speaker, come from such places as 
Willowbrook, Theodore, Springside, Wynyard, Quill Lake, 
Battleford, Sceptre, and my own city of Saskatoon. I so place 
these petitions before the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
to table a few hundred petitions by various people from various 
parts of the province who ask that the government listen to a 
clear expression of public opinion that the sale of SaskPower is 
not in the public interest, that it constitutes a sell-off of a major 
public utility, and will lead to higher utility rates. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, come from North Battleford, 
Battleford, Lanigan, Viscount, Plunkett, Watrous, Nokomis. 
These people represent most areas of the province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present several hundred, I think 400 names on a petition. 
These people are petitioning the government to stop the sell-off 
of SaskPower that they know and believe will lead to higher 
power and gas rates in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, these people are from the towns of Lumsden, Melville, 
Yorkton, Regina, Saskatoon, Rosthern, and Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to provide some 600 names of petitioners in respect to 
their opposition to the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
These petitioners reside in a wide range of communities 
throughout Saskatchewan such as Milestone, Regina, Wawota, 
Kipling, Endeavour, St. Victor, Hudson Bay, Tisdale, Melfort, 
Canwood, Nipawin, Neudorf, Esterhazy, Estevan, Corning, 
Usherville. I so file, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions to the Assembly 
containing 400 names of Saskatchewan residents who are 
opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. These petitioners are 
from such places as Estevan, Bienfait, Prairie River, Hudson 
Bay, Dysart, Sturgis, Fox Valley, Prud’homme, Hodgeville and 
Coronach. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise along with my 

colleagues in this Assembly to lay on the Table, petitions of 
about 400 Saskatchewan people who are concerned about the 
privatization of SaskEnergy. 
 
The petition says in part that the privatization of SaskEnergy 
constitutes a sell-off of a major public utility which serves all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
These people come from such varied communities in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as Elfros, Wynyard, Porcupine 
Plain, Kerrobert, Carragana, Moose Jaw, Maidstone, Zehner, 
Kronau, Yorkton, and my own city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since I’ve begun to table names of people who’ve signed this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, I’ve personally tabled 4,100 names. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the 
Assembly. This petition is signed by residents from 
Langenburg, Kindersley, Goodsoil, North Portal, Prince Albert, 
Lloydminster, Semans, Qu’Appelle, Watrous, and Carrot River. 
 
And these petitioners are urging the Legislative Assembly to 
stop the privatization of SaskPower. They state that the 
privatization of SaskPower constitutes a sell-off of a major 
public utility which serves all Saskatchewan people. 
 
In all now, Mr. Speaker, I have presented 3,900 such names to 
the Assembly, and I’m pleased to present these this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour as 
well to rise pursuant to rule 11 to present the same petition, with 
signatures in the neighbourhood of 400, from people who are 
opposed to the Saskatchewan government’s stated intention to 
privatize SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from several communities 
including Dalmeny, Holdfast, Windthorst, Bethune, Spring 
Valley, Frontier, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Cabri, Shaunavon, 
Eastend, Maple Creek, Success, Swift Current, and others. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to a rule of having 
to present petitions from quite a few different communities 
from across the province of Saskatchewan, which includes 
about 400 residents. These include Saskatoon, Kelvington, 
Hudson Bay, Unity, Weyburn, Dubuc, Stockholm, Pilot Butte, 
Earl Grey, Delisle, Duperow, Biggar, Landis, Estevan, North 
Battleford, Midale, Albertville, Lipton, and Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
These petitioners are opposed to the privatization of SaskPower, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
rise pursuant to rule 11 to present to the legislature several 
hundred signatures of Saskatchewan citizens who are opposed 
to the privatization of the Saskatchewan Power utility. 
 
The people who have signed the petition come from 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1272 
 

several different rural constituencies throughout Saskatchewan. 
They come from Maple Creek, Lafleche, Shaunavon, Arcola, 
Perdue, Lang, Pangman, Macrorie, Shellbrook, and Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 as 
well, to present to this legislature a petition signed by 400 
residents of Saskatchewan. The petitioners oppose, Mr. 
Speaker, the privatization of SaskPower. They believe a sell-off 
of SaskEnergy is not in the public interest, and they are opposed 
to the PC government’s policy in this regard. 
 
They represent a number of communities including Balgonie, 
Drake, Wishart, Wynyard, Rayner, Swift Current, Weyburn, 
Saskatoon, my home town of Regina, and the constituency of 
Regina North West. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to file approximately 200 petitions against the privatization 
of SaskPower. These petitions come from a number of different 
communities including Rocanville, Swift Current, Simmie, 
Melfort, Torquay, Ridgedale, Maple Creek, Eastend, and 
Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition under rule 11 which has been signed by approximately 
400 residents of the province of Saskatchewan, and which urges 
the provincial government to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower. The people signing this petition hail from 
communities such as Lumsden, Southey, Kennedy, 
Martensville, Kelliher, Leross, Melfort, Gronlid, Codette, 
Yorkton, Pilot Butte, Wynyard, Cupar, Estevan, Yorkton, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
pursuant to section 11 as well to again present some 400 names 
of residents of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
privatization of SaskPower by this government. Of great 
concern to them is that SaskPower privatization is not in the 
public interest. 
 
Some of the communities include, Mr. Speaker, Muenster, 
Maple Creek, Melville, Stoughton, Blaine Lake, Fillmore, and 
Elrose. I trust the Government of Saskatchewan will listen to 
these petitioners, residents of rural Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too join 
my colleagues in rising pursuant to rule 11 to present to the 
legislature a petition regarding the proposed sale of public asset, 
that is, SaskPower natural gas utility, signed by residents from a 
number of different communities around the province, 
including Regina, Conquest, Manor, Dinsmore, Elrose, Carlyle, 
Craven, and White City. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, pursuant to 
rule 11 I rise to present a petition with another 400 signatures of 
Saskatchewan residents, residents opposed to the privatization 
of SaskPower. And these petitioners make their homes in 
communities such as Allan, Rosetown, Spiritwood, Canora, 
Saskatoon and Regina, Odessa, Markinch, and Paradise Hill. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 

rule 11 yet again to present the signatures of 400 more people 
opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. These signatures are 
a time-honoured method of the people in our democracy to 
make their views known to the government. These signatures, 
Mr. Speaker, represent many, many hours of volunteer efforts 
of collecting these signatures, and I thank those people for it. 
 
These petitions are from Lake Alma, Oungre, Goodwater, 
Grenfell, Whitewood, Humboldt, Melfort, Bright Sand, 
Pennant, and the town that I grew up in, Beechy. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am honoured to 
rise pursuant to rule 11 to present the petition of residents from 
many different communities asking that the privatization of 
SaskPower not go ahead, because the privatization of 
SaskPower is not in the public interest. The privatization of 
SaskPower constitutes a sell-off of a major public utility, and 
the privatization of SaskPower will lead to higher utility rates 
for Saskatchewan people and will benefit only wealthy 
investors. 
 
The people in this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
communities of Turtleford, Odessa, Webb, Warman, Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw, Sedley, Vanscoy, Sturgis, Preeceville, 
Indian Head, Regina, and some from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan. These petitioners are 
urging the government not to privatize SaskPower but to keep 
this major public utility in the service of all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities including 
Balgonie, Edgeley, Broadview, Meadow Lake, Tuxford, 
Rocanville, Paddockwood, St. Benedict, Englefeld, Duval, and 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with all 
of my colleagues in also rising pursuant to rule 11 to present 
some 1,000 petitions of people from many parts of the province 
who are saying that they oppose the privatization of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. They don’t think it’s in the 
public interest. They are fearful that it will result in greatly 
increased utility rates. There’s evidence why they have a right 
to believe that. 
 
These thousand names, Mr. Speaker, which I present here 
today, now bring the accumulated total of approximately 10,000 
names today, for a total of approximately 90,000 since these 
petitions began to be signed by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the names that I present here, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Zenon Park, St. Walburg, Crystal Springs, Sturgis, Meadow 
Lake, Prince Albert, Yorkton, Birch Hills, Hague, Weyburn, 
Foam Lake, Fort Qu’Appelle, Wilkie, Regina, and many, many 
other communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly a group of 19 students seated 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1273 
 

in your gallery today from the town of Hodgeville. They are 
grade 6 students. They’re accompanied today by their teacher, 
Alison Peake, and their bus driver, Mark Gross. 
 
I’m going to be meeting with them outside later on, and I hope 
you enjoy the Assembly proceedings here while you’re here. 
Question period will be delayed a little bit for a few minutes, 
and if you’re interested, you could probably stay and watch 
that. You’ll probably be seeing interesting things happening 
here. 
 
I’d like all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to 
other members of the Assembly this afternoon, a group of 47 
students from Henry Kelsey School in Saskatoon. They’re 
grades 4, 5, 6, and 7. They’re in the west gallery, and they’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Guy Jean and Kathleen Ryror 
Hildebrandt, and four parents who are chaperoning them today. 
 
They’re going to be visiting in the Assembly for question 
period, and I will be meeting with them about 3 o’clock this 
afternoon. I certainly hope that they enjoy the proceedings, and 
I would wish them well with the remainder of their school year 
and also a very happy summer vacation. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome this group of 
students, their teachers and chaperons here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Allegations re Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is to the Premier, and it’s in regards to the rather serious, not 
rather, but the very serious allegations made by the Minister of 
Justice in the question period on Friday last, where the Minister 
of Justice alleged, among other things, that the Provincial 
Auditor had acted improperly because, as the Minister of 
Justice said it, the auditor had demanded, in part, material 
advantage to himself in exchange for a better report on the 
spending habits of your government, Mr. Premier. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: do you support those 
grave charges made by your Minister of Justice, since you’ve 
had the weekend now to consider the transcript and the 
evidence; and if so, will you today table in this House any and 
all proof whatsoever to back up those grave allegations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today we provided 
to the Leader of the Opposition, pursuant to his request, two 
letters dated April 14 and April 18, and I intend to table those 
letters after question period today. 
 
The letter of April 14 — if the hon. member would listen 

— the letter from April 14 from the lawyer for the Provincial 
Auditor to the lawyer for CIC (Crown investments corporation 
of Saskatchewan) refers to a package proposal being made by 
the Provincial Auditor, the substance of which I have been 
made privy to. The package proposal contains material 
information central to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. The hon. 
member is answering a question and deserves the right to have 
that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I said, Mr. Speaker, before I was 
interrupted, the package proposal, I am aware of what is in it. I 
say to this House that that package proposal contains material 
information central to this entire question. 
 
The package proposal was sent to our lawyers by the Provincial 
Auditor’s lawyers on trust conditions of confidentiality. The 
package proposal was returned by our lawyer to the auditor’s 
lawyer by letter April 18, and the copies that we had made were 
destroyed pursuant to the demand of the Provincial Auditor’s 
letter and trust condition. The Provincial Auditor is the only 
person that has this proposed package; the only one in existence 
is in his hands, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have asked today of 
the Provincial Auditor, through our lawyers to, one, provide me 
and the House with that information. 
 
I indicated, and I think it’s interesting for the hon. member to 
listen, I know what is in that package proposal. It is central to 
the issue of what we are dealing with here, and it cannot be 
released because of the trust conditions imposed by the 
Provincial Auditor’s lawyer — those letters I sent to you this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I would 
like it to go to the Premier, but I suspect that he will not answer 
this question as he didn’t the first question. So I’ll simply direct 
it to the Premier, and whoever in the front benches takes it, if 
it’s the Minister of Justice, I guess that’s who we’ll take the 
answer from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I heard the Minister of Justice a few moments 
ago, he has told the House that he is aware of — I think he 
repeated that two or three times — of something called a 
package proposal or a proposal package. My question to you, 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, is: when were you made aware of 
that proposal package? And having given us the date, which 
presumably you will, as to when you became aware of that 
proposal package, if there was something improper in that 
package, why would your lawyers, presumably on instruction 
by the government, destroy it and not deal with that impropriety 
at the time? Or more importantly, why didn’t you act at the 
impropriety at the time that you were seized of the knowledge 
of it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I became aware of the 
package proposal, or the proposal by the Provincial Auditor, 
last Thursday when the provincial audit report was filed in this 
House. And the reason for that is because this is not normally 
the file that I would handle. I am 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1274 
 

handling this file in the absence of the Minister of Finance, and 
therefore I became involved with it at that point in time. 
 
The documents were sent by the solicitor for the Provincial 
Auditor to the solicitors for CIC. Those documents were then 
requested, pursuant to the trust condition in that letter, that they 
be returned and the trust conditions that all documents be 
destroyed. We did not destroy those documents because of our 
wish to; we destroyed those documents because of the demand 
of the trust conditions of the lawyer for the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Justice. And I must admit, like in Alice in Wonderland, his 
answers are getting more curiouser and more curiouser. 
 
The letter which you gave to me — not you, but the Premier, 
gave to me this morning — the letter of April 18, 1989 from 
Mr. Kyle to Mr. Neill, Mr. Kyle writes as of April 18 that the 
photostat copy of the proposal package has been destroyed. Yet 
you tell us that just as of a few days ago you were aware of that 
package. 
 
My question to you is: how is it that you were made aware of 
this package, since presumably it was destroyed? And my most 
important question to you and to the government is this: if there 
was impropriety in that package, as you alleged on Friday, why 
wasn’t action taken? Why weren’t steps taken on April 18, or 
whenever that package came to your light — steps taken to 
clarify this matter by way of reference to the Department of 
Justice or to some other appropriate body? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the hon. member that I was 
aware of this document, or this package proposal, the substance 
of it — as I said, the substance of it. I have not seen word for 
word what is in there, but I have been advised by the three 
people . . . just hear me out . . . I have been advised by the three 
people that read that document. They are Larry Kyle, Wolfgang 
Wolff, chairman of CIC, and Larry Kyle’s secretary. Now those 
are the ones that have seen the documents. 
 
But is the issue to my hon. friend not this? There is a document 
in existence, and I have been advised as to what is in that 
document. There is one document available to us, sir, and it 
now is in the hands of the Provincial Auditor. Now if, as you 
would suggest on Friday, that within that document there is 
nothing of any significance, then I simply pose the question: 
why the secrecy by the auditor? Why the trust conditions by the 
auditor? Why the demand that the documents be returned back 
to the auditor? Those are legitimate, fair questions that you as a 
lawyer should understand, trust conditions. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Before we move to the 
next question, I would once more remind the hon. members 
unparliamentary language, whether from your feet or from your 
desk, is unacceptable and disrupts proceedings of the House. I 
would ask hon. members to refrain. 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: would you 
advise the legislature whether or not your government initiated 
a course of action with the Provincial Auditor before the letter 
of April 20, 1989, which was tabled by the Minister of Justice 
on Friday last? 
 
The course of conduct that you negotiated I’m asking about 
with the designed objective of getting the auditor to amend his 
— what has been proven to be — damning report, to determine 
what it would take by way of changes to get the changes made 
to that report? And if this is so, who in your government 
authorized the discussions, when did they begin, and who 
conducted them? Were they Mr. Kyle, on the instructions of the 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the hon. member that the 
negotiations entered into between Mr. Kyle on behalf of CIC, 
and Mr. Neill on behalf of the Provincial Auditor, related to the 
following circumstance. There was in existence for some period 
of time a great deal of animosity between the Provincial 
Auditor’s office and the offices of various appointed auditors, 
and the negotiations were to try to find ways by which the two 
sides, the two groups of auditors, might better co-operate to do 
the job that they’re both mandated to do pursuant to the 
legislation and pursuant to their assignments. That was the 
purposes of the negotiations. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Minister of Justice. He says the mandate was . . . where the 
lawyers for CIC and the lawyers for the auditor engaged in 
discussions to determine how the mandate can be fulfilled is, I 
gather, the essence of what the Minister of Justice says. 
 
That being the case, how in the world does the Minister of 
Justice get up and make the serious allegation on Friday, 
repeated today in effect by indirect innuendo — or direct 
innuendo, if there’s such a term — that those activities and 
responses by the Provincial Auditor were somehow improper. 
Why is that improper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the ultimate answer to the 
entire question that we face lies in the document that I referred 
to. Now it would seem to me, you along with me and all 
members of this House, would want to know what that 
document says verbatim. It seems to me that is the question. 
Now there’s a document in existence in the hands of the 
Provincial Auditor, the servant of this legislature. 
 
It would seem to me that the entire matter could have a great 
deal of light shed on it should the auditor see his way fit to lay 
that document on the Table of this Assembly, have that 
information provided to the Assembly. Then you, sir, and 
everyone else in he House, can see for their own eyes what is in 
that document. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, I have a new 
question to the Premier or the Minister of Justice. I want to just 
get the Minister of Justice back to what the situation is here. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1275 
 

The situation is, sir, that you on Friday made the allegation of 
impropriety. I think that was the exact word used. You make the 
allegations of impropriety which now today you would have us 
believe you’ve done so on the basis of documentation that 
you’ve not seen; and you would have us believe, on 
documentation that everybody should see. 
 
You’re the one who made the allegation of impropriety, and I’m 
asking you, sir, is the only evidence of impropriety that you 
have the two attachments that the Premier gave to me in his 
letter of this morning? Is that the only evidence that the 
government has upon which you justified this serious 
condemnation of this long-time civil servant and the attack on 
the Provincial Auditor’s office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, permit me to read the letter 
we refer to of April 14. It is to Larry Kyle, Q.C. It’s in 
handwritten form from one Mr. Gordon Neill. 
 

Dear Larry: I am enclosing a package proposal from 
the Provincial Auditor on the following trust conditions: 
 
(1) That it be made without prejudice and be returned on 
demand. 
 
(2) That if accepted the contents will remain confidential 
(need to know) and that if not accepted the same 
conditions apply. 
 
I (will) expect a response to this proposal as soon as 
possible. 
 

As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, in my opening statement, I have 
been advised by Mr. Kyle and Mr. Wolfgang Wolff as to what 
were in those documents. I am prevented by this trust condition, 
as the hon. member understands trust conditions. Now . . . Just a 
minute, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member says, there’s no trust 
condition. Let me read paragraph two: 

 
That if accepted the contents will remain confidential 
(need to know excepted) . . . 
 

Need to know is the principals of the lawyer, in other words, the 
lawyer’s clients, which is us. The hon. member should, in 
reading this letter, ask the question: why would the Provincial 
Auditor want to keep information from the members of the 
opposition? That seems to be the question, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is a question that should be asked. And the only individual 
that can answer that, Mr. Speaker, is the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. The Minister of 
Justice has been seeking to build a house of cards upon a 
document . . . based on a document we don’t have. I suggest to 
the minister that we deal with the documents we do have. And 
I’ll suggest to the Minister of Justice that rather than painting a 
picture of a shabby effort by the Provincial Auditor to get 
material benefit, the documents which you have provided show 
a dedicated public 

servant who sought, with considerable courage, to maintain the 
integrity of his office. 
 
This letter of April 18, Mr. Minister, which to it you’ve 
referred, suggests — and I’m going to read this. Your lawyer 
requests: 

 
a listing of those other requirements which he imposes as a 
condition of a further review of his presumably critical 
report. 
 

You asked him, in effect, what will it take to change the 
Provincial Auditor’s report? His letter of April 20, Mr. 
Minister, says what it’ll take is to restore the integrity of this 
office. That’s the response. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you not admit that rather than behaving in a 
shabby fashion, he showed considerable courage, and in 
attempting to maintain the integrity of his office. And that’s 
what the letters prove and nothing else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I say to the hon. member opposite: why 
would you not want to know what is in — no, just hear me — 
what is in this package proposal? I know what is in that package 
proposal, the substance of what is in that package proposal, the 
substance of what is in that package proposal, because I have 
been advised by solicitors for CIC. I have been advised of 
what’s in that, and I say to you and I say to this House, the 
contents of what is in that package proposal is material to the 
entire debate we are debating here today and have for the last 
two days. 
 
I believe that is important, Mr. Speaker. I would say to the 
members opposite: before you rush off on a crusade or rush off 
on some challenge to my character or anything else, why would 
you not want to wait and see what those documents are and 
what those documents say? 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have a person that says I need to provide 
information to the entire Assembly. Is it not proper to ask: why 
are you not providing this information to this Assembly that 
you say you serve as its servant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. The minister states that he 
knows what’s in the package which he has not seen. Mr. 
Minister, we found out on Friday that you didn’t know what 
was in the letter you were reading, so we’re not prepared to take 
your word for a document you haven’t seen if you don’t know 
what’s in the document you have seen. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that what happened was that you, 
your officials, sought from the Provincial Auditor a list of those 
conditions. You asked him, what will it take to get your report 
changed? He said, restore the integrity of my office, that’s what 
it’ll take. Isn’t that what this correspondence boils down to, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1276 
 

he’s not prepared to take my word. I say to the hon. member: is 
he prepared to request from the auditor the package proposal 
referred to in the auditor’s letter of April 14? And if that is 
presented to this House, is he prepared to accept the words on 
the paper that are contained in that package proposal? 
 
That is what is central to this issue. That is the information that 
this House must have to determine, Mr. Speaker, to determine 
the question at issue. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Justice. That being the case, why was it that your 
government through its various representatives, legal and 
otherwise, was dealing with the Provincial Auditor for all these 
weeks? If there was something improper in this proposal 
package, which was identified back on April 18, why in the 
world is it that your lawyers and your government is still 
dealing with the Provincial Auditor. How in the world do you 
justify that? Because surely if it was improper for the Provincial 
Auditor, it was improper for you to be dealing and not referring 
this to the appropriate authorities. Why didn’t you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, and I say 
to the hon. member the following: clearly, when we have an 
issue before us that is this serious then we must look at the 
entire negotiation — which is what you were talking about — 
the entire discussion and the entire dimension of what was 
being proposed here. 
 
Now I say to the hon. member, in all fairness to you this, sir: 
why are you not interested in what is contained in that package 
proposal? I have advised you as a minister, and as member of 
this House, that in that proposal is material significant to this 
entire question. I would think that all members of this House 
would want to have that document here to judge for themselves 
what that document says. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Justice. I want to tell the Minister of Justice, and 
especially the Premier, the opposition is absolutely interested in 
all of the relevant facts, including the proposal package. Make 
no mistake about that. 
 
And I note that the Minister of Justice this day, Tuesday, after 
the long weekend, has now raised the proposal package. He did 
not make any mention of that at all on Friday, which I say leads 
one to suspect that this is a fact after conclusion. 
 
We want the facts and we want the facts out now, in the open. 
And I direct my question to you, Mr. Premier, in the light of 
these ongoing serious allegations of which now you apparently 
have also supported by virtue of the letter that you’ve written to 
me, will you agree that we introduce a rule 39 resolution right 
now, this afternoon, to summons Mr. Lutz and any other party 
who is relevant, who can give testimony to this issue before the 
bar of the House of this legislature and tell all the facts right 
now, including the proposal package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
question, I have indicated to you throughout question period, I 
indicated to you at the beginning of question period that I 
sought that document from Mr. Lutz today, or sought waiver of 
the trust conditions. We have not . . . Now just listen. I have 
sought that information. I believe it is fundamental that we have 
that document and that information here before the entire 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I understand the traditions of this 
Assembly, as I understand the traditions of this Assembly, that 
the Public Accounts and the Provincial Auditor’s records are 
referred to the Public Accounts Committee. Mr. Speaker, the 
Public Accounts Committee have all the powers and authorities 
of this Assembly. They have the right to call for persons, 
papers, and things, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that is exactly 
where the matter should be; that I believe the document, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe the document I referred to as a so-called 
package proposal, should be requested to be put on the table at 
the public accounts. 
 
I believe that all people material to this question, whether it be 
the Provincial Auditor, the lawyers, Wolfgang Wolff, the 
secretary of the lawyer, should also be summonsed to that 
committee, and that committee has all the power to do that. I 
can say to the hon. member that the people on this side of the 
House that are sitting on that committee are prepared to 
co-operate in having those people brought immediately to the 
Public Accounts Committee along with the documents that I 
have referred to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Justice, and if I may be permitted a very brief 
opening comment. I say to you, Mr. Minister of Justice, that 
that request smacks of nothing more, nothing less than a 
cover-up, pure and simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And it smacks of a cover-up, sir, because 
the Public Accounts Committee’s main mandate is to deal with 
the report of the auditor with respect to the expenditures as he 
sees it in any one given year. 
 
That is not the issue right now we’re dealing with. We’re going 
to get to that. The issue we’re dealing with right now is the 
integrity of the auditor, your allegation of impropriety, and the 
Office of the Provincial Auditor, which has nothing to do with 
the Public Accounts Committee; it has everything to do with 
this legislature because he’s an officer of this legislature. 
 
The only way to get this thing aired, and aired properly and 
completely and fully, I say, is to call him before the bar right 
now with all the documents. I say to the Premier: will you 
overrule your Minister of Justice and get on to the bottom of . . . 
define the truth of this case right now? Call him to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1277 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose it’s ultimately 
for you to rule as to what power the Public Accounts 
Committee has. 
 
I say to the hon. member, my understanding of the Public 
Accounts Committee is it has all the powers of the Legislative 
Assembly. It has the right . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
he says, nonsense. It has the right to call for persons, papers, 
and things. That is a fact. That is the rules of the Public 
Accounts Committee, subject, sir, to your ruling and 
interpretation as the Speaker of this House. 
 
I submit that it does have that. And I submit, Mr. Speaker: how 
can you say it is a cover-up, as the hon. member tries to say — 
a cover-up — when we’re saying, please give us the document, 
Mr. Auditor General? Please give us the document. Come 
before the Assembly. We will call the various people that I have 
listed out, or any other members the hon. member wishes to call 
that are relevant, before that committee so they can be heard. 
 
(1445) 
 
I say to the hon. member, if the hon. member simply wants the 
matter to be dealt with in this Assembly so that he can carry on 
for, what — two weeks, three weeks, four weeks more — if that 
is what his intention is, Mr. Speaker, if that is what his intention 
is, Mr. Speaker, I would ask him: are you interested in getting 
to the bottom of this issue, or are you more interested in 
disrupting further the House as you have already done this 
session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Are the hon. 
members ready to proceed? 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the orders of 
the day, Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rules of this Assembly 
to raise a question of privilege. In accordance with the rules, 
Mr. Speaker, I provided to you earlier today an advance notice 
of my intention to raise this matter. I would now like to state the 
matter to this Assembly. 
 
At issue are the extensive remarks made by the Minister of 
Justice about the Provincial Auditor during question period on 
Friday, May 19. This present question of privilege is based 
solely on the minister’s remarks made on Friday morning and 
is, therefore, completely separate from the question of privilege 
raised by the colleague on Thursday on which you have already 
ruled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 3(2) of The Provincial Auditor’s Act reads 
as follows: 
 

The Provincial Auditor is an officer of the Legislative 
Assembly and holds office during good behaviour. 
 

I also note, Mr. Speaker, that the Erskine May Parliamentary 
Practice 19th Edition defines privilege in the following way: 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights 
enjoyed by each House collectively as a constituent part of 
the High Court of Parliament, and by members of each 
House individually, without which they could not 
discharge their functions, and which exceed those 
possessed by other bodies or individuals. 
 

That’s on page 67. 
 
May elaborates on the nature of privilege as follows: 
 

Each House also claims the right to punish actions, which, 
while not breaches of any specific privilege, are offences 
against its authority or dignity, such as disobedience to its 
legitimate commands or libels upon itself, its officers or its 
Members. Such actions, though often called “breaches of 
privilege” are more properly distinguished as “contempts.” 
 

That’s on page 68. 
 
With respect to the officers of the House, May also states, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

It may be stated generally that any act or omission which 
obstructs or impedes either House or Parliament in the 
performance of its function, or which impedes or obstructs 
any member or officer of such House in the discharge of 
his duty or which has the tendency directly or indirectly to 
produce such results, may be treated as contempt. 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, May states the following: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 
 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that is precisely what we have before us, 
an unequivocally clear breach of privilege of this Assembly. 
 
During the question period on Friday, the Minister of Justice 
spoke at length about the Provincial Auditor. And during the 
course of the minister’s remarks he made reference to a letter 
from the Provincial Auditor’s lawyer, purported to quote from 
that letter, and undertook to table it. He did table it after 
question period. 
 
When the minister’s remarks as recorded in Hansard are taken 
as a whole, and particularly when his remarks are compared to 
the actual text of the letter itself, it is unequivocally clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that the minister has engaged in an assault on the 
professional conduct of the Provincial Auditor. I note the 
following issues in particular. 
 
The minister’s assault appears to have been premeditated in so 
far as he came to question period with the letter and began to 
refer to it, quite apart from the substance or thrust of questions 
to which he was responding. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1278 
 

Throughout the minister’s remarks he repeatedly implied and 
inferred improper conduct on the auditor’s part, and at page 
1247 of Hansard went so far as to state, in part, Mr. Speaker, “I 
suggest that this is improper”, is the words of the minister. In 
purporting to quote directly from the letter, the minister quoted 
both incorrectly and inaccurately. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that this 
particular minister has made unacceptable and unjustifiable 
critical comments about an officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
In the spring of 1987 the minister made such comments about 
the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk. In ruling that those 
comments constituted a prima facie case of privilege, you said 
on June 24, 1987 at page 697 of Hansard, and this is your 
quote: 
 

It is vital, if parliament is to get fair and impartial service 
from its officers, that these officers must be defended from 
intimidation while conducting their duties. Critical 
comments attacking the competence of and (the) credibility 
of an individual can be construed as a form of obstruction. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the office of the Provincial Auditor is absolutely 
fundamental to our system of parliamentary government under 
which we are proud to live as free men and women. The auditor 
is not the agent of the government of the day. No, Mr. Speaker, 
the auditor is an officer of this Legislative Assembly, and thus 
is the watch-dog of the people of the province in the public 
interest. 
 
The office of the auditor must be secure from unacceptable 
assaults from any member. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, such an 
assault has taken place. And I submit to you, sir, that the 
Assembly itself should now have the opportunity to decide on 
this matter. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, if you find that there is 
indeed a prima facie case of privilege, I would then propose to 
move a motion along the following lines: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of the legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor; that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council; and further, that this Assembly 
reaffirms the importance of the office of the Provincial 
Auditor as an officer of the legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you to consider the prima facie case of a 
breach of privilege, and if so doing, I’ll move on to the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s impossible for 
the Speaker or members of the Legislative Assembly to make a 
determination as to breach of privilege or not, without all the 
facts before the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . all 

members, all members are aware of the package proposal that 
was given to the solicitor for CIC and the trust conditions 
attached thereto. All members are now aware, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Minister of Justice has asked, through the solicitors, to have 
those trust conditions dropped, or to provide this Assembly with 
that package, Mr. Speaker. It has been made aware to the 
legislature by the Minister of Justice that information in that 
package is material to this very question. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it is impossible to determine whether there 
has been a breach of privilege or not until such time as those 
facts are made available to this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think Mr. Speaker should take that into account when he’s 
making his decision. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to make a couple of very brief 
comments. The question was based upon . . . the motion of 
privilege was based upon what was said Friday. None of this 
was available to us Friday; indeed, none of this is available to 
us today. All we had today was the minister making some 
reference to some documents which nobody, including himself, 
has seen. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this has adds nothing to the 
scurrilous comments made by the Minister of Justice on Friday, 
which I suggest to the Speaker clearly impede a legislative 
officer in the discharge of his duties. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d just like to speak to the matter of privilege being raised by 
the members of the opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be very 
supportive of all of the evidence being brought forward to this 
Legislative Assembly and to the public of Saskatchewan before 
you or anyone else prejudges whether or not there is a case of 
privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition have made the case 
thus far that the Auditor General is lily-white, if you like, or 
without sin. The Minister of Justice has made . . . raised some 
very interesting questions. I would think by the mere fact of the 
introduction of the letter so far, that there has to be some 
questions that should be addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Furthermore, today in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, by reference 
to this other document, I would think that those are serious 
questions that should be addressed. Surely the members of the 
opposition, as we would, and you, Mr. Speaker, would want all 
of these facts brought forward to the people of Saskatchewan 
before you rule whether or not a case of privilege exists. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make one point 
clear and to reiterate what my colleague from Regina Centre 
was saying when he was making his comments; that is, the 
privilege that has been proposed today deals not with a package 
that has been mentioned by the minister and by other members 
of that caucus, subsequent to the issue on Friday; that is a letter 
that was referred to by the minister — misrepresented and 
misquoted — for I believe his own political purposes — this is 
the point — and at whose expense? 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1279 
 

I say, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of the auditor, yes, and the 
office of the auditor, but at the expense of the taxpayers of this 
province. That’s what this debate is all about — millions and 
billions of taxpayers’ dollars at stake as to where they’re being 
spent. And the auditor says there’s a problem with that. 
 
The minister rises in his place on Friday and quotes from a 
letter inaccurately, for his own political benefit, because he’s in 
political trouble. He misrepresents the letter, he misrepresents 
the auditor, and he does a disservice to the people of this 
province. And that’s why we’re saying we have a case of 
privilege against this minister. That’s what it’s all about. 
 
And the history of this minister is clear, and my colleague from 
Quill Lakes refers to it. This is not the first time that he has 
attacked an innocent individual who is employed by the 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I think we’re getting into a debate. Let’s 
confine our remarks to the question, directly to the question, the 
privilege question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say that this minister has been 
involved in this kind of an incident before, and that’s why we 
are concerned and believe very truly that a case of privilege is 
in fact in order today — and going back to 1987 when he made 
comments similar to this, not as exaggerated, about the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, and had to apologize. 
 
Here we are again in the second case of privilege now before 
this House, dealing with the same minister. And I say it’s based 
on a letter which he not only read parts of, but misquoted and 
misrepresented the facts. I think that that is a case of privilege, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to speak just briefly to the point of privilege. 
 
As you well know, your decision is whether there’s a prima 
facie case of privilege. And I notice that government members 
are suggesting that we have to see the whole package — the 
package that no one has access to, it appears, at this point in 
time — before a decision can be made on whether there’s a case 
of privilege here. 
 
Well the question of whether there’s a case of privilege will be 
decided by the Assembly. But your decision, sir, the question of 
whether there’s a prima facie case of privilege, surely will not 
have to depend on whether or not we have access to this 
package. And therefore I urge you to rule, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is a prima facie case of privilege based on the fact that the 
remarks made by the Minister of Justice clearly interfere and 
impede with the ability of the Provincial Auditor to perform his 
role as an officer of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
The Speaker: — At 10:30 a.m. today I received notice for 

a point of privilege for which I thank the hon. member from 
Quill Lakes. I had an opportunity to examine the matter raised, 
and I am prepared to make a statement. 
 
The case made by the member charges the Minister of Justice 
with a deliberate attack on the professional conduct and 
integrity of the Provincial Auditor. The member cites remarks 
made by the minister during oral question period on Friday, 
May 19. 
 
I remind all members that the Provincial Auditor is an officer of 
this Legislative Assembly, and consequently he is protected by 
its privileges. I don’t intend to outline those privileges here 
again, but simply refer members to my statement of May 19. 
 
Before making my ruling, however, I must repeat the following: 
it is not the role of the Speaker to decide if a breach of privilege 
has been committed. This is a question only the House can 
decide. It is my role to decide whether a prima facie case of 
privilege has been established which would justify the matter 
taking precedence over the normal business of the House. 
 
I now turn to the case presented by the member for Quill Lakes. 
This question rests on the statements by the Minister of Justice 
last Friday and the interpretations put on them. The Chair is not 
in a position of deciding whether any particular interpretation in 
this case is valid or not. Nor is the House in that position 
without proper reference to a substantive motion or motion of 
censure. Simply put, charges cannot be brought against an 
officer of the House incidentally in the midst of other 
proceedings. 
 
I refer members to the principle outlined in Sir Erskine May’s 
Parliamentary Practice, 20th edition, page 378: 
 

. . . no charge of a personal character can be raised, save 
upon a direct and substantive motion to that effect. 
 

If the minister has a grievance against the Provincial Auditor, it 
should have been put to the Assembly by the proper means. In 
the absence of a substantive motion, I must look at this case 
strictly from the perspective of whether the remarks of the 
minister might constitute a reflection on the Provincial Auditor 
that could interfere with his ability to carry out the statutory 
duties. In isolation, the remarks of the minister contain 
allegations which could undermine the personal credibility and 
the professionalism of the Provincial Auditor. I reiterate that it 
is the duty of the House to protect its officers. 
 
I refer members to a ruling of the House dated June 24, 1987, 
that it is vital if parliament is to get fair and impartial service 
from its officers, that these officers must be defended from 
intimidation while conducting their duties. Critical comments 
attacking the competence and credibility of any individual can 
be construed as a form of obstruction, because on the face of it, 
the officer’s capacity to carry out his duties might be inhibited. 
 
I find that this matter is serious enough to warrant the House 
setting aside its other business to deal with this issue. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1280 
 

Since it is not the Speaker’s role to determine if a breach of 
privilege has indeed taken place, and since the House has the 
right to seek further information and that is the decision of the 
House, I now leave it up to the Assembly to determine if a 
breach of privilege has in fact been made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the closing of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, I intend to move a motion, essentially the 
following: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor; that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
the minister to apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council; and further, that this Assembly 
reaffirms the importance of the office of the Provincial 
Auditor as an officer of this legislature. 
 

I will be moving that at the closing of my remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, what we have before us here 
today in the Legislative Assembly is indeed a very, very grave 
matter. We have an officer of the legislature, an officer of the 
public, an officer whose formal mandate by law is to watch 
over the public purse and to protect the public interest. 
 
That officer, of course, is the Provincial Auditor, a very 
essential part of the integrity of our democratic system. And 
that watching over money has, throughout the history, evolved 
so that the legislative members would watch over the 
expenditures of government, and we have put in place the 
Provincial Auditor to do just that. 
 
What we have here . . . or last Friday, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a senior cabinet minister who I say came into 
this House with a copy of a letter, came into this House and 
misquoted, incorrectly and incompletely, and left clearly before 
the public no doubt the inference of improper action by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As you have rightly ruled, Mr. Speaker, that is 
a breach of privilege. But the ultimate determination of what 
course of action should be taken in such a case, Mr. Speaker, 
rests with this Assembly. 
 
How can the operation of the essential Office of the Provincial 
Auditor stay intact if the very members which he serves in this 
Assembly that he serves will undermine him? And what is even 
more galling is that on Friday the minister came in with one 
letter, as I said, and misinterpreted, quoted it incorrectly and 
incompletely, alleged an improper action, and then he tries to 
distort it further today by coming in with information which he 
is unable to table and hasn’t seen. 

But what is more important is that the minister, during this very 
question period, indicated to this House that on Thursday last he 
had knowledge of further information. But he came into this 
House, I believe, to misrepresent the facts and to misrepresent 
the position of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the law is absolutely clear on the point that the 
Provincial Auditor is an officer of the Legislative Assembly. 
The law is equally clear that the Provincial Auditor is required 
by statute to audit the accounts of the government of the day, to 
note any matters that in his professional view warrant 
significant attention, and to report those matters to this 
Legislative Assembly and thus to the public. In essence, that is 
the auditor’s job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Provincial Auditor is required by law to 
audit the accounts of the province. The auditor is required by 
law to report fully and accurately on the audit to this legislature. 
The auditor is required by law to be a watch-dog over the public 
purse, a servant, Mr. Speaker, not of the government of the day, 
but a servant of the public interest. 
 
To the extent that the Provincial Auditor is permitted by the 
government of the day — that is by the cabinet and its civil 
servants — to do his job, the legislature and the public can have 
confidence that the government truly has nothing to hide and 
that the public moneys are being used appropriately and legally. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, if the Provincial Auditor is prevented 
from doing his job by the government of the day, or if, as is the 
case now before us, the government or any one of its cabinet 
ministers tries to attack or undermine the office of the 
Provincial Auditor, that is unacceptable. That undermines this 
Legislative Assembly and it undermines the protection to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Such an attack by the minister is unwarranted, unjustified, and 
totally unacceptable. And I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the 
unprecedented attack by the minster that we witnessed in the 
House last Friday morning simply cannot be tolerated or 
condoned by this legislature. That attack was groundless, 
without foundation, and totally unjustifiable. Moreover, the 
minister did not even have the courage to repeat outside the 
Chamber his very serious allegations which he made in this 
House. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in respect to any of the 
problems that the auditor has in respect to doing his work, 
providing his audited statement, giving a report on the 
expenditures, any information that he is unable to attain, any 
illegal acts of the government, the auditor has no way of getting 
to the government. His only court, his only protection, is this 
Legislative Assembly. And here we have a case of a member of 
the front benches, the Minister of Justice, an experienced 
legislator in this House, coming forward and making unfounded 
allegations against the auditor. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s shocking to me and to many 
of my colleagues who have served in this House for 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1281 
 

a number of years. I was shocked, Mr. Speaker, to see the 
Minister of Justice, one whose duty has imposed him with the 
responsibility of upholding the laws, of running an office of 
fairness to all people in Saskatchewan. And this very Minister 
of Justice walks into this House, and he is the one who makes 
the false allegations in respect to the improper conduct of the 
auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislature must take appropriate actions when 
there is a breach of privilege. In view of the gravity of the 
offence, and in view of the fact that it is not the first offence by 
this minister, the Premier of Saskatchewan must, I submit, 
require that minister to apologize publicly. And I would submit, 
Mr. Speaker, that he should no longer have the confidence of 
any premier to remain as the Minister of Justice and should 
resign his cabinet position forthwith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go into some of the aspects of what 
precipitated our motion in respect to privilege. The minister 
came into this House last Friday. We were asking him questions 
in respect to the auditor’s inability to carry out his work. And 
certainly the auditor indicated to this in his report that he did 
not have sufficient money . . . or sufficient information to be 
able to do an accurate accounting and perform his job. 
 
(1515) 
 
The auditor indicated that he was unable to get information. He 
indicated that the government, in several areas, would not 
provide information. Secondly, that they were acting contrary to 
the law. He indicated that it was incumbent upon him under the 
jurisdiction of The (Provincial) Auditor Act, to perform in total 
an accounting for the expenditure of the whole government. He 
recognized that some of the Crowns and some agencies of 
government are audited by private auditing firms. But within 
the auditor’s report, he indicates that it’s still incumbent upon 
the auditor to seek the information even though it has been 
audited by a private auditing firm. 
 
Let me give you an example. If the potash corporation goes out 
and gets private auditors, that private auditor is hired and is the 
client of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and that’s 
who pays him. The Provincial Auditor represents all of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and accordingly he has to account for 
all the expenditures by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here we have a minister coming into the House to debase the 
auditor, alleging that he was negotiating a certain package, 
when within that very letter that was not in fact the case. 
 
I want to take a look at the aspect of that letter and some of the 
comments on which the minister based his comments the other 
day, Friday morning. There were two aspects that the solicitor, 
on behalf of the auditor, was in fact negotiating. He was 
negotiating for the independent operation of the office of 
auditor, and it’s clearly indicated in the second part of the page 
of that letter if the Minister of Justice had been fair in reading it 
completely and putting this letter forward in its full content. I 
want to indicate what the Provincial Auditor was doing . . . or 
his solicitor was doing on behalf of the Provincial Auditor. 

The Provincial Auditor is prepared to continue in office so 
the appointment of a successor is not emergent. All that is 
required to overcome the difficulties is a directive from the 
executive to all concerned that they are required by law to 
furnish the information that the Provincial Auditor deems 
necessary to fulfil his duties (to fulfil his duties — that’s 
what he wanted) . . . are required by law to furnish the 
information that the Provincial Auditor deems necessary to 
fulfil his duties and that his estimates be reviewed by the 
Board of Internal Economy. 
 

And what the Provincial Auditor did . . . or his solicitor did, was 
to enclose a draft letter with respect to working out the details 
so he could be provided with all the information, and secondly, 
a statutory provision with respect to having the auditor’s budget 
reviewed by the Board of Internal Economy, as is the 
Legislative Assembly’s budget reviewed by the Board of 
Internal Economy. To clearly . . . indicative of what the 
Provincial Auditor was attempting to do, was in fact to bring 
greater independence — independence — to his performance of 
his duties. 
 
And what was alleged by the Minister of Finance is that the 
Provincial Auditor was actually trying to negotiate what was 
going to be in the report depended upon what kind of a private 
package he might obtain. And I want to say that although the 
Minister of Finance comes into this House now with further 
letters, it’s not relevant to the actions of the Minister of Finance 
in respect to his actions on Friday . . . Minister of Justice. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, this legislature, as you have 
indicated, and as set out in the various books in respect to 
parliamentary procedure, this legislature, it’s incumbent upon 
all of us to protect the integrity and the ability of servants of the 
Legislative Assembly to perform their duties. And I say to you 
that in dealing with that we have to deal with it in a way in 
which is very, very grave affront to the legislature when the 
Minister of Justice comes forward and did what he did in the 
House on Friday. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the parliamentary system, in my 
view, cannot continue to grow and to exist unless each of us 
here share a responsibility in promoting it. It’s not a very far 
step that democracy can be suddenly eroded. And I have been in 
this legislature for a number of years, and I want to say that I 
have been concerned over the recent years — I guess since 
1982 — in the respect and the use of the Legislative Assembly 
as it had been in the post-period, or the pre-period to ’82. 
 
And I think what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a minister who 
would come in and have a breach of privilege which in effect 
was what he said, there was improper actions by the Provincial 
Auditor. He did that at a time when the Provincial Auditor has 
absolutely no way of defending himself. And more cowardly 
than that, the Minister of Finance made the allegations in this 
House. When he was challenged to make them outside of the 
Chamber, he was not prepared to do so. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, while we have immunity in 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1282 
 

this House, because often the debates get hot and heavy, we still 
have to essentially be prepared to back our statements of what 
we allege in this House, or the statements we make in respect to 
the characters of other people. And here what we have, in my 
view, is one of the most graveous, most grave situation that I 
have encountered in the number of years that I have been in this 
legislature, an officer of this legislature who the Minister of 
Justice took it upon himself to indicate the improper action. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there is much more that I can 
say in respect to this, but surely . . . I want to conclude my 
remarks by saying that a few of the basic aspects in respect to 
the background of the auditor and the position so the public can 
understand. 
 
I think in respect to The Provincial Auditor Act, it requires first 
of all, it is necessary to appreciate that many of the terms used 
are defined in this Act and the “appointed auditor” means an 
auditor appointed pursuant to the Act or other authority to audit 
accounts related to the public money. 
 
The “auditor” under Section 11 states: 
 

That the Provincial Auditor is the auditor of the accounts 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

And therefore, that really means that all information has to be 
made available to him. 
 
And just because the auditor, after doing his best, with 
insufficient information, with some aspects where he indicates 
that not only information isn’t provided, but that laws are 
essentially broken by the government, he indicates in his report 
that he is unable to carry out his major function as auditor. 
 
And instead of coming into this House and addressing those 
concerns of the Provincial Auditor — and obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, we could go through the auditor’s report, and it is a 
condemnation of the actions or the inactions of this 
government. It has been said, that is the role of the government. 
And any government certainly wants to have the least issues 
raised by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
But any government acting properly, with a report of the nature 
that was presented by the auditor this year, would have come 
into this legislature, and the Premier or the Minister of Justice 
or the Minister of Finance, perhaps more appropriately, would 
have said, we have concerns with it, and outlined some of the 
areas in which they’re going to address the concerns and work 
out the concerns in respect to what the auditor raised. 
 
But not this government. This government, when backed into a 
corner, now lashes out against an auditor who has operated in 
this province of Saskatchewan for . . . prior to 1971 as an 
auditor. Mr. Speaker, the actions of this government indicate 
that they have no longer confidence in their administration of 
this province. 
 
What has precipitated this debate here today is that the 
government has an auditor’s report which is damning, 

which indicates possible waste, possible disappearance of 
money, a lack of information. It’s a damning report. It is 
probably the worst report that any government in the history of 
the Commonwealth has received from an auditor. 
 
And instead of coming in here and humbly putting before this 
legislature how they are going to rectify it, like a caged, 
cornered animal, having lost the confidence of the people of this 
province, they now strike out at whoever stands in their way. 
 
And here we have one minister, the Minister of Justice, who 
should stand up for fairness before the law, bringing in a letter, 
misinterpreting it, misquoting it, leaving out parts of it, and 
ending up by saying that the actions of the auditor were 
improper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this of course is a very serious situation. And we 
find a number of the headlines that have precipitated it where it 
says: “Andrew’s attack on auditor called scurrilous, gutless.” 
We have a provincial . . . another article by Ron Petrie, we 
have: “Andrew attack on auditor draws criticism.” 
 
And what we have before us, Mr. Speaker, clearly is a 
government whose record of mismanagement, of cover-up, of 
non-disclosure, of not providing the public with information 
having caught up to them. The very concern that the people of 
this province have is the fiscal management by this government. 
And the auditor is required by law to give his report, and he 
gave his report. And I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 
are right, that this government’s financial management is totally 
out of control. And that’s what the auditor’s report says, in part. 
 
Can you believe a Minister of Justice coming in here to criticize 
the officer who brought down that report, rather than going to 
his Premier and saying . . . and his Finance minister and his 
other cabinet colleagues and say, let’s formulate a policy how 
we can address these major concerns of the public. Because not 
only here have we an individual integrity being assailed by the 
Minister of Justice, but what is more importantly, it’s 
symptomatic of the nature of government that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
Do you realize that the Provincial Auditor said that I can only 
really account for 50 per cent of all of the funds that are spent in 
this province? Fifty per cent, ladies and gentlemen, people that 
are watching. Fifty per cent, he says; with the information 
provided I cannot carry out the function under which the Act 
provides. 
 
And rather than having a government that would address those 
concerns, as I know the government under Allan Blakeney 
addressed . . . And I can remember sitting at the cabinet table 
when an auditor’s report came down and the premier of the 
province at that day said, I want a report back from every 
department in respect to the complaints of the public auditor, 
and I want you to indicate to me how those problems can be 
resolved. And if they reoccurred a second time under the 
premier that we had, 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1283 
 

like Allan Blakeney, I’ll tell you, you didn’t sit comfortably 
around the table again. 
 
But here what is lacking is a lack of leadership by the Premier 
of this province. Instead of allowing his minister to come in 
here and defame a servant of the people of Saskatchewan, what 
he has . . . he has no solution. This government is totally out of 
control, and what we have is the Minister of Finance, the 
Minister of Justice rather, who should be protecting, providing 
fairness under the law, coming in and leading the attack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated in the initial part of my remarks the 
seriousness of what is before this House. What you have found 
is a prima facie case that the minister in fact breached a 
privilege of this House in his attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
And it’s not a question only of the individual, but it’s a question 
of addressing the situation, the serious situation, and that is on 
behalf of the people of this province. 
 
What I want to do, Mr. Speaker, in light of the seriousness of 
this allegation, I want at this time then, Mr. Speaker, to move 
the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor; that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council; and further, that this Assembly 
reaffirms the importance of the office of the Provincial 
Auditor as an officer of this legislature. 
 

I so move that motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, 
the member from Regina Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to address a few remarks on this 
matter. My learned friend from the Quill Lakes stated that this 
was a situation in which the Premier showed a marked lack of 
leadership. That, in a sense, was accurate. I think it was also 
fairly compassionate. I think the Premier has displayed not just 
a lack of leadership . . . I think what we have here is an effort by 
the government, and apparently with the Premier’s advice, what 
we have here is an effort to cover up. What we have here is an 
effort to avoid an examination of the auditor’s report. 
 
We have a clear, intentional effort by the member from 
Kindersley to discredit the Provincial Auditor; sought not to 
deal with it; did not refer the report to a special committee, 
which might have been done; did not take any steps to deal with 
the issues that the Provincial Auditor had named, but attacked 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this situation is unique in many ways. I don’t 
think I have ever heard of such a direct, blunt, and brutal attack 
on an officer of this Assembly. In fact, the only instances I 
know of which approach this were all committed by the 
member from Kindersley. 
 
It’s unique as well, Mr. Speaker, because I doubt that in this 
Assembly have we ever had two questions of 

privilege on the floor at the same time. We now have this one; 
we have the one which was dealt with Friday. 
 
I understand my friend from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, wants to 
introduce some students. Providing I will have the floor again, 
I’ll yield it to him. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you today 15 grade 10 students from the Dene 
High School in La Loche, who are seated up in the Speaker’s 
gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher Sheila Hamel, 
and chaperon Donna Lee Dumont. 
 
I’d like to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that these students . . . a 
trip from La Loche to Regina and back is a little over 1,100 
miles, and I would ask all members in here to join with me in 
welcoming the students from La Loche, and we sincerely hope 
that your trip will be enjoyable and educational. And I will meet 
with you shortly after. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I want to point out to members 
of the Assembly that this debate, the debate on the point of 
privilege raised on Friday, are about the integrity of the office. 
But in a much more substantive way, Mr. Speaker, they are 
about the integrity of this government’s spending. It’s about 
waste and mismanagement and this government’s attempt to 
conceal what is a shocking record with respect to its 
management of tax dollars. 
 
The auditor’s function, Mr. Speaker, is to assist this Assembly 
in ensuring that tax dollars are spent as efficiently as possible, 
with as much effectiveness as possible, and with as much 
economy as possible. Those words — efficiency, effectiveness, 
and economy — sum up the goal of the Provincial Auditor’s 
office. 
 
He serves as an officer of this Assembly, as you do, sir; as the 
Clerks at the Table do; as the Sergeant-at-Arms does; as the 
pages do. All serve this Assembly — in a larger sense, the 
public of Saskatchewan — all serve this Assembly in an 
attempt to assist the Assembly in carrying out its functions. 
 
As members tell students, and I’m sure all members have told 
students, that one of the primary functions of a Legislative 
Assembly, of a parliament of any sort, is to control government 
spending. That is indeed what the battle of Runnymede was all 
about a thousand years ago. Parliament sought the right to 
control the expenditure of kings. It’s the oldest and the most 
hallowed right, and the Provincial Auditor speaks directly to 
that. 
 
With the growth of governments in this century, it became very 
difficult for members to do the job directly. Members began to 
rely on offices of the Assembly to assist them. One of the 
primary officers which assists us in 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1284 
 

controlling government expenditures, in ensuring that tax 
dollars aren’t wasted, is the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And when they seek to obscure the Provincial Auditor’s report, 
Mr. Speaker, they seek to obscure government waste and 
mismanagement, because that is his function. His function is to 
ensure, as I said, that money is spent in accordance with the 
rules which this Assembly has laid down, and that it’s spent as 
efficiently as possible, as effectively as possible, and with as 
much economy as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to go very far to discover why the 
Provincial Auditor was as concerned in his report as he was. 
The Provincial Auditor’s report must be without parallel in the 
history of the dominion. I would be very, very surprised if 
anyone can find another instance in Canadian history, 
provincial or federal, where a report of this sort has been issued. 
This, Mr. Speaker, is not . . . instances of qualified reports are 
very, very rare when dealing with a level of government. 
They’re very, very rare. I never saw one before this government 
was elected. 
 
A qualified report is a report where the Provincial Auditor says 
the report is not as reliable as it might be for the following 
reasons. This isn’t a qualified report; this is no report at all. The 
Provincial Auditor says, and I will quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the hon. members have 
to be cognizant of the fact that there are two motions before the 
House. One is in effect dealing with the issues that the members 
are about to bring up in a more substantive way. The motion 
we’re dealing with today is directed more to criticism of the 
Minister of Justice for remarks he made. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I thank you for that, Mr. Speaker. I will 
relate my remarks to the question of privilege which is before 
the Assembly today. 
 
I would point out to members opposite that one cannot deal 
with this motion without talking about the importance of the 
Provincial Auditor, and that’s really what I was doing. If the 
members are to understand why the kind of remarks which the 
member from Kindersley made should not be permitted, it’s 
important that we understand the role of the Provincial Auditor. 
That’s really all I was dealing with. 
 
And I point out that he provides a report which provides 
assurance to this Assembly that its rules have been followed, 
that there’s been no waste and mismanagement, and if there’s 
any instances of it, he points them out. This time he doesn’t 
give us a qualified report; he gives us no report at all. He’s 
unable to do his job. 
 
The member from Kindersley, instead of dealing with that 
problem — and it’s a very real problem — I want to just spend 
a moment talking about the sort of waste and mismanagement 
with which this Provincial Auditor is required to deal. I won’t 
deal with that at length, but it’s a proper comment to make. But 
instead of dealing with that, the member from Kindersley didn’t 
try and solve the problem; he tried to shoot the messenger. As 
someone 

has pointed out, he took direct aim at the messenger and shot 
himself in the foot. 
 
One has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, what can be left of this 
government’s feet after this last session. They’ve seemingly 
been doing nothing since the middle of March but shooting at 
their feet and, I may say, with deadly accuracy when they’re 
pointing down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount this government spends has increased 
by 58 per cent in the years it’s been in office. Inflation during 
that period of time has been 38 per cent. When I relate those 
figures to people, they say to me, but how can that be? The 
roads have deteriorated; the health services have deteriorated. 
The response is: that’s patronage; that’s waste and 
mismanagement. 
 
(1545) 
 
This is the function of the Provincial Auditor, to assist the 
members of the Assembly in rooting out waste and 
mismanagement and patronage and dealing with it. And when 
this government attempts to shoot the messenger, as it did, what 
it’s saying to the public is: we don’t want to solve the problem; 
we want to hide it, and we’ll take aim at anyone who attempts 
to criticize us. 
 
You don’t have to go very far to find the sort of things which I 
think the taxpayer would want the Provincial Auditor to point 
out: the lease of a hotel in Regina for which they had no use; 
office space for which they had no use. We found some new 
ones with the Provincial Auditor’s report. We found that there’s 
a couple of million dollars missing from the sale of dental 
equipment. It may show up somewhere. I’m not suggesting it’s 
in a numbered Swiss account — or it may be — but the 
Provincial Auditor points out that there can be no proper control 
over the level of expenditures if you don’t know where the 
money is being spent. And that’s all the Provincial Auditor said. 
It may turn out to be a more heinous story than I suggest, but 
it’s bad enough. If all assumptions are made in favour of the 
government, the story’s bad enough. 
 
The Provincial Auditor attempted to do that. He filed his report 
in the Assembly . . . you did on his behalf, Mr. Speaker; you 
filed the report. He said, “I cannot effectively carry out my role 
to watch over the public purse for my client, the Legislative 
Assembly.” The sentence ends with a period. There are no 
qualifications. 
 
What did the government opposite do? Did they suggest, as did 
the Liberal government in Ottawa when they faced a report 
which wasn’t anywhere near as damning from the then auditor 
Maxwell Henderson, they said, it’s a problem; we’ll see if we 
can deal with it. This government has never admitted that 
there’s any conceivable problem in dealing with public 
expenditures. They’ve never admitted that there is waste, which 
there patently is; that there’s mismanagement, which there 
patently is; and that there’s patronage. 
 
That waste, mismanagement, and patronage has left the people 
of this province with a high level of taxes and a low level of 
services. The difference is waste and mismanagement. That’s 
what we have a Provincial 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1285 
 

Auditor to deal with. 
 
The member opposite . . . the criticisms of the member opposite 
could not have been more unfair. The Provincial Auditor, I 
suggest, throughout this, acted with sterling integrity and a 
courage that we can only admire. It is not the Provincial 
Auditor who lacked courage and integrity, it is the member 
from Kindersley who is displayed with a lack of integrity and 
an appalling lack of courage. In fact the criticisms which he 
levelled at the Provincial Auditor are very apt criticisms of 
himself, and most unfair of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Let’s look at what the Provincial Auditor actually said. I’m 
sorry, let us look at what the correspondence actually says, to 
which the member referred. These are sessional papers tabled 
today and yesterday, not numbered, but it doesn’t matter. I refer 
to a letter tabled today, dated April 18, 1989. This letter 
preceded the letter which the minister used on Friday on which 
he attempted to base his case. 
 
This letter says, if the matter is to proceed . . . we’re not quite 
sure what the matter is — it appears to be the resignation of the 
Provincial Auditor. First of all, it’s most improper of the 
government to be requesting the resignation of the Provincial 
Auditor in a private fashion, as they’ve clearly done. The 
government has clearly gone to the Provincial Auditor and said, 
we want your resignation. They have clearly gone to the 
Provincial Auditor and said, we want your resignation. What 
will it take? 
 
It is very, very improper for the government to go to any 
member of this Assembly and ask for their resignation. The 
letter which they tabled today, which was supposed to buttress 
the case on Friday, states: 
 

If the matter . . . (and it’s clear from the context the matter 
is the Provincial Auditor’s resignation) 
 
If the matter is to proceed, it should proceed along the lines 
of your providing a form of letter which is acceptable to 
your client, along with a listing of those other requirements 
which he imposes as a condition of a further review of his 
presumably critical report. 
 

To reduce that to simple language, the government . . . Mr. Kyle 
said to Mr. Gordon Neill, both solicitors practising in Regina, if 
he’s going to resign he’s got to do it in a letter which is 
satisfactory to us, and he’s got to tell us what he wants in return 
for his resignation. That’s what the letter says in the clearest 
possible fashion. How did Mr. Neill respond? 
 
Mr. Lutz responded, I suggest, with considerable courage and 
with the highest possible integrity. Standing up to the bullies, 
Mr. Speaker, he states: 
 

My client has suggested that joint audits of the crown 
corporations and crown-controlled corporations would go a 
long way to overcoming some of the difficulties. This was 
rejected by your side (meaning the Minister of Finance). 
My client has suggested that the executive government 

ensure that (the Provincial Auditor) has full access to 
whatever information he deems necessary (as his Act 
provides) together with a statutory amendment to allow for 
the review of his budget by the Board of Internal Economy 
rather than the present system. 
 

Then he goes on to say: 
 

If this were done he indicated (that) he could retire quietly 
upon the appointment of his successor, knowing that his 
successor would be able to fulfil the responsibilities of the 
office in a more harmonious atmosphere. 
 

It is clear from that paragraph that the Provincial Auditor’s 
conditions were a restoration of the integrity of the office so 
that he could deal with the waste, the mismanagement, and the 
patronage, and assist this Assembly in developing and imposing 
upon the government a less wasteful system of running its 
affairs. 
 
I am not sure how the member from Kindersley could have so 
interpreted the Provincial Auditor’s letters, but he did. What the 
member from Kindersley said, I’m going to repeat that as well 
for members opposite. He quotes inaccurately, and out of 
context, the paragraph which I just read. 
 
I’m reading from May 19, page 1247: 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I am about to read, Mr. 
Speaker, is directly related to what the Leader of the 
Opposition has said, Mr. Speaker, and it says: 
 

This is a direct quotation from the letter, supposedly. It’s 
indented and single-spaced: 
 

I am advised if speedy acceptance of this proposal is 
confirmed . . . the Provincial Auditor will amend his report 
to reflect that satisfactory steps have been taken (to 
negotiate the deal.) 
 

That is not what the letter said. That’s an inaccurate quotation. 
The words “to negotiate a deal,” Mr. Speaker, give a false 
impression of the entire letter. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has behaved throughout this . . . I say 
again to members opposite, the Provincial Auditor was asked 
by members opposite what it would take to get his resignation. 
He said, the restoration of the integrity of my office. That’s 
clearly the import of these letters. 
 
The member opposite, in a shoddy, dishonest, and certainly 
stupid attempt to discredit the Provincial Auditor, attempted to 
put a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I know sometimes the word stupid is used in 
the House, but as it’s directed at a member, I don’t think it’s 
good parliamentary language, and I simply ask that the hon. 
member to keep that in mind. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I recognize, Mr. Speaker, the accuracy of 
your comments. There are times when what is accurate is not 
necessarily what’s parliamentary. In that sense, I withdraw the 
remarks. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1286 
 

I want to quote from the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
withdraw the remarks unequivocally. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I actually 
didn’t ask the hon. member to withdraw his remarks — simply 
to refrain from it, and without any comment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note what 
others are saying about this province. I venture to say . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well this is not Barb Byers. The 
member from Lloydminster never tires of libelling and 
maligning members of the trade union who are duly elected to 
their position by the public servants that you’re supposed to be 
working with. 
 
I would like to quote, not from a trade unionist in 
Saskatchewan, but an editorial writer in The Globe and Mail. I 
was coming back, Mr. Speaker, I regret to say, from a funeral 
yesterday. Someone came from the back of the plane and said, 
Mr. Shillington, I think there’s something you might be 
interested in. It was an editorial, which had been written in 
consequence of the member from Kindersley’s remarks on 
Friday. And I want to read a selected line or two out of this 
editorial. It says, I think more succinctly than many of us have, 
what this government is doing. 
 

The Saskatchewan government appears to regard the 
province’s auditor as a kind of Peeping Tom, a prowler in 
the backyard of its fiscal business and a rude intruder on its 
(public) affairs. 
 
Thus, when Willard Lutz came to call with briefcase, 
clipboard and calculator, the response of the government 
was to rush around the house closing curtains, bolting 
doors and exhibiting other signs of inhospitability. This 
has gravely displeased Mr. Lutz, as well it might. It should 
equally disturb (the editorial goes on to say) it should 
equally disturb his clients, the members of the (Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan) . . . 
 
It is commonplace that government auditors (should) turn 
up irritating, embarrassing things in the course of their 
work. It is routine that they should remonstrate, strongly if 
necessary, with (respect to the) . . . handling of public 
money and failure to ensure that the taxpayer got value for 
it. 
 
It is rather less common for an auditor to censure a 
government for actually preventing him from getting at the 
books, thereby evading its obligation (to the) law . . . 
 

I think it’s fair to say that it’s not rather less common; it’s 
probably never happened before. 
 
And then it goes on to say, and I’ll close with this line: 
 

The image that emerges is (that) of a shabby, almost 
furtive government. 
 

The member opposite tries not to deal with the problem but to 
cover it up. And I say to the members opposite, you 

must realize there are some limits to the extent to which you 
can attack this institution without getting yourself into 
difficulty. 
 
This episode on which you show no signs of relenting, is far 
and away from being the first attack on this institution which 
you’ve made. As someone pointed out, you have made a 
practice for years of not answering orders for return . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I want to once more draw the member’s 
attention . . . and he has been wandering somewhat. But I now 
draw his attention to the fact that the motion is a specific 
criticism of the Minister of Justice, and not of the government 
in general. And while I have allowed the member to introduce 
one or two remarks to substantiate his case, I believe he’s 
getting off into a general discussion, and he should come back 
to the motion. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That may have been. I want to deal with 
this member and his particular propensity to attack members of 
this Assembly. 
 
I think members on this side of the House would be less 
alarmed if it had happened the first time. This, Mr. Speaker, is 
just unforgivable for an 11-year veteran of this Assembly to 
commit such a fundamental breach of the rules of this 
parliament. If a member came in and did it, if he’d been elected 
to this House for one month, I’d hope he’d understand that such 
behaviour is not tolerable. It is just unforgivable, Mr. Speaker, 
for an 11-year veteran of this Assembly to behave in a fashion 
which this minister has. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This is the worst speech I’ve heard since 
the last one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Lloydminster says it’s 
the worst speech he’s heard since my last one. I have nothing to 
compare with because the member from Lloydminster hasn’t 
spoken in so long that no one can remember it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that the member from 
Kindersley . . . this is not the first time the member from 
Kindersley’s done this. He has attacked other officers of this 
Assembly when they happened to displease him. I’ve provided 
a short list of such breaches that I recall from memory. 
 
When Mr. Tickell, who was then the Ombudsman, suggested 
that there was some room for improvement in the way this 
government treated some people, and when he suggested that 
his budget had been reduced beyond the level at which it was 
possible for him to do an effective job, what did the member 
from Kindersley do, who was then Finance minister? Did he say 
to the provincial Ombudsman, we’ll look at it? Did he say, there 
is no more money; I’m sorry, you’ll have to make with what 
you do? None of those things, which would have been a 
sensible and a fair and honest reply. What the member from 
Kindersley said to Mr. Tickell is, he’s being chintzy. 
 
Apparently the member from Kindersley’s view is that 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1287 
 

anybody who offers anything by way of comment on his 
conduct, which is anything less than fully supportive, is a 
proper subject of criticism. 
 
I note as well that the . . . I recall as well the Legislative 
Counsel, Merrilee Charowsky, in yet another instance of this 
government paying something less than due regard for the 
democratic institutions. In 1987 they decided they weren’t 
going to call the session, so they didn’t. March went by; April 
went by; finally in May the then leader of the opposition, Allan 
Blakeney, sought an opinion from Legislative Counsel about 
the propriety of spending and warrants. The Legislative 
Counsel, as was her function, stated, this is illegal. 
 
What did the member from Kindersley do? Did he say, well 
then we’ll have to recall the session and have a budget passed? 
Did he take issue with the judgement? He described her as 
being some sort of a handmaiden of the opposition. I think his 
comments were: she’s the opposition’s lawyer. On that one and 
only occasion, the member from Kindersley apologized. 
 
Nor is this his first attack on Mr. Lutz. He was reported in the 
Kindersley weekly newspaper as having made a comment 
which goes along the following lines: provincial auditors are 
people with very thick glasses; their function is to see if the i’s 
are crossed and the t’s are dotted, suggesting that they had no 
legitimate function to serve. That may well, I say to members 
opposite, that may well have prompted the opening line in The 
Globe and Mail editorial: 
 

The Saskatchewan government appears to regard the 
province’s auditor as a kind of Peeping Tom, a prowler in 
the backyard of its fiscal business and a rude intruder on its 
private affairs. 
 

I suggest that this indeed . . . that this line in The Globe and 
Mail is justified by the member from Kindersley in his 
comments in Kindersley. 
 
The member from Kindersley didn’t even have the courage to 
justify his remarks, having made them, having been asked some 
hard but very fair questions by the media. What did he do? Did 
he stay; did he try to deal with it as best he could? As nearly 
everyone has reported, he ducked into the government lounge 
where the reporters couldn’t follow him. It is bad enough that 
he makes these sort of — they’re libellous, that’s as good a 
word as any — makes these unfair, untrue remarks about the 
Provincial Auditor, a person who has no means of defending 
himself, unlike an attack which a member might make on 
another. We have grounds for replying. 
 
If the member from Kindersley had attacked Mr. Neill, the 
lawyer, Mr. Neill has a means of replying, but the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker, has none, no means of responding. He 
cannot engage in a debate with any member of this Assembly. 
Not only did it attack a person who has no means of defending 
himself, but the member didn’t even then have the courage to 
defend his remark, ran for the government caucus, spent all 
weekend, presumably, trying to put together some sort of a 
defence which was as thin as the very air itself. 

He comes into this Assembly today . . . I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s got to be a point in time at which points of privilege are 
going to become surplus to the functioning of this legislature. 
But there’s more. I suggest there’s some points of privilege 
which could arise out of today’s session. 
 
The members opposite today, far from recanting their sins, far 
from at least avoiding their sins, have repeated them today. 
They have repeated some of the sins which they committed on 
Friday and have added a couple of new ones. As I say, I’m not 
sure what purpose it serves to each day keep calling more points 
of privilege, but there are a number which arise today. One of 
the ones which arise today is that the . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Arises today, I thank the member from Regina Wascana. 
My, what a sparkling contribution you have made. It’s obvious 
that the member from Wascana is a learned and brilliant student 
of the English language. I say it’s obvious in that comment. We 
haven’t heard him speak. It’s too bad he hasn’t got enough wits 
to get in cabinet or at least get up in this House and speak on 
occasion, but we’ll simply have to take it from that contribution 
that his contribution could be brilliant if only he’d make it. 
 
The member from Kindersley today, I think, in a very real way 
went on to say, it’s true, and what’s more, there’s more 
damning evidence that the Provincial Auditor tried to trade 
material benefits for a favourable report, and it’s contained in 
this document, this package of documents which we sent back. I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that’s yet another point of privilege if 
there was any point in raising it. I don’t know to what point it’s 
going to serve to keep adding one point of privilege on top of 
another. It’s fairly obvious though that members opposite 
haven’t yet got the message. The message is that central to the 
democratic institution in this province is this Assembly, and this 
Assembly cannot function without its officers, not in this day 
and age. 
 
So when you attack the officers of this Assembly, you attack 
this Assembly and ultimately democracy itself. It is apparent 
that you people don’t understand that. It’s apparent that you 
care little for the officers. It was a cowardly, mean, and grossly 
unfair attack. You apparently don’t understand that when you 
attack the officers, you attack the institution. When you attack 
the institution, you attack democracy itself in this province. 
 
You people . . . I won’t, Mr. Speaker, get back into the other 
examples of this government attacking democracy itself, 
because you’ve already asked me not to dwell on that at any 
great length, but I say that this is not an isolated example. This 
is not an isolated example of this government attacking 
democracy itself, the democratic institutions. They have done it 
on any number of other occasions by their conduct of the 
business in this province, in this Assembly, by their conduct 
outside the Assembly, and they’ve done it again today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The members opposite seem to feel that they should be 
attacking and criticizing anyone who isn’t fully supportive. 
Never mind the fact that these people are doing their duties 
which they’re required by law to do; never mind the fact that 
they have no means of responding; members opposite feel free 
to attack them. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1288 
 

I say there cannot have been a government elected in this 
province which had less respect for this institution and the 
officers than you people. There cannot have been another 
example of a government which had less understanding of how 
this place operates and less understanding of why it operates 
and how it functions. You people are really in a class by itself 
when it comes to showing disdain for this Assembly and its 
officers. 
 
I see members opposite smiling. It is thought that a showing of 
disdain for the officers of this Assembly, and this Assembly, is 
a humorous thing. I say to you, you grossly underestimate the 
public of Saskatchewan. I say that when the member from 
Shellbrook sits grinning like a Cheshire cat, and the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has just thought . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . but he was when I was making the comment, 
and the member from Saltcoats sit grinning when I talked about 
the importance of this institution. I say to members opposite 
that when you attack an officer you attack this institution, and 
it’s not something that I think you should find particularly 
amusing. 
 
It’s apparent that members opposite . . . you don’t begin to 
understand the gravity of what you’ve done. The others do. As I 
say, I point out that this province, Mr. Speaker, has got more 
ink in the Globe and Mail in the last two weeks, all of it 
reporting . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Negative. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — . . . negatively on the province — that’s 
right. All of it reporting this government’s shortcomings. 
 
I went to . . . with respect to this very issue of the Provincial 
Auditor, got to Toronto — not on very pleasant business, I 
might add — but at least one is away from the pressures of 
ordinary business. What happens? Pick up a copy of The Globe 
and Mail on the street corner and there’s Saskatchewan and the 
member from Victoria commenting on it; Monday coming 
back, once again. 
 
If you people are looking for coverage, you’re succeeding 
brilliantly. If you’re looking for good publicity, then you’ve 
failed very, very, very badly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is this going to lead somewhere? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The members opposite ask if this is going 
to lead somewhere. I would hope this would lead to an 
understanding by members opposite of the importance of what 
we are discussing. I know members opposite think this is wildly 
amusing because members opposite couldn’t care less what 
happens to this institution. 
 
The public in Saskatchewan do, and if you don’t shed yourself 
of some of your arrogance, and if you don’t start showing some 
respect for the institution, the taxpayer, who Mr. Lutz is trying 
to serve, then indeed you people are going to be . . . to use the 
phrase of the former member from Wilkie, you’re going to be 
given the option of transferring to the private sector after the 
next election. 

(1615) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know what members opposite think 
the rules of this Assembly are. I find it annoying enough that 
the member from Kindersley once again displays abominable 
judgement and an abominable temper, which is what he 
displayed — both bad temper and bad judgement. The bad 
temper is never forgivable. The degree of bad judgement is 
astonishing, considering the fact that he’s spent 11 years here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope you’ll indulge me if I tell . . . it’s a true 
story. It happened to me last year, and I will be as brief as I can. 
I attended a conference in Denver last July. Met an individual 
who talked with a distinctly Brooklyn accent. It was obvious he 
was from the north-east. I was surprised he knew where 
Saskatchewan was. But when I told him where Saskatchewan 
was, he said to me, and this is a direct quote, “What on earth is 
going on?” I said, what do you mean? He said, what on earth is 
going on in Saskatchewan? 
 
It turned out that he worked as an analyst for Salmon Brothers 
in New York. He was an analyst who analysed credit ratings for 
provinces. It is that very thing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
this is directly on point. It was that very thing that Willard Lutz 
is trying to deal with. He is trying to assist . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . indeed it was. 
 
I was astonished that someone from New York would have 
heard of this province. They heard of this province in a negative 
context. They heard of it in a negative context because the bond 
rating had been lowered. Why had it been lowered? Because 
this government can’t competently manage its province’s 
affairs. 
 
The primary function of Mr. Lutz is to assist us in imposing on 
the government some efficiency, some effectiveness, and some 
economy. I didn’t say to the chap in Denver, it’s because the 
Provincial Auditor isn’t allowed to do his job; I said it’s 
because of patronage, waste, and mismanagement that this 
province has got into the shape it has — but I might have. 
Because if Mr. Lutz had been allowed to do his job over the 
years, if he had been given the staff he needed and the support 
he needed, which was obviously lacking in the comments of the 
member from Kindersley, we might not be in the serious 
situation we are with respect to taxes, which are way up, and 
services, which have deteriorated very badly. It is that very 
issue which is at stake. 
 
I say to Mr. Speaker, and to members opposite, that we treat 
this issue very seriously; we treat this institution seriously. If 
you think it’s amusing, then you’re going to have to spend some 
time, because we want to take an opportunity to talk about the 
seriousness of what’s happened. 
 
I see and I welcome a former colleague from Rosthern in the 
Assembly. He and I served on public accounts together for four 
years. We invested a goodly number of hours in public 
accounts, going over the public accounts, 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1289 
 

going over the Provincial Auditor’s report. I wonder what he 
would say if he still had a seat in the Assembly. He might be 
quiet out of the interest of party discipline, but I suspect he 
might well know that the Provincial Auditor is deserving of 
more support than he’s been getting. 
 
He’s deserving of the support of this Assembly. He is entitled to 
conduct his work without interference. He’s entitled to conduct 
his work without being the subject of criticism. And he’s 
entitled to do so without the sort of comments that have been 
made. 
 
This kind of comment which has been made I think must make 
the Provincial Auditor’s work almost impossible. How on earth 
can any officer of this Assembly carry out his duties; how can 
he go to the public accounts day after day; how can he assist the 
members in dealing with the accounts when he’s subject to the 
kind of attack which he has been in this Assembly? I think it 
would make his work almost impossible, and I suggest that this 
House has got to deal with it. 
 
It isn’t sufficient for this government to sit there glumly as they 
have done on every other issue in this Assembly. It isn’t enough 
for the government to sit there grim faced and say nothing, and 
hope that sooner or later the members of the opposition will run 
out of speakers and steam and the issue will blow over. 
 
This issue, Mr. Speaker, deserves better treatment than that. I 
see members opposite, if there’s any indication that they are 
aware of the problem that they’re going to deal with it, it 
certainly isn’t evident in the members opposite who 
alternatively look as if they think it’s funny, and alternatively 
look rather grim faced — amusing because they don’t 
understand the issue; grim faced because they do read polls. 
 
And whatever one might say about the Provincial Auditor, the 
waste, the mismanagement, the patronage with which we have 
been attempting to deal over the seven years this government 
has been in office, is beginning to catch up to this government. I 
therefore . . . 
 
The Speaker: — You’re about to move the motion, or to 
second it, rather. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I therefore, Mr. Speaker, take great 
pleasure in seconding the motion. And I trust all members 
opposite will enter the debate, and I trust this Assembly will 
find a means of restoring some integrity to the officers who 
serve us so loyally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few 
minutes on this motion, and only a few, Mr. Speaker. I’m going 
to try and keep my comments relative to the motion before us. 
 
Members opposite have said, Mr. Speaker, that this auditor’s 
report is a damning report. And I agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 
Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have said that the Provincial 
Auditor has a statutory requirement to report fully and 
accurately, and I agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 

And while, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t personally researched every 
point that has been made by the Provincial Auditor in his report, 
I would like to make reference to at least one today that I have 
responsibility for, to perhaps question why it’s reported in the 
way that it is, Mr. Speaker. And let me begin, Mr. Speaker — 
this is on page 94 of the auditor’s report — in July, Mr. 
Speaker, of 1988 . . . Mr. Speaker, this is about the time that 
there were some gas reserves at SaskPower, sold to Saskoil for 
cash and shares in Saskoil. The Provincial Auditor was of the 
belief at that time that SaskPower now became a 
Crown-controlled company and therefore he was the auditor. 
And the auditor that had previously been there, by virtue of 
Saskoil being a private company, was no longer the auditor. So 
he sent that auditor a letter — and I won’t read it, I’ll table it, 
Mr. Speaker — but he sent that auditor a letter setting out his 
belief and the reasons why he was now the auditor for Saskoil 
and not the private sector auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That letter was responded to by the auditor for Saskoil, and it 
says: 
 

Dear Mr. Lutz: In your letter dated to me July 28, 1988, 
you have asked Clarkson & Gordon to provide you with 
the same reports which we provided to you for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We did not provide any 
such reports for Saskoil for the 1987 fiscal year because it 
was not a Crown-controlled corporation. 
 

In this regard, Mr. Speaker, he says: 
 

Its status has not changed, and I would be interested in 
discussing with you further your proposed change in our 
reporting to you for 1988. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there was a letter from the auditor that said this is 
not a Crown-controlled company and I’m the auditor. Then 
there was a letter that went from the auditor of Saskoil that says, 
no, you’re wrong, but I’d be happy to discuss that with you at 
any time. Okay. 
 
Then there was another letter, Mr. Speaker, from the Provincial 
Auditor to the auditor for Saskoil. It says: 
 

In response to your letter to the Provincial Auditor, it is our 
understanding that Saskoil became a Crown-controlled 
corporation on April 22, 1988, when the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation acquired shares of Saskoil resulting in 
more than 50 per cent of Saskoil’s issued and outstanding 
shares being vested in the Crown through the combined 
investments of SaskPower and CIC. 
 
However, we would be pleased to consider any evidence 
that refutes our understanding in this regard, and I will 
contact you in a couple of weeks when my staff returns 
from vacation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it was during these discussions, Mr. Speaker, it 
was during these discussions that the auditor for Saskoil talked 
to the in-house solicitor at Saskoil for the purposes of getting all 
of this information requested by the auditor to satisfy himself as 
to whether or not Saskoil was a 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1290 
 

Crown-controlled corporation. The solicitor, I am told, agreed 
to provide any and all information the auditor had requested. 
 
The interesting thing is, Mr. Speaker, the auditor never showed 
up, or his people never showed up at Saskoil to get, to avail 
himself of the opportunity presented to him for this information, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I have reminded other 
members that while I’ve allowed other members to make one or 
two statements that could be construed that weren’t directly 
related to the motion in order to substantiate their case, and I 
want to draw the same rule to the Deputy Premier at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, following that discussion 
— and I’ll tie it in — following that discussion, Mr. Speaker, 
there was another letter went from the Provincial Auditor to the 
auditor for Saskoil and said, kindly disregard my letter of July 
28 regarding the audit of Saskoil; I am satisfied that Saskoil is 
not a Crown-controlled corporation. The only reason I bring 
this out now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I mean, the 
members opposite are squawking. They were talking about 
everything from people he met on a plane trip to New York, 
Mr. Speaker, or another one coming home from wherever it is 
he had been travelling to. I am talking specifically, Mr. 
Speaker, about a question of privilege that we are asked to 
judge on without the facts before us, Mr. Speaker, without the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I don’t believe the 
hon. member should be interrupted, and he has the right to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And so, Mr. Speaker, the point that I 
make, simply, is on page 94 of the auditor’s report. On page 94 
of the auditor’s report there is . . . well it may be factually 
correct in as far as it goes, Mr. Speaker. It does not tell the 
complete story. It does not report fully and accurately as 
suggested by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. It does not report 
fully and accurately. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, at no time was 
SaskPower ever asked for any information relative to this deal. 
 
Now that point being made, Mr. Speaker, that point being 
made, I don’t know why members opposite . . . I don’t know 
how they can in good conscience sit there and scream and 
squawk about cover-up when all we are asking for, Mr. 
Speaker, is that all the facts be made available to the legislature 
prior to a decision being taken on this question of privilege, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, because 
members opposite were talking about this in question period — 
I want to point out just what the powers, Mr. Speaker, just what 
the powers of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts are 
as they exist today. And this is in a motion passed in this House 
in 1986 on Wednesday, December 3, when these committees 
were struck, Mr. Speaker, and it says: 
 

That the said Standing Committees be severally 

empowered to examine and inquire into all such matters 
and things as may be referred to them by this Assembly, 
and to report from time to time their observations thereon, 
with the power (Mr. Speaker) to send for persons, papers 
and records, and to examine witnesses under oath (Mr. 
Speaker). 
 

Now I’ve given one example in the auditor’s report where I do 
not believe, Mr. Speaker, that it has been reported fully or 
accurately, Mr. Speaker. I’ve given one example. 
 
We have the question now, Mr. Speaker, of this trust condition 
on a proposed package, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Justice 
is aware of the content of that package. None of the rest of us 
are. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it’s right 
and proper to have all of these facts before us, Mr. Speaker, 
before we pass judgement, before we make the determination, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I intend to amend the 
motion of the member for Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker. And I 
move, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the motion of the member for Quill Lakes be 
amended by deleting all of the words after “that” and 
substituting “certain correspondence tabled by the Minister 
of Justice on May 19 and 23 and any associated 
circumstances be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts for their immediate investigation and 
report.” 
 

I move that, seconded by the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — You’ve heard the amendment put forward by 
the member for Souris-Cannington. I have reviewed the 
amendment and find that it does not deal with the central issue 
of the main motion, which is the finding of a breach of 
privilege. 
 
I refer members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and 
Forms . . . Order, order. Order. I refer members to 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms which discuss 
the issue of the relevancy of amendments as follows. Citation 
425: 
 

The object of an amendment may be either to modify a 
question in such a way as to increase its acceptability or to 
present to the House a different proposition as an 
alternative to the original which must, however, be 
relevant to the subject of the questions. 
 

Citation 426: 
 

It is an imperative rule that every amendment must be 
relevant to the question on which the amendment is 
proposed. 
 

And citation 437: 
 

An amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a 
matter which is foreign to the proposition involved in the 
main motion is not relevant and 

  



 
May 23, 1989 

1291 
 

cannot be moved. 
 

The amendment deals with the reference of certain documents 
to the Public Accounts Committee for review but does not 
demonstrate the relevance of this action to the determination of 
the question of privilege, which is central to the main motion. 
The Public Accounts Committee has no role to play in 
investigating or determining whether a matter is a breach of 
privilege. 
 
The amendment does not purport to give the Public Accounts 
Committee any authority to consider the matter of privilege. I 
therefore must rule that the amendment is out of order . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member has spoken on the 
amendment and moved it, and therefore he cannot speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a couple of 
minutes to address the motion. I also, like the Deputy Premier, 
am responsible for one of the areas within the auditor’s report, 
the property management, particularly regarding the dental 
equipment in which the auditor attests that there’s $2.2 million 
worth of assets, and certainly cannot, in his words . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, prior to recognizing the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley, I think it was clear that 
the member for Regina North was on his feet, and that you 
chose . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if I could have the floor, 
Mr. Speaker . . . that there was an obvious arrangement between 
the Deputy Premier and the minister in charge of privatization 
to get yet another motion moved. And I find it very interesting 
that you would recognize the minister of privatization and allow 
him an opportunity again to move yet another motion which 
would try to in fact “deep-six” the privilege motion that you 
have ruled on here in the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member did not have a point of order. 
The member was standing on his feet, and I recognized him, 
and I do so now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying 
previously that there’s some comment about the dental 
equipment, and I’d given the figure of $2.2 million. I would like 
to tell the same story, as my colleague just has with Saskoil, 
that certainly there was no request, no request regarding dental 
equipment specific to my auditors of (Saskatchewan) Property 
Management Corporation. So I think as we see these things 
come forward, that certainly puts some question as to the report, 
as my colleague from Kindersley has aptly said. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, for everything to be brought out in 
the open and have a discussion of this, and bring forth the 
package that the member from Kindersley has been talking 
about, I would like to move the following amendment to the 
motion, Mr. Speaker. And it is moved by myself and seconded 
by the member from Melfort: 
 

That the motion of the member from Quill Lakes 

be amended by deleting all words after the word “that” and 
substituting: “certain correspondence tabled by the 
Minister of Justice on May 19 and 23, 1989, and any 
associated circumstances be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Privileges and Elections for their immediate 
investigation and report as to whether or not the privileges 
of the Legislative Assembly have been breached.” 
 

The Speaker: — Does the member have an issue to raise? 
 
Mr. Trew: — . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m on my feet. When you rule 
that out of order . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members don’t serve notice to 
the Speaker that they’re next to speak. The Speaker recognizes 
who he sees first. 
 
Since the Committee on Privileges and Elections can deal with 
the matter of privilege, I rule that the amendment’s in order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to see the 
citations with which you back up your ruling. I would like to 
have an opportunity to examine those. And I would like to 
comment on a further point of order. It has been traditional in 
the debates of this House, once the mover and seconder have 
spoken, that the debate, if it seems convenient, will alternate 
from one side of the House to the other. Now the mover and 
seconder have spoken . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I have dealt with 
that issue. The member was standing in front of me; I 
recognized him. 
 
Regarding the first part of the member for Saskatoon 
Westmount’s question as to the citations, they’re the same 
citations that I mentioned previously — 425, 426, and 437. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As much as my 
colleagues, the member for Quill Lakes and the member for 
Regina Centre, have laid out this case of prima facie breach of 
privilege factually, there is also a fundamental question of 
fairness to be dealt with here today. And the fairness I’m 
talking about of course is the fairness to any officer of the 
Legislative Assembly, in this case a question of fairness to the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
You see, the member for Kindersley can take his place in this 
Legislative Assembly and make whatever statements he wants, 
either backed up with fact or not, backed up with fact or not, 
and he is protected against any legal action. So he can say 
anything he wants about anybody, including an officer of the 
Legislative Assembly. In this case, the officer of the Legislative 
Assembly that we’re dealing with is the office of the Provincial 
Auditor, and that Provincial Auditor does not have the same 
access, the same ability, to speak out publicly to defend himself 
in this case. That’s part of why, Mr. Speaker, we’re asking for 
the Provincial Auditor to come before the bar in the Legislative 
Assembly so that he can defend himself, so that he can defend 
the office of the Provincial Auditor, and so that we can get to 
the bottom of all of the facts 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1292 
 

rather than continually dealing with innuendo and with 
misrepresentations of letters, misrepresentations of the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier was dealing with a part of the 
auditor’s report, and he was talking about page 94 where 
Saskoil sold some gas reserves for cash and shares to Saskoil, 
the oil company. He was trying to make reference to the fact 
that the Provincial Auditor had been calling for some special 
reports dealing with Saskoil. 
 
But I want to draw members’ attention to Appendix III of the 
auditor’s report, and the following audits are not fully 
completed at March 24, 1989. It lists 26 — 26 audits not fully 
completed. Not one of those audits relates to Saskoil. Not one. 
So I wonder what the Deputy Premier was referring to when 
he’s talking about the Provincial Auditor going on about the 
Saskoil audit. 
 
Appendix IV of that same report, Mr. Speaker, deals with “List 
of Financial Statements and/or Annual Reports Not Tabled In 
The Legislative Assembly in the Manner Required By Law.” 
Not meeting legal requirements, these keepers of democracy 
opposite, not in keeping with their own laws. And there are not 
one, not 26, but there are 64 — 64 annual reports and financial 
statements not tabled here as they are required. 
 
Now who is it that is trying to defend the democracy? The 
Provincial Auditor quite correctly points out that in 64 cases the 
law has not been met. Those annual reports and financial 
statements have not been tabled here where they should be. 
 
Not much wonder that the Provincial Auditor filed a report that 
was not exactly full of wild applause for the government but 
rather was a damning condemnation of the Conservative 
government and of the members opposite. 
 
Now of the 64 financial statements and annual reports not 
tabled, I want to list a few of them, but I want to point out that 
nowhere in here is Saskoil. Nowhere does the Provincial 
Auditor list Saskoil as not being filed. And I submit that the 
reason that it’s not listed is that the Provincial Auditor had at 
one time either thought Saskoil should be reporting to the 
Provincial Auditor or, in any rate, was checking it out to make 
sure that it should not be. 
 
But some of the lists . . . some of the financial statements and 
annual reports not tabled, as required by law, include the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan — not tabled; 
Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan —again, not 
tabled in time; Municipal Financing Corporation; Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan; public employees superannuation 
fund; and the list goes on and on. The Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund, Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission, 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications — in total 64 financial statements, 64 
annual reports not tabled, as required by law. And yet the 
members opposite would have us believe that they’re the 
keepers of democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has made statements 

that are at best wrong and misleading, and therefore coming 
from an incompetent minister. Or another interpretation of his 
statements are the minister is attempting to discredit the 
Provincial Auditor so as to remove or reduce the public reaction 
to the duly submitted Provincial Auditor’s report; in other 
words, making the public believe that somehow the Provincial 
Auditor is a nasty, mean-spirited individual who is somehow 
wrong, wrong, wrong. 
 
And remember, as I pointed out earlier, the minister can make 
whatever statements he wants in this legislature, he’s protected 
against any court action, but can make any statements, however 
factual, right here, and is protected. 
 
But the officer that we’re dealing with, the officer of the 
Legislative Assembly that we’re dealing today, the Provincial 
Auditor, cannot do that. That, Mr. Speaker, is why we have 
repeatedly asked for the Provincial Auditor, and whoever else is 
needed to get to the bottom of this, to come and appear in the 
Legislative Assembly before the bar. Then we’ll get to the 
bottom of it and, I suspect, only then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Centre pointed out that 
we have not one but two questions of privilege on the floor 
before us now. And I readily and hastily admit that, this being 
my first term, I don’t have a long history of being in the 
Legislative Assembly, but I never in my wildest nightmare 
would have dreamt that we would have two questions of 
privilege to be dealt with at the same time. I always thought that 
the job of MLAs was to look after the public interest, to deal 
with legislation, and to deal with it in a forthright honest 
manner. Granted, there would be differences of opinion. 
Granted, there are differences in philosophy. But honest women 
and honest men can have those differences and deal with them 
in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
What we have today is not simply an honest difference in 
opinion. We have before us today a whole question of the 
integrity of the member for Kindersley. I believe that it is really 
the member for Kindersley who is, and should be, on the 
defensive. 
 
I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to a Star-Phoenix article of May 
23. I want to refer to it in part, not to distort the article, not to 
represent the article . . . or misrepresent the article in any way, 
as the member from Kindersley so scurrilously misrepresented 
the April 20, 1989 letter from Larry Kyle to . . . or pardon me, 
to Larry Kyle from G.J.K. Neill, the lawyer for the Provincial 
Auditor. The article states, Mr. Speaker: 
 

It wasn’t until Friday morning that Saskatchewan truly 
discovered how distant from reality a government can 
become midway through its term. 
 
Under attack from all sides by what can only be described 
as a scathing provincial auditor’s report, the government 
set up its own world of make-believe to escape from 
allegations of secrecy in its spending habits. 
 

The letter explains that the Provincial Auditor has been on 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1293 
 

the job since 1971, and is now serving, I believe, in under its 
third administration. And then it says: 
 

If the Provincial Auditor’s estimates are correct, the only 
auditor who must by law report to taxpayers . . . can’t get 
detailed information about almost $3.5 billion in spending 
by government and Crown corporations — or (put another 
way) approximately $3,500 for every man, woman and 
child in Saskatchewan. 
 

That’s not terribly far from half of the total spending that the 
government and Crown corporations in this province are 
responsible for. And we have a Provincial Auditor not able to 
deal with it. I’m going to skip a paragraph, Mr. Speaker, and 
then it goes on: 
 

Puzzled and startled observers of the legislative assembly 
listened as Andrew read selected passages from a letter 
Lutz’s lawyer (provided) wrote to the government’s legal 
counsel on April 20. Andrew’s abbreviated account of the 
correspondence left the impression Lutz had offered to 
resign, submit a palatable rewrite of his report and make no 
more trouble for the government — but only if the price 
were right for a severance package. 
 

The article goes on. 
 

Either Andrew believed no one would ever see the full text 
of the letter or somebody convinced him an overnight 
epidemic of illiteracy had gripped Saskatchewan and only 
cabinet ministers from Kindersley were immune. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the . . . want to deal with some of the events of 
Friday last when in the Legislative Assembly, in answer to a 
question, the member for Kindersley said: 
 

Number three, Mr. Speaker, (and I’m quoting now) . . . 
Number three, Mr. Speaker, is, and I will read: That he 
would of course expect to . . . 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to draw to the 
member’s attention that at 4:37 this afternoon I received in my 
office the following letter and documents from the Provincial 
Auditor. The letter is addressed to myself: 
 

Dear Sir: In accordance with Section 14(a) of The 
Provincial Auditor Act, I present herewith a special report 
to the Legislative Assembly. In accordance with Section 
14(b) of the same Act, I request that you table this report. 
 

I do so now. 
 
It being 5 o’clock the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


