


















































June 13, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 13, 1989 
 
 

1861 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I seek leave of the 
Assembly to move to Committee of Finance. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to direct a 
question to the minister in regards of The Potash Resources Act, 
1987, which I think was introduced in this legislature about two 
years ago and was enacted, and no doubt has been proclaimed. I 
don’t have the date of the proclamation of the effect of that Bill. 
I wonder if the minister could tell us what date The Potash 
Resources Act, 1987, was proclaimed, and on the assumption 
that the Bill would be proclaimed, of course, because it was 
enacted two years ago, if she would mind telling the House who 
the members of the board are, set up under The Potash 
Resources Act, when were they appointed, and the 
qualifications of the members of the board. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the legislation was indeed 
passed by the House but it has not been proclaimed. Because it 
has not been proclaimed there are no board appointments. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister 
would be kind enough to explain to the legislature how it was or 
why it is that this legislation which was introduced with such a 
fanfare and with such great importance by the government of 
the day, your government, and which was described as “the key 
to survival of the potash industry” — the exact words used by 
yourself and the Deputy Premier and the Premier and various of 
the numerous speakers who spoke in support of the Bill — how 
was it and why is it that a Bill of such magnitude and 
importance has not been proclaimed and made the law, and 
therefore is ineffective? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, when . . . 1987, I believe, 
when we were into the legislation regarding The Potash 
Resources Act, at that time we had a serious problem. As the 
Leader of the Opposition will recall, we were . . . The potash 
producers in the province were facing dumping charges out of 
the United States and were in some serious difficulty. And there 
was a very large question at that time hanging over the industry 
that if, in fact, they were going to be able to get out of the 
situation they were in. 
 
I think if the Leader of the Opposition takes a good look at the 
environment of the day, what happened after the legislation was 
put in . . . And I might add that it, in fact, was put in to protect 
the industry, to preserve some jobs, and I guess more 
importantly, Mr. Chairman, to allow the environment to become 
more stable by bringing supply and demand into better balance. 

Now that happened in an indirect way and that is through 
discipline within the industry. That legislation at that time, I 
believe, facilitated the framework that in fact allowed the 
producers in Saskatchewan to negotiate a suspension agreement 
in the United States. And I think he would not find any 
disagreement with that statement among the industry itself. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Chairman, while there are still minor 
difficulties in terms of supply and demand within the potash 
industry, the discipline within the industry itself has been quite 
good, and we have not seen massive amounts of surplus of 
potash to this date, and nor are we likely to. 
 
I think the industry as a whole is paying very strict attention to 
the supply and demand situation, and as long as that happens, 
Mr. Chairman, the legislation will remain there, but we will not 
proclaim it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, would the minister 
care to explain to me and to the House how it is that this result 
comes about when, in effect, there is no legislation, because the 
minister must surely agree with me that a Bill enacted but not 
proclaimed is not legislated enactment; it has no authority, no 
power, no disciplinary measures. How is it that this turn-around 
— rather dramatic turn-around — took place in the absence of 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with the legislation 
on the books and the legislation that could be proclaimed within 
a week or a two-week period of time, I think probably it rests in 
a very direct way with the industry, the potash producing 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
The industry is aware of our interest in maintaining an orderly 
level of supply and demand, and I think, given the 
government’s interest, including the legislation that was 
debated and passed in this House at that time, the discipline, 
while it was within the industry itself, there was a certain 
amount of pressure there from the government initiative of the 
legislation itself. 
 
They don’t want to see government having to take that kind of 
measure, and I think, given the level of our interest in seeing 
that some action would take place to bring the demand and the 
supply into a better balance, that they in turn looked after it 
internally without having the government measure there. I think 
their interest in seeing government out of it today is still there 
and, as I said, they . . . In fact, the discipline is good within the 
potash industry itself in terms of that supply and is likely to be 
over the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Is the minister saying that this internal 
discipline that she describes within the industry is taking place 
by the various corporations of the industry, in concert with one 
and the other, meeting and fixing prices and supplies, if I may 
use that term, in a way which is satisfactory to the industry at 
the expense of U.S. consumers and Canadian consumers? Is that 
what she means by internal discipline? Is that what’s been 
happening, and do you as minister, have you as minister  
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1862 
 
 

condoned that action? I gather you have by your comments. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The answer to the member’s question is 
no. What you are seeing is that the potash producers in fact are 
abiding by the agreement that they signed in the United States 
— nothing more, nothing less. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Let me just see if I understand this. There is 
no Bill which brought about the discipline. There are no 
agreements amongst the potash producers to bring about the 
discipline. There is an adherence, apparently, to an American 
set of objectives and interests which the minister advises, and 
the problem has been solved, as the minister would have us 
believe. 
 
Isn’t it correct, Minister, that the solution of the problem has 
come out this way: that the private potash producers in 
Saskatchewan today, two years after that Bill was introduced, 
are operating at approximately 80 per cent capacity production, 
and Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is operating about 60 
per cent of potash production, and the problem’s been resolved 
all right, at the expense of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don’t think this agreement, Mr. 
Chairman, came about because of private versus public sector at 
all. I think that the industry, whether they were the publicly 
owned Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan or a private 
company such as IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 
Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) or perhaps Kalium west of Regina, 
it wasn’t one versus the other. 
 
I think, though, what you do find, Mr. Chairman, and I believe 
it’s part of the real world and you will probably find it in almost 
any industry, if you have one player that is somewhat bigger 
than the other, the bigger player has a tendency to play what 
they call the swing role. And the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan often finds itself in a position of being the swing 
producer. 
 
I would suggest that that probably has been the case since day 
one, and as long as that particular corporation remains 
somewhat bigger in terms of its capacity and its productivity 
level, that it will continue to play the role of swing producer. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What the minister is saying is that the 
potash corporation will continue to play the role, as she 
describes it, of swing producer, essentially to the advantage of 
the private potash corporations and in this instance to the 
essential advantage of a pair, maybe more, of outdated potash 
mines in the United States, which in a nutshell says that the 
Saskatchewan potash industry and its orderly development and 
its maximization of profit and jobs, as we know by the Cory 
shut-down, has been sacrificed to the advantage and the 
economic interest lying outside. 
 
And I wonder, Minister, if you would check with your officials 
and tell me whether or not it is correct what I put to you now. I 
put to you now that, on average, the non-PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) producers of potash in 
Saskatchewan are functioning at approximately 80 per cent of 
productive capacity and that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is  

functioning approximately at 60 per cent of productive capacity. 
 
Would the minister’s officials advise her as to whether or not 
that information is correct, and if it is correct, how in the world 
can it be justified since the government at the time that they 
introduced the potash resources Bill said that its intent was to 
bring equity and fairness as amongst the producers and 
orderliness to the market. Are those figures correct, and if so, 
how do you explain them? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I would suggest that your operating rate 
of 60 per cent is somewhat higher for PCS, and I’m not sure 
where you get the figure of 80 per cent within the province of 
Saskatchewan. If you go back and take a look at the capacity 
level, and I would have to take you back to 1981 or 1982, when 
PCS expanded and the surplus that came on to the market then 
. . . And the reason for the expansion at that time in our history 
was the . . . The best guess by a lot of people was that the price 
indeed was going to keep going up, and in fact that didn’t 
happen. 
 
And it didn’t happen for a couple of reasons. One would be who 
was buying, weather conditions, farming conditions, and the 
other major factor would be the reality that that expansion 
ultimately brought on more capacity than what was needed. But 
the 60 per cent that you state is somewhat higher, and I do not 
have the specific figures with me tonight. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess the . . . Madam 
Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You might be right 
about that. Anyway, Minister, your figures are only partially 
complete, by your own admission. I say that the productive 
capacity of the potash corporation today is at about 60 per cent; 
you say it’s less. 
 
An Hon. Member: — She said more. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, I think you said less. All right, whether 
it’s more or less, it’s at about 60 per cent. You’re not able to 
confirm and/or unwilling to confirm what the productive 
capacity of the private industry is. 
 
Does your department have figures as to the level of United 
States potash production today as compared to the fertilizer year 
1987? Is it up or down? And does your department have figures 
as to the level of importation of potash into the United States 
today as compared to ’87, not from Canadian source, not from 
Saskatchewan sources? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we would have to get 
some specific figures, and maybe the Leader of the Opposition 
would like to state precisely what he wants to know of which 
company in the United States. We don’t have these figures here 
but I can tell the member that from reports we know that the 
production is up in the United States. That’s no secret. That’s in 
the reports and we read of that every week. 
 
I think that it’s probably safe to say that the U.S. potash 
industry is operating at close to capacity. I don’t know that for 
sure, but I think it’s safe to say that. And I would  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1863 
 
 

also suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that in fact that 
operating at capacity, Mr. Chairman, is all under the umbrella 
of the suspension agreement. 
 
I think that that is probably one of the prices that our own 
industry in Saskatchewan was willing to pay in order to stay 
away from full-blown dumping charges, and in giving up some 
of that market they in fact did stay away and were able to get an 
agreement that still allowed them to operate. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Minister, the minister 
wants to know what it is exactly that I want, and perhaps I 
could put it in the form of a brief statement and out of the 
statement you’ll get the essence of what the information I seek 
from you is. 
 
I say to the government and to the minister opposite that the 
introduction of The Potash Resources Act, amidst blaring 
headlines, was probably one of the most fraudulent political 
exercises that we have seen in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It was a fraudulent exercise because as we 
know, by the minister’s own admission, no legislation was ever 
enacted, and therefore there is no legal authority to try to bring 
order to the market. 
 
And in fact the stated purpose of the legislation, which was to 
act as some sort of a disciplinary mechanism upon the world’s 
potash, has worked in the absence of this legislation. You 
haven’t even proclaimed it. There’s not even a suggestion that 
you will proclaim it. 
 
You also deny that there’s anything that the industry is doing 
itself by way of meetings to come to terms. You called about 
internal discipline, but you shift off what internal discipline 
clearly means to the average lay person. You shift off that 
internal discipline term to mean now it’s the United States 
commerce department anti-dumping imposed settlement. That’s 
“internal discipline.” That’s hardly internal discipline by the 
industry. That’s an imposed United States law or configuration 
— hardly internal discipline. 
 
So it’s difficult to get an answer from you, Madam Minister, 
with the greatest of respect, as to what it is, why it is that the 
current situation has resulted in the results that you give us. 
 
And what are the results that you give us? The results are that 
PCS is operating at about 60 per cent more or less, but all the 
other non-PCS private potash corporations in Saskatchewan are 
operating at a higher basis. 
 
The United States companies, by your own admission, are 
producing at near capacity. They’re producing flat out and 
making all the profit they can. By your admission, or implied 
admission, the United States is importing more potash from 
non-Saskatchewan sources than it ever has in a long time. Here 
it is the United States and the potash industry is burgeoning, 
and the very objective of this sham Bill has gone by the side, by 
the boards, the very objective being that presumably it was to 
defend the Saskatchewan industry and also, in the world at 
large, to bring some discipline to the market-place. 

I say that the government has handled this absolutely, totally 
incompetently. The government has set about here a policy 
which has deliberately had the result of meaning massive 
lay-offs of workers in Saskatchewan, reduced production of the 
Saskatchewan potash industry here in Saskatchewan, all the 
while that the profits and the production outside of 
Saskatchewan are on the increase. 
 
That is a deliberate strangulation of the potash industry. That’s 
a deliberate, bludgeoning threat, hanging there like the sword of 
Damocles over the industry, both private and public, which has 
not had the desired public effect; in fact, one could argue, was 
purposefully put into place to have the effect that I’m currently 
telling you about: lay-offs, capacity production which is 
significantly lower than the United States. And everywhere 
else, Jordan and Israel and New Brunswick, the expansions and 
the productions are going full board, but not here. 
 
Now isn’t that . . . Can you not see that? I don’t expect you to 
admit this — you cannot and will not. But surely in the face of 
those facts, isn’t that the most stirring condemnation of your 
department’s and your government’s policies with respect to the 
management — one would say the mismanagement — of this 
tremendous resource? 
 
And I know somebody’s watching this exchange on television, 
and the member from Biggar is here providing you with an 
additional answer to the questions that I put. But if my figures 
are wrong, please give me the additional information. But I 
don’t know what else can be concluded but that. What else can 
be concluded? And under the circumstances, I don’t expect you 
to do it; but the least that you could do is to get up and to admit 
that two years ago, your government introduced that Bill for 
purely political reasons, and the net result has been — I won’t 
say a disaster because that’s an overstatement — but a very 
serious blow to the viability, particularly of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and of the Saskatchewan industry 
at large. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, surely the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t deny that there was a great of risk for the 
potash industry in 1987. Surely he doesn’t deny that — that that 
industry, in fact, was at risk with the preliminary charges that 
were brought down. And if that risk was indeed there, then how 
can he possibly deny that jobs were at risk, revenue for the 
province was at risk, all those factors within the industry? 
 
Mr. Chairman, you know, we could spend a lot of time in 
talking about what has taken place within the industry over the 
last 10, 11 years. I think that perhaps a clearer picture would be 
to go back over the last three or four years and, in particular, 
since 1987. 
 
And the member says that we’ve lost out; Saskatchewan’s 
potash industry has indeed lost out. And yet if he looks at the 
figures of the sales, the markets, it says, no, they haven’t. And, 
in fact, 1988, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, was a record year 
for the industry in Saskatchewan in terms of its sales and the 
value of the sales, and they were back to the 1981 level. So how 
can you say that this  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1864 
 
 

industry in Saskatchewan has lost out, and the U.S. is beating 
them, and Israel and Jordan? 
 
Now that’s not to take away the reality that indeed the 
competition is greater than it has been. And I guess if you were 
living in a country like Jordan and you had that resource there, 
you would want it developed and you would be looking for 
markets around the world too. Well that’s what they’re doing. 
 
(1930) 
 
And Saskatchewan has done a good job through its marketing 
arm, along with the producers. And I’ll give these figures to the 
member. For example, in 1986 there were 6.8 million — and 
this is KCl tonnes — on the domestic market; 1987 showed 7.3. 
Now 1988 is 6.5 and 1989, we are estimating 6.7. On the 
offshore market, Mr. Chairman, the picture is a little brighter. 
For example, in ’87, you had 4.1 KCl tonnes, 4.1 on the 
offshore market in 1987. In 1988 that was up to 5.1, and they 
are estimating for 1989 approximately 4.4. 
 
Now that’s not a bad record, and the estimates aren’t bad for 
1989 either. So for you to stand in your place and say that this 
industry has lost out is not credible. The facts say otherwise. 
They are doing quite well and they will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Minister, the 
figures that you give me prove my case unless I’ve marked 
down the figures incorrectly. I’m not looking at these figures. 
You still have to give us some percentage increases or decreases 
of production in the United States. I’ve made my point on that. 
 
Let’s go back at that. Let’s just take a look at your figures. 
Domestic production in 1986, you say, went from 6.8 to 7.3. 
That’s 0.5 of an increase. In ’88, it’s back to 6.5, which is 
below the figure of what it was in ’86; and 1989 projected at 
6.7, which is still below what it was in 1986. 
 
Even on the offshore side, we’ve had a marginal increase of 0.3. 
Even assuming your figures, it doesn’t answer the question. I’m 
talking about the share of market, the share of market for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the share of market 
for the non-potash corporation — private producing potash 
corporations. 
 
And I say to you that your legislation and your policies have 
failed because since the introduction of that Potash Resources 
Act, in the United States there has been more production, there 
has been more importation of Israeli and Jordanian and German 
production of potash — they’ve taken it from every other 
source than Saskatchewan source. 
 
And that you’ve solved the problem, if I may put it that way, 
but you’ve solved the problem on the backs of the workers and 
on the backs of the communities here in the province of 
Saskatchewan by this heavy-handed threat, this Damocles’ 
sword that I’ve talked about, which has never been proclaimed, 
and those are what the figures show. There’s no other 
conclusion that can be made under the circumstances. 

Now I want to ask one last question, which I think is a very 
easy question for you to answer. What is the government’s 
intention with respect to this Bill? Are you going to repeal it, or 
do you hold the position that the Bill is there for proclamation 
at some future time? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already 
indicated that The Potash Resources Act, if necessary, would be 
brought in, in the future. Given the discipline within the 
industry today, I don’t see the need for that on the short term, 
but I wouldn’t second-guess it on the long term. But it is not my 
intention to put the board into place as long as the industry is 
exercising the discipline that they have been to date. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last night, 
Madam Minister, we established that you were the Minister of 
Energy and Mines. We confirmed that the Minister of Energy 
and Mines, namely you, signed the order in council which 
appointed directors to the board of Sask Oil and Gas 
Corporation. We confirmed, as well, that you actually named 
two of the three directors the government appointed. And we 
confirmed, Madam Minister, that you were, therefore, 
responsible for the provincial government’s investments in 
Saskoil, and through your two or three representatives on the 
board, that they are responsible to you, you are responsible to 
this Assembly through estimates, and you are accountable to us 
and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I asked you at that time, Madam Minister, to come forward with 
some information respecting Sask Oil and Gas. I wanted to 
know — for your remembrance, to remind you what scenario 
took place — from the time the Sask Oil and Gas went from 
government equity position of 60 per cent to where we are 
today at 25 per cent, what was given in exchange for that 
equity, and a number of other questions related thereto. And I 
was wondering, Minister, if you’ve had time to have your 
officials provide those answers for us this evening. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I had indicated last night 
that I would endeavour to have Sask Oil and Gas respond to the 
member’s questions. A letter was drafted today to Mr. Ted 
Renner, the chief executive officer of Saskoil, to supply the 
answers to the questions that we indeed took out of Hansard, 
and the questions that are asked tonight, if he has some on 
Saskoil, will be added. 
 
And I have also asked Mr. Renner to respond directly to the 
hon. member, and have also suggested that perhaps the 
invitation should be extended for my critic to sit down and talk 
to the officials in Saskoil, in case the response in writing does 
not clarify everything that he wanted to know. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in terms of those board members, I was in error 
last night. There are indeed three, and it was Mr. John Brennan, 
the professor from the U of S, Mr. Ron Barber, and Mrs. Joan 
Cook from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d also like if 
you could obtain information respecting a decision on who 
authorized the issuing of the new treasury stock. There was, I 
believe, two circumstances in the last year or so where the 
board issued new treasury stock, the 10  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1865 
 
 

million shares in March of 1989 regarding the . . . or in lieu of 
$97 million on the Toronto Stock Exchange through the three 
capital corporations out of Toronto. 
 
And I’d like to know as well whether you were aware of this 
dilution in advance, this issuance of new treasury stock, not just 
who authorized it but whether you were aware of it and whether 
you had your five members of the board, at that time out of the 
10, take that from the government. Or was that an instruction 
that came from the management? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will add that 
question to all the other questions to go over to Sask Oil and 
Gas. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Madam Minister. A number of 
other issues I wanted to raise tonight are related to Saskoil, but I 
think I’ll go on to other matters, because I would appreciate 
receiving the written reply from the president through your 
office. But I just want to summarize, I think, the position that 
has brought us to where we are with regards to Saskoil. 
 
We have, as a government . . . Or you as a government in 1986 
privatized the corporation. You took $75 million, which you 
told the public of Saskatchewan was the price paid for 40 per 
cent of the company. That $75 million, the majority of it, came 
from retained earnings, and part of it was from the sale of 
shares that the company made, so in essence we sold it at a 
discount price, the 40 per cent we had. 
 
When Saskoil was originally privatized, the corporation laid off 
25 per cent of the employees in Saskatchewan. The original 
intention of the corporation, Madam Minister, was to create 
employment in this province, to explore not only outside the 
province but primarily in the province, and to create a head 
office here, and as well to provide revenues to the treasury that 
would subsidize the tax expenditures of the governments of the 
day. 
 
And what we’ve seen since the privatization is we’ve seen $75 
million extended to the Crown Management Board, much of it 
from retained earnings and profits earned by the corporation. 
We have seen, since the 60 per cent equity was originally 
established, a dilution of position in the company from 60 per 
cent down to 25 per cent. We have lost control of the 
corporation. 
 
There has been no exchange of value for the dilution in control 
or dilution in equity. We have not received one penny to the 
treasury or to the Crown Management Board or to any other 
government holding company in exchange for the give 
_away of Saskoil. In essence, Madam Minister, people are 
saying that you’ve cheated the people of this province from 35 
per cent of the equity of the Sask Oil and Gas Corporation. 
 
We have seen as well, Madam Minister, you stand in this 
House, in replying to questions with regard to Saskoil, that we 
have created new jobs in this province as a result of the 
privatization. The new jobs, I remind you, are not created in this 
province; they have been created in Alberta — the purchase of 
ICG (Inter-City Gas) Resources Ltd. for $261 million, $111 
million of that being cash, for  

sale of our shares. 
 
We have seen those jobs protected in Alberta; it’s an Alberta 
corporation. They did not create very many jobs in this 
province. And yet you say that the companies picked up $261 
million of equity, but on top of that they’ve picked up $261 
million in debt, 97 million being equity debt through shares 
issued on the stock exchange, and 150 million of existing debt 
by ICG Ltd. in Alberta. 
 
So in essence, we’ve seen no new jobs created; we’ve seen a 
loss or a give-away of 35 per cent of the equity of this 
corporation in exchange for literally zero, not one penny, to the 
treasury of this province. And on top of that, we have stopped 
getting the dividends to the treasury of this province that the 
people of this Saskatchewan became accustomed to from 
Saskoil when it was a Crown corporation. 
 
And it’s my contention, Madam Minister, that you have cheated 
the people of this province out of the Sask Oil and Gas 
Corporation. You have not picked up the options to purchase 
your controlling shares that were issued out of new treasury 
stock, and you’ve really been negligent as a minister in terms of 
overseeing the investment of the people of this province. 
 
You have not been accountable to this Assembly; you refuse to 
answer the questions. And I feel, Madam Minister, that the 
people of this province will make a decision with respect to 
your credibility and your participation in this business venture 
when the next election arises. 
 
But I want to know how you can explain, in general terms, 
without a letter from the president or the chairman of the board, 
how can you explain, Madam Minister, how this has been a 
good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member may 
very well be right, that the people at the time of the next 
election will make a decision. And I want to remind him 
perhaps in a more gentler fashion than what he has a tendency 
to do in this House, that applies to both sides. When you get up 
in the morning, look in the mirror. People going to the polls 
have choices. And it isn’t all a one-way street. 
 
I also want to remind the member that when you start talking 
about lay-offs, particularly on one corporation in 1986 like 
Saskoil, I mean, come on. You know and I know that all 
companies within the industry in Saskatchewan were laying 
people off in 1986. And if you’re wondering why, all you have 
to do is go back and look at what the price of oil was in ’84-85 
and what happened in 1986. 
 
And if your memory serves you well, you will also know that in 
fact the lay-offs had the potential to be massive within the oil 
industry in Saskatchewan, right down to the local producing 
communities in the service and supply sector. Was it 25 per 
cent? No. I don’t know where that figure comes from, but I 
recall that Saskoil, in 1985 I think, had about 284 employees. 
And I believe in 1986, when the bottom fell out on the price of 
oil, that they were running around 220. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1866 
 
 

And the president can confirm it for me, but I think it’s around 
260 now, and I don’t know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m 
talking about in Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan. And I don’t 
know that that figure yet includes the recent acquisition, 
because there in fact, Mr. Chairman, would be a small number 
of employees moving to Saskatchewan with that acquisition. 
 
You know, was it a good deal and how did it benefit 
Saskatchewan? You and I talked about this once before in 
question period. It was the same question. And I have the same 
answer for you. Yes it was a good deal. It’s good for 
Saskatchewan and here’s why: it’s a corporation that, in fact, 
the head office is in Saskatchewan. Its emphasis is on 
Saskatchewan and that includes the development of the 
resources in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1945) 
 
And there were new jobs. If you don’t believe that, you go out 
and you look at the gas industry. And that’s where Sask Oil and 
Gas has been putting its emphasis recently, has been in locating 
gas, producing gas. And there’s jobs with that, direct and 
indirect. So there have been jobs with that. 
 
That acquisition has put that company in a relatively healthy 
position as are some other oil companies in this province. It 
allowed them to diversify their base so that they weren’t only 
dependent on oil, but they now have the gas properties and the 
income that comes with that. That acquisition also allowed 
them to diversify their land base, and there’s nothing wrong 
with that, the purchasing of some properties in Alberta. And if 
you believe that’s wrong, then you’re being two-faced about 
what the NDP used to do. 
 
Go back and read Saskoil annual reports dating right back and 
you will find that the NDP ministers of the day responsible for 
Saskoil thought that in fact it should be diversified between the 
producing provinces. So there’s nothing wrong with that. It 
makes it a healthier company. The jobs are more stable with it. 
And because the company is healthier the revenue opportunities 
are greater. 
 
I think given the way the deal was done, and its equity base, left 
it in a fairly healthy position given the state of the industry 
today and the price of oil being so volatile. For example, the 
exposure to the banks for the size of the company that that 
corporation is is minimal. And that’s a very healthy sign. And if 
you compare that with many other companies you will in fact 
find that Sask Oil and Gas is a very healthy company. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if I could say anything more that 
would clarify it for the member. But as I had indicated several 
times, the questions will be sent to Mr. Ted Renner, the chief 
executive officer, and he will respond in a like manner. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, I have to respond to 
what you’ve just commented on. You indicated that this is a 
good deal for Saskoil because it diversifies or develops new 
resources in Saskatchewan. And I suppose that’s a good deal if 
the profits that were  

made by the company were paid to the people living in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The problem is, you’ve given away 
35 per cent of the company for the purchase of ICG Resources. 
Why didn’t the rest of the shareholders in the company give up 
35 per cent of their equity, or an equal proportion for the 
purchase of this new asset and debt? 
 
You haven’t explained how this was purchased. It went from a 
company that was 60 per cent controlled by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to one that now is controlled in the tune of 25 per 
cent by the Government of Saskatchewan. And in lieu of that 
you’ve given $97 million to ICG corporation in Toronto for 
ICG Resources Ltd. in Alberta. So you’ve given up equity; you 
got nothing in return. You’ve given Saskoil a larger . . . or 
another diversified operation, but that hasn’t helped us. We’ve 
lost our equity of 35 per cent in exchange for zero. 
 
You talked about, as well, Saskoil’s bottom line and how 
healthy it is. Well Harold Johnson, who you may recall is the 
former vice-president of finance of Saskoil, attended the annual 
meeting and seemed to concur with the financial analysis that 
was done by a number of other people, that the debt/equity ratio 
has gotten to a very risky position in the annual report. And as 
of the end of 1988, the debt/equity ratio was up to about 43 per 
cent. If you add on ICG, you’re probably over 50 per cent 
which is very, very high compared to some of the other 
corporations in the oil and gas business. 
 
Other oil and gas corporations are consolidating their debt. 
They’re reducing their debt, and they’re becoming more 
streamlined and not taking on large operations, except for the 
Nova Corporation you keep referring to — it’s such a 
wonderful corporation. Well we can talk about Nova having to 
go to the European stock market because they can’t raise any 
more money in the North American markets. Have you heard 
about that, Madam Minister? 
 
The Nova Corporation, the flagship of your government, has a 
big problem in the North American markets raising capital so 
they’ve gone to the European markets. And the estimates are 
that about 15 to 20 per cent of the equity of Nova Corporation 
will soon be held by Europeans, and I think that’s the method 
you want to see happen with Saskoil. Well you’re sure helping 
by giving away 35 per cent. And I think that it’s a crime. 
You’ve cheated the people of Saskatchewan out of 35 per cent 
of the equity of this corporation; you’ve given it away. 
 
And I want to know: who gave the corporation that mandate? 
Was it you or the Premier or was it your colleague, the Deputy 
Premier from Souris-Cannington? And I’d appreciate an answer 
on that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I told him that answer 
would be forthcoming. 
 
Just a comment in terms of . . . What did we give away? The 
member says we gave away. So that makes me think, well . . . 
He says we gave away control. I think he’s been around enough 
and he knows that 25 per cent of a voting share is a fairly 
healthy voting share, enough that you could control a 
corporation. I don’t know what you want to do with that 
control. Do you want to walk in and you  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1867 
 
 

want to direct the board of directors and the chief executive 
officer and everybody else to do things your way? Or in fact, do 
you want to give them some running room and to carry out the 
functions that they were educated, trained, and worked for for 
many, many years? There is a lot of expertise within Sask Oil 
and Gas today. And I might add that the people are highly 
thought of, outside of this province and inside, that work there. 
Their opinions are valued and they think twice before they 
make a decision and do their investments. 
 
I think if the member is very truthful with himself he will take a 
look at what the investment dealers and the investment 
community, the experts, had to say about Sask Oil and Gas 
during the acquisition and the share offering, and he will know 
that the company, indeed, was in a reasonable position with its 
equity and debt. And that was indicated on the stock market. 
That’s a healthy sign for that company and I think the member 
should give the company some credit where it’s due. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The other aspect I want to raise with the 
minister while she’s getting some answers in writing for us, is 
with regard to the number of Saskatchewan shareholders. In 
1986, in the annual report . . . It actually was a good report 
except for those pictures I commented on yesterday, which were 
actually entertaining, and the pictures . . . My colleague from 
Rosemont constituency wasn’t here when I explained what 
happened here, but in the 1986 annual report, when it was 
privatized, there were three pictures that were screened back 
underneath the pictures of employees in the corporation. One 
was of J.R. Ewing, which is a symbol of big oil in Texas, and 
the other one was a picture of four employees shot over the 
background of John Wayne in the movie Hell Cats, the life of 
Red Adair. 
 
And then of course the third picture they had were the executive 
officers pictured in front of a picture of Jed Clampett from the 
Hillbillies. And the comment I made last night still sticks. I 
think they got it right with that one, that this is a government 
that would make the Beverly Hillbillies look well organized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And it seems to me that if this is someone 
they’re trying to emulate in their operations in Saskoil and in 
the ministry of Energy and Mines and in the Government of 
Saskatchewan, I think we’ve got a bit of a problem, because the 
Hillbillies were not known as administrators and safe keepers of 
the taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
But I think, Madam Minister, that the question I want you to 
review at this point is the question related to the number of 
shares. In 1986 in that report it also gave a breakdown on where 
the owners of the shares live, the geographic region by 
province. And it has not been as easily accessible since the ’86 
report. 
 
There have been explanations at the annual meeting that they’re 
not available because of accounts that head office is in Toronto, 
and that’s true. I agree with that. But the corporation can find 
out that information very simply by writing a little letter to 
McLeod Young Weir, or whoever the brokers are, and ask them 
for province residency of  

the shareholders of Saskoil. That is easily done, not a problem. 
They’d be happy to comply. And I wish that that would happen 
in the next 1989 annual report. I make it as a recommendation 
to you, Minister, to pass on to the directors on the board from 
the government to pursue. 
 
But, Madam Minister, what I’d like to do is I’d like you to give 
a comment with regard to the number of shares that are held by 
Saskatchewan people. On page 51 of the annual report of Sask 
Oil and Gas it says that there were about 39 million shares, 
common shares outstanding. And if you exclude the shares that 
were held by the Government of Saskatchewan . . . My 
calculations show that out of the 39 million, about 28,842,910 
were owned by the government. That leaves a total of 551,540 
shares that are owned by individual shareholders in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and these are common shares. 
 
And I’m wondering how the minister can explain the 
government’s initiatives in potash corporation, in SaskEnergy 
and others, when they say they’re going to be controlled by the 
people of this province. And they said that about Saskoil, but in 
effect we are looking at roughly 1.4 per cent of the total shares 
issued being held by the residents of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s as of the end of ’88. That’s not 
counting the additional 10 million that were sold in March of 
’89 that have gone almost entirely to pension funds and other 
large corporations and major wealthy stockholders in eastern 
Canada and other parts. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We will include in the package to Mr. 
Renner the question of shares. I believe that he can give you an 
approximate number. I do not think that it is a simple matter to 
be precise, because of people that choose to register their 
activity in Toronto, bypassing Saskatchewan people. Yes, that 
does take place . . . 
 
Mr. Solomon: — All of the companies who register . . . 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, but individuals will choose to go 
through a broker in Toronto, is what I’m saying, as opposed to 
. . . Anyway, all I’m saying is I don’t think it is a simple matter. 
And there may be some difficulty in being precise with 
numbers, so expect it to be approximate. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in response to his last question to do with other 
legislation and control, that type of thing, legislation can vary, 
as the member well knows. The issue of control — it depends, I 
guess, on what the commodity is. For example, you may very 
well see in a piece of legislation that the board . . . Indeed, there 
is a majority of Saskatchewan residents on it which could be 
very well be different than what you see in the Saskoil. The 
government may have the majority of appointments. That’s one 
way, in terms of control. I guess the other issue has to do with 
what percentage of shares that the government chooses to keep. 
And those are two factors that would play a key role in 
determining the issue of control. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, if you write the brokerage 
houses in Toronto, I am told by the brokerage houses here that 
have head offices in Toronto, that they will comply with that 
information. And even if it’s an estimate or a general average 
throughout the year is all  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1868 
 
 

we’re looking for. Whereas, at year end, where they usually 
register them by the first week in December, you can get the 
information in January and put it in your report that’s tabled 
usually in March. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to now turn to the . . . My colleague 
from Saskatoon wishes to ask a question. Do you want to raise 
one question on this before I go on? 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
you’re aware of the Human Rights Commission’s evaluation of 
Saskoil’s affirmative action program, I’m sure, and where 
Saskoil got a poor report card from the Human Rights 
Commission, and rightly so. And of course this was not unlike 
some of the other Crown corporations with affirmative action 
programs, and in my judgement was sort of a damning 
statement in terms of your government’s commitment to human 
rights in the province. 
 
We’re well aware that the Premier has made a number of racist 
comments and discriminatory comments towards indigenous 
peoples, and that the Minister of Labour and Social Services is 
famous for his discriminatory comments towards women and 
people foreign to Saskatchewan and other groups. 
 
(2000) 
 
So we see the Saskoil getting their poor report card in terms of 
their performance in human rights. Rather than management 
showing a positive response, and seeing this as a challenge to 
be a better corporate citizen, the corporation phased out the 
program, affirmative action program, as I understand it. I would 
like to ask you . . . I might add too, phased this out without a 
word of protest or concern by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, by the minister responsible, or by yourself, as 
far as I know. And I would submit that this is another element 
in the down side of privatization. 
 
I would like to ask you: has in fact the affirmative action 
program been phased out? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can only respond in terms of the 
withdrawal on their affirmative action program with the Human 
Rights Commission. That was basically a management decision. 
The board of directors may have been aware of it; I don’t know 
that for sure. If you’re wondering how I feel about it, I would 
have preferred that they did not do that; however, that’s my 
own personal opinion, and I think it’s probably obvious as to 
why I would prefer that. 
 
I do not get involved in the management decisions of that 
corporation nor the decisions that the board of directors are 
going to be making. Government appoints people to that board, 
and I suppose if we should be unhappy with the decisions that 
they take in total then their appointments would not be extended 
for a second term, and that would be one way of ensuring that 
the voice of government is heard in it. 
 
However, I think there are other things that government can do, 
perhaps in an indirect way, that not only impact on Saskoil but 
other groups. And contrary to what you  

say, I think our record has been fairly good in terms of women 
within the civil service, government service, senior 
management positions, middle management positions, courses 
and seminars that have been put into place. Plus with the private 
sector we have been working closely in terms of trying to get 
women . . . “remove the glass ceiling”, I believe, as they call it; 
it’s not always easy but it continues. 
 
The Saskoil decision was taken by them, and like I said, I 
would have preferred that perhaps they carried out. They felt 
that they could not meet the target, given the economics of the 
day within the oil industry, and they said that once they came 
out of that that they would slowly work their way back into it 
again. Have they reinstituted it? I don’t know, but it’s certainly 
something that I can raise in the letter that will be sent to Mr. 
Renner. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s my 
understanding that at the time this decision was made to phase 
out the affirmative action program, five of the 10 directors on 
the board of directors were government appointed directors. 
And I guess I find it quite amazing, in this day and age, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan would not have at least offered 
some protest or made some appeal to the directors, if not 
directed them to remain committed to affirmative action 
program. I think it’s . . . Despite what you say, I think the 
record of the Government of Saskatchewan is extremely poor in 
the area of human rights. And it comes from the top down 
where we have a Premier who is on record in 8 or 9 or 10 
instances of either making racist comments or discriminatory 
comments. 
 
So I think that the Premier would have been concerned that one 
of the major corporations would, in fact, be allowed to phase 
out the affirmative action program, which I’m sure wasn’t a 
very costly proposition for Saskoil to . . . not even be committed 
enough to ask to keep that small project going. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to ask you if rather than raising 
that point in your letter in an inquiring nature, if you would put 
your concerns stronger; that you, in fact, strongly urge the 
corporation to develop with the Human Rights Commission 
affirmative action program for Saskoil that would back up your 
statement that the province of Saskatchewan is worthy of a 
good record in human rights. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I think it is incumbent 
upon that member, if he is going to make allegations and 
statements such as the Premier being on record for racism, that 
he be obligated to table those quotes in this House. I think 
you’re wrong, Mr. Member, I think you’re wrong. You’ve got 
the wrong man. The Premier of this province, the member from 
Estevan, not once has he ever made a racist comment like you 
have stood in here and said tonight. 
 
Now if you have information contrary to that, you say he’s on 
record, then I would suggest that perhaps send the information 
over. Let’s see, instead of standing in and making allegations 
and insinuations like that. Those are serious allegations against 
a person — very serious. And because they are serious, then 
you have an obligation to show us differently if, in fact, it is. I 
don’t believe that it is. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1869 
 
 

Mr. Chairman, in terms of a message to Saskoil from myself, I 
will tell the member tonight that, in fact, I did raise at the point 
of time of the withdrawal from the affirmative action program, 
my concerns with the senior management in Sask Oil and Gas, 
and as a consequence with the board of directors, who I might 
add I meet with on an annual basis. And it was brought up at 
that time. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, I was wondering whether 
you had a response to my colleague’s question with respect to 
the fact that the government had on the board of directors, when 
this decision was undertaken, at least five of the 10 members. 
His question was related to the affirmative action program. 
These members obviously supported the arrangement. 
 
I’m wondering whether you specifically gave directions to the 
board members that were appointed by your ministry — by 
your hand and by the Premier’s hand — the direction in which 
they should recommend to the Sask Oil and Gas Corporation a 
deletion of the affirmative action program after your very own 
Premier wrote a letter to the president of the corporation, just 
two short years ago, supporting affirmative action in 
corporations. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview’s figures were right, that it was five out of 10 when 
that decision happened. And as I stated earlier, the board of 
directors and its senior management were making the managing 
decisions of that corporation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So what you’re saying, Madam Minister, is 
very clearly that we have . . . The provincial government, your 
ministry, has given direction to the board members that you’ve 
appointed to support this kind of a deletion of a very important 
program. And I find that consistent with what has been said by 
your Premier, at least in public, but inconsistent what he’s said 
in private. 
 
I’m wondering what sort of contingency plan you would have 
in effect when you remind the president of the corporation that 
the Premier has written a letter in support of such a program, 
and you have indicated tonight that you are going to do 
likewise. Do you think you will be able to make any difference? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well if the member had been listening, he 
would have heard that I did not say that I gave direction. I had 
indicated to the member from Saskatoon Eastview that I in fact 
had raised my concern with the senior management in oil and 
gas and with the board of directors over the cancellation of the 
affirmative action program that was registered with the Human 
Rights Commission. I also stated, very clearly, that I do not 
give direction to the board of directors. They are competent 
people when they are appointed, and they are expected to act in 
a competent manner. 
 
Now that was their decision, made at that time, given the 
economic conditions of the industry that they were in. And 
while you may not like it, and I wasn’t particularly comfortable 
with it, the reality is that they made the decision, and then they 
must live with it. 

Now I think it’s fairly obvious that if the economics for the 
industry change, you may very well find them back into an 
affirmative action program. I don’t know that you would find it 
being registered with the Human Rights Commission, but they 
may very well make a concerted effort to ensure that women, 
along with minorities, in fact, are hired within the corporation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well it’s a typical Conservative . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, I ask leave to introduce some 
guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well it’s a great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for me 
to introduce these 28 people from across Canada — six 
provinces represented here today, Mr. Chairman. New 
Brunswick is represented, and the gentleman from New 
Brunswick is 90 years of age. They’re here from Ontario, 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, B.C., and Alberta. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Speaker, are a group of people 
involved in the Elder Hostel program of Canada. And what that 
means is, is that elder hostels’ premise is very simple. Most 
retired people are active both intellectually and physically and 
ready for new challenges, and anyone 60 years of age and older 
is eligible for the programs. And the programs will last 
approximately one week. And there are various kinds of 
programs. 
 
This group, Mr. Chairman, is currently staying out at Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and they’re studying history of Saskatchewan, 
primarily the geological structure of Saskatchewan, and in 
particular, the geology of the Qu’Appelle Valley, which is most 
interesting. 
 
And of course that will tie in with the fur trade, which goes 
back over 200 years — Simon Fraser, etc., and it would involve 
Mackenzie and all the rest of them. And I’m sure that the 
people from outside of this province are finding it terribly 
interesting, because we in this province are extremely proud of 
our province, and I hope you have an opportunity to see more 
than just the Qu’Appelle Valley area. 
 
At any rate, it’s my pleasure to welcome you to the House. And 
what you see going on here this evening is we’re really just 
reviewing the budget, and members of the opposition are 
quizzing the Minister of Energy and Mines, the Hon. Pat Smith, 
about her particular department, that is Energy and Mines, and 
asking questions related to the budget, etc., etc. 
 
The Speaker is not in his chair, but however, Mr. Toth, who is 
the MLA from Moosomin, is presiding over this process this 
evening. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And doing a good job. 
 
Mr. Martin: — And doing a good job, too, I might add. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1870 
 
 

So I ask all members, please, to . . . Thank you for allowing me 
to introduce, and please welcome our guests, not only from 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are you 60? You 
want to join the club. You’re 60 years of age and older? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I thought you might mention me as well. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Oh, okay. 
 
Anyway . . . Well the member from Prince Albert will have his 
chance to become part of Elder Hostel when he gets to be 60 
years of age, and he’s working towards it now. 
 
At any rate, please welcome our guests, our guests in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to join with the 
government member from Regina Wascana in welcoming our 
visitors this evening. We are very pleased to see you here this 
evening. There’s a significant number of people living in 
Saskatchewan who are age 60 years and older, and many of 
them have been to this Assembly as well, but I’d like to, on 
behalf of the opposition, provide you with a very warm 
welcome, too. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The member is also correct in the sense that 
we are in the process of what we call estimates, which is 
reviewing the budgetary expenditures on a line-by-line basis of 
the government departments. We have a very interesting 
evening so far, and I thank the member for complimenting me 
on what I’ve been doing tonight. 
 
I haven’t been as successful as I’d like, however, with regard to 
getting some answers. The minister has been a little more 
co-operative, however, since . . . in comparison to the previous 
day. 
 
(2015) 
 
Madam Minister, I want to raise some questions in relation to 
the Husky Oil upgrader in Lloydminster. I’ve got a number of 
questions I want to raise with you, and I’d prefer to do it in 
estimates tonight as opposed to a letter. But I’d like you to just 
give us some information in relation to the financial 
commitments. And I suppose what I’m looking for is some 
rationalization of this project of the government. 
 
We have seen the government opposite, over the last six or 
seven years, work very actively in selling off the assets  

of the people of this province. They have been privatizing or 
selling off Crown corporations at fire sale prices to your friends 
outside of the province. Your philosophy has been, and I quote 
one Deputy Premier in the Crown Corporations Committee 
meeting of February 5, 1988, the objective of your government 
is to sell off as much of the government’s assets and as many of 
the government Crown corporations as possible so that when 
the NDP get back into power we’ll never, ever be able to 
retrieve them. 
 
You’ve gone on record on a number of occasions . . . You’ve 
got a ministry in charge of selling off the assets of this province, 
the Minister of Public Participation. Yet on this upgrader deal in 
Lloydminster, after eight announcements — political 
announcements in co-operation with the federal Conservative 
government, the Alberta Conservative government, and your 
government, the eighth announcement last fall leading up to the 
federal election campaign — you said that no, all of our 
philosophy is out the window with regard to selling off the 
assets and privatization. And what we’re going to do is, we’re 
going to sink in $222 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
dollars in a minority position in this corporation. 
 
And I want to know from you, Minister, why you went off and 
turned your — just within a matter of months — your 
philosophy around on its ear; and secondly, why you went from 
a loan guarantee philosophy — that is guaranteeing loans of this 
heavy oil upgrader — to one which was equity, which is a 
commitment of cash of $222 million. Can you explain those 
two things please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, indeed the member is 
right in terms of the length of time. I don’t know if I actually 
counted how many times we thought the Lloydminster upgrader 
was a go, but I know that it felt like a lot through all of the 
negotiations. And actually if you look at the history of it, I 
guess it was going on a long time before I ever got involved 
with it. There’s no doubt that they were frustrating, and the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster can attest to that, as he 
had the opportunity to sit in on many meetings with myself and 
the federal government and the Alberta government. 
 
You know, philosophy doesn’t have a whole lot to do with what 
you’re talking about. If you make a commitment that you, in 
fact, are going to develop and diversify in Saskatchewan, you’re 
going to have a hard time doing that if you are dug in to one 
philosophy or another. The real world out there accepts that 
there are various players within the economy, from the private 
sector to the public sector, joint ventures, partnerships, and 
various relationships. 
 
We did, in effect, a joint venture with the co-op people over at 
the Co-op refinery on NewGrade upgrader, an arrangement 
somewhat different than what we did in Lloydminster. The 
federal government was also involved with that. We didn’t have 
another provincial government that we had to deal with, but 
there was certainly another government. 
 
I think we’ve said right from the outset that as a government we 
believed in a mixed economy and  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1871 
 
 

government should, in fact, facilitate that if they can, if it’s wise 
that they do that, and if it can’t take place any other way. 
 
We also, in looking at the issue of another upgrader up in that 
north-west corner, took into account the long-term resource of 
heavy oil, the difficulties in the development of it, and one more 
factor came into play. We were simply tired of shipping all the 
jobs on the processing end down the pipeline either to the South 
or to the East. 
 
For a change, we wanted the opportunity to see some of those 
processing jobs stay at home, processing to do with some of our 
raw commodities. And this gives us an opportunity to do that. 
Now why did we look at an equity position rather than loans? 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that’s true. I believe the 
first package that was on the table some months before the final 
negotiation session was one of loan guarantees, and quite 
frankly we could not come to an arrangement within the four — 
Husky, Alberta government, federal government, and the 
Saskatchewan government — one that was suitable to all on a 
loan position. 
 
So we looked at other options. And the equity position was one 
of those options, and we moved with that. And as a 
consequence, a final agreement was reached, and today the 
groundwork is going on for the Lloydminster upgrader. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, this is a very 
significant turn of events with regard to your economic 
initiatives, and one has to question the motives of which this 
decision was based. 
 
What I want to read to you this evening, it’s just an excerpt 
from the Leader-Post, Saturday, September 3, l988. And it says 
here, and I quote: 
 

 So the Husky heavy oil upgrader is being announced again. 
When’s the election? 
 

From a well-known newspaper columnist. And I continue on 
from quoting in the newspaper: 
 

It’s easy to be cynical about the much announced, often 
delayed Lloydminster upgrader. When a project gets 
announced eight times in four years, people are bound to 
get cynical. The project has undergone a metamorphosis of 
its own, with the price tag gradually shrinking from a 
full-blown $3.5 billion in the mid-1980s down to a svelte 
$1.3 billion by 1988. 
 
The only constant has been Husky president Art Price who 
attends press conference after press conference to 
announce a project that seemed destined to produce more 
paper than oil. And of course we’re supposed to believe 
this is the real thing this time. 
 

And it goes on to talk about megaprojects and so on. And it 
talks about Bill McKnight, the minister responsible for western 
diversification, whose riding the project will be located in; and 
it talks about the Deputy Prime Minister’s riding who is 
adjoining Mr. McKnight’s, Don  

Mazankowski’s in Alberta. 
 
I think what we’ve seen is a project that was put together very 
quickly, at the last moment. You know it was announced seven 
or eight times. And I want to ask the minister if you can table 
this evening the feasibility study which was done which showed 
that this project would go on the basis of the financing that you 
have resolved to proceed with. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Briefly, Mr. Chairman, just a comment 
on the editorial that the member was reading. I recall that 
editorial. I suppose as editors go they have their perspective, 
and their viewpoint, and write accordingly. I think what the 
member must remember: when, in fact, that announcement in 
September took place that we had the actual signing of a joint 
venture agreement. Previous to that, on occasion, they came to 
an agreement in principle and for one reason or another the 
agreements in principle did not fly. Whether the economic 
conditions changed, whether one partner within the negotiations 
. . . their, perhaps, economic conditions changed, I don’t know. 
I don’t recall all of the circumstances of the various agreements 
that were looked at. 
 
But I do know that, in fact, they did change over the course of 
time during the negotiation. But the September one, and it is 
key to remember that, in fact, the actual joint venture agreement 
— the final document — was signed. There was no agreement 
in principle signed two weeks . . . or announced two weeks 
before that. We waited until the actual joint venture agreement. 
 
The feasibility study, I don’t have that and, in fact, because 
there are four partners in on this, I would think that there would 
have to be permission and agreement by all four to in fact table 
such a document. But I simply cannot do that tonight. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Have you undertaken to do a feasibility study 
prior to the signing of the agreement? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we in fact did 
evaluate the . . . I guess one might say the prudence of the 
investment, and at that time it was concluded that in fact we 
would go ahead with it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The minister said that you did a feasibility 
study, and that the feasibility study showed that you should 
proceed? Is that what you said? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, what I said was we did an evaluation 
on the investment and the prudence of it, from want of a better 
term, and concluded after doing that evaluation that in fact it 
would be a good investment. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’ve decided to invest taxpayers’ 
money. Could you perhaps tell us where you were going to get 
$222 million to invest when your operating budget is at $4 
billion? It has gone from a surplus of about $155 million in 
1982 to over $4 billion in operating now, in debt, operating debt 
of $4 billion and a Crown corporation debt of over $8 billion. 
Where were you going to get this $222 million, Madam 
Minister, and how much were you going to pay for it? 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1872 
 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I already stated that the 
evaluation we did was on the investment, and the conclusion on 
that was that, in fact, it would be commercially viable. 
 
Now I think the member must look at some of the other 
spin-offs that come with the Lloydminster upgrader. Jobs is one 
of them, obviously a very big one — not only temporary while 
construction is going on. And as the member will know from 
living in Regina and watching the NewGrade upgrader go up, 
you’re looking at about three to four . . . three to five years of 
construction work and a lot of jobs. There’s also over 300 
permanent jobs that will go with that structure in Lloydminster. 
 
You have the development of the feedstock that will be required 
for the Lloydminster upgrader. That takes in a lot of jobs, and 
over, I might add, a very long period of time. 
 
You have the indirect spin-offs that will come from that in a 
community like Lloydminster and some smaller surrounding 
towns: restaurants, hotels, clothing stores, real estate, homes, 
taxation levels for R.M.s and the town councils and the 
Lloydminster city council. So the spin-offs indeed are very 
large. In fact, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s estimated that about $6 
billion will be spent over the lifetime of that project on things 
like salary and equipment and other factors. So it’s not a small 
project. 
 
(2030) 
 
Saskatchewan has a 17.5 per cent share in the upgrader, which 
is $222 million. And I suppose one could take the view that the 
member has, because one is in debt, that one should not be 
looking down the road at the future for this province. But we 
don’t look at it that way. 
 
We believe that in fact this is a long-term investment, and 
including 20, 25, years from now. It’s the development of our 
heavy oil resources; it’s jobs for our people; it’s revenues for 
our communities, the development of those communities, very 
much people-orientated, as opposed to looking at the debt on a 
Crown. The dollars, this will be through Crown Management 
Board as are other large investments. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, you said you did an 
evaluation on the investment and the investment looked good. 
I’m asking you again: where are you going to get the $222 
million to invest, considering the fact you’ve got a deficit, an 
operating deficit of $4 billion and a Crown corporation capital 
debt of $8 billion? 
 
Can you tell us where are you going to get the money, number 
one; and number two, where is the evaluation? Was this an 
evaluation based on various business interests or was it based 
on the timing of the federal election campaign, ergo political 
evaluation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the evaluation was based on a 
number of factors. I’ve already . . . Well which question do you 
want answered first? You want both. Well let me answer the 
one that I started out with and then we’ll get to the latter 
question. All right, we agree on that. 
 
Now I forgot what the question was. Where did we get the  

money? I’ve already told him that the money, the payments, 
come through Crown management. And the investments and the 
borrowing of those dollars — listen now — work no differently 
than what they used to when you called it . . . What did you call 
it? Crown investment, I think, previous to 1982. 
 
It’s a long-term, it’s a long-term project, Mr. Chairman, and 
will be treated as such. And the borrowing of it will be done 
through Crown management. I hope that answers the member’s 
question. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well not quite, Madam Minister. The name 
of the corporation is actually the Crown investments 
corporation. Whenever you want to invest some borrowed 
money of the taxpayers . . . or borrowed money the taxpayers 
would be on the hook for, you call it the Crown investments 
corporation. Whenever you figure you can try and manage the 
corporation, you call it the Crown Management Board. 
 
Legally it’s still called CIC, Crown investments corporation. 
And I think if you want to change it legally to Crown 
Management Board you’d have to do a lot of marketing and 
selling on the fact that you could manage anything, because you 
can’t. I mean that’s been proven time after time with Saskoil 
and Sask Minerals and SGI and the potash corporation, and so 
on. 
 
You told us you’re going to get $222 million from the Crown 
Management Board/CIC. You have an $8 billion Crown 
corporation capital debt that they’re responsible for already. It 
seems to me you’re going to get this money probably at 12 or 
14 per cent interest per year. You’re giving it into the Husky 
upgrader project interest free because it’s an equity purchase. 
 
I’m wanting to know if you could table the evaluation that you 
did. I’d like to know what kind of break-even-point analysis 
that was done on this project to make you conclude, as you’ve 
said, that this evaluation pointed very clearly that it was going 
to be an investment worthwhile investing in for the return on 
the investment. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already indicated that 
I cannot table that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Why not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe the member was in this House 
when we got into some questions regarding the NewGrade or 
the Co-op upgrader. And I cannot table those documents 
because they contain confidential, commercial information, and 
to lay out that commercial information would put the upgrader 
in somewhat of a sensitive position, more so than its 
competitors. And I cannot do that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, I don’t think that 
argument washes. You’ve told this House tonight that you’ve 
done an evaluation. You’re saying it was based on some kind of 
risk analysis, but I think it’s political risk analysis in my view. I 
think that’s generally conceded by everybody who’s looked at 
this project, outside of the three partners . . . or the four 
partners. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1873 
 
 

And I want the minister now to, since you’re not going to 
proceed in tabling that, I’d like to know if you can table a 
censored copy of the document which would show, at least, 
what kind of rate of return we’re going to have on our 
investment, and when you believe and your officials believe 
we’re going to get our investment back, if at all. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don’t recall stating to the member that, 
in fact, there was . . . that I talked about a risk factor. I may 
have. However, it escapes me for now that I did, if in fact I did. 
 
When we did the evaluation, I think the key components that 
come into it, one is obviously the cost of construction and, 
given interest rates, how long it will take to pay off. And of 
course all of that is based on the price of oil, what it costs for 
feedstock, plus some other, I guess I would call them minor — 
they’re probably minor — but certainly figures that would come 
into play in looking at that evaluation. 
 
In terms of the rate of return, I will tell you tonight that the 
differential that is required for this upgrader to at least break 
even would be about $4 U.S. I believe once you are up close to 
that $5 mark, then you are looking at a reasonable rate of return 
on it. But it’s $4 U.S. for the differential. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you won’t tell the people of this province 
what you based your evaluation on with respect to this 
investment. I want now, Minister, to go to the . . . some 
percentages and some equity positions in the joint venture 
agreement. 
 
The project makes little sense when you look at it in terms of 
the Saskatchewan side for the people of this province. For our 
27 per cent contribution to the heavy oil upgrader . . . I’m sorry, 
for Husky Oil’s 27 per cent contribution — they contribute 27 
per cent — they get approximately 54 per cent of all the 
revenue. They put up 27, they get about 54, and I may be off by 
one or two points, however that’s generally accepted in the 
agreement here. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are contributing 17 per cent of the 
equity — actually 17.5 — and we’re getting only 10 per cent of 
the revenue after the upgrader . . . the Husky people realize a 
return of 10 per cent on its investment. So in essence, we’ve put 
up 17 and a-half per cent, we’re getting 10 per cent of the 
profits, and that will remain in effect until Husky Oil realizes a 
return of 10 per cent on its investment. And given current 
conditions and the volatility of the oil prices, that could be some 
time before we get our investment. 
 
Can the minister explain how this kind of a deal is going to be 
good for Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, some of the benefits 
to Saskatchewan on the Lloydminster upgrader, and let me 
begin with again, very clearly for the member, you are looking 
at over 5,000 jobs — 5,000 jobs, mister, people — of direct 
employment during the construction of the upgrader. That’s not 
for one year or a year and a half . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — When’s it going to start? 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the member from Athabasca says, 
when’s it going to start? If he would go to Lloydminster I 
would be pleased . . . He can go up with me next week; I’m 
going up. And in fact the land has been cleared and some of the 
contracts have been tendered and in fact bid upon and let out for 
the beginning of the project. All he has to do is read. Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix covers it and so does the Lloydminster paper. I 
would be surprised if Meadow Lake didn’t either. 
 
Mr. Chairman, back to the benefits for Saskatchewan. We’ve 
got well over 5,000 jobs, direct jobs, during the construction 
period. We’ve got over 300 permanent jobs to go with the 
upgrader upon its completion. We’ve got at least 1,500 
permanent jobs that are created as related production facilities 
are developed to supply the feedstock for the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that works out to about 7,200 jobs across 
Canada. And why I say across Canada, I think there was a 
recognition that in fact some of the engineering equipment, that 
type of thing, would probably be outside of the province of 
Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
 
We are looking at a further $2.5 billion, over and above the cost 
of the 1.2 for the construction of the upgrader, that will be spent 
over the 25 years to operate, just to operate the upgrader, Mr. 
Chairman. And once again, that will total, over the lifetime of 
this particular project, everything included, including the 
development of the feed stock, the development of the heavy oil 
fields around Lloydminster, you’re looking at a $6 billion 
project. 
 
Now I know it’s over 25 years, but I stated earlier, you had to 
look at it on the long term. And I think on the long term you 
can’t argue with the benefits of that project. I mean, it’s pretty 
hard to even argue with them on the short term — the 
construction jobs and the engineering jobs alone that go with it. 
 
Saskatchewan, I think, has placed itself fairly well to move 
some of the jobs that were, in fact, in Regina out at the Co-op 
upgrader over to Lloydminster. I would suggest to the member 
that, in fact, Alberta is somewhat worried that they will not see 
their fair share of some of those jobs when it gets into the 
construction period because of the workers moving from 
Regina to Lloydminster, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So the benefits, over and above what I’ve given the member, I 
think he only has to look at what happens when you diversify 
and in fact when you develop a raw product and you begin to 
process it at home. 
 
Indirectly, for the community of Lloydminster and around it, 
the spin-offs are many, from revenue within the community, 
taxation, and on down the line. So the spin-offs are extensive 
and the benefits also, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, I think I heard you 
say 5,000 construction jobs. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It says person-years, and it’s five point 
eight thousand. Person-years, I just said over 5,000. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1874 
 
 

Mr. Solomon: — What I’ve got is, Madam Minister, is a 
Lloydminster newspaper, actually Star-Phoenix report of May 
17, ’89. The title is: “Husky Oil upgrader breaks ground — 
official.” 
 

Last week Husky started on-site stripping of top soil, and 
construction will begin before the end of this month, Mr. 
Ferris said. 
 

He is the vice-president of Husky Oil. 
 

At peak construction 2,750 people will be working on the 
site. Once on stream the upgrader will be operated by 280 
workers and they’ll create another 150 spin-off jobs. 
 

So it won’t quite get the 7,000 like you say; maybe 2,750 at 
peak construction. But none the less, Madam Minister, what I 
want to know is, you’ve sunk in $225 million in equity on a 
project that is contrary to your philosophy. The Premier of this 
province on the front page of the Leader-Post on September 3, 
1988, said, and I quote: 
 

“I don’t want any of it,” he said. “If it had all been done by 
the private sector, then fine, but it wasn’t.” 
 

(2045) 
 
He goes in here reluctantly. The headline is not Lloydminster 
upgrader for Lloydminster; instead it’s, the headline reads, and I 
quote, “Devine eager to sell province’s share of upgrader.” Well 
he’s trying to sell it before it’s even built. 
 
And I’m curious to know, Madam Minister, having said all 
those things, what kind of assurances do you have as a result of 
this investment, in writing, what kind of guarantees do you have 
that will ensure that we get our fair share of Saskatchewan 
people working there, and that we get our fair share of the 
purchases made in relation to that construction of services and 
products and supplies from Saskatchewan suppliers? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, just a clarification on the 
over 5,000 job figure that I used. That over 5,000 is directly out 
of the Husky figures that they have put out to contractors and 
the community and the media. And I think the one that you 
were reading is the 2,000 at peak. But don’t forget this project 
will be about four years, and over the course of those four years 
you’re looking at over 5,000 jobs. 
 
What have we got in place to ensure that we get a fair share in 
terms of the job benefits, Mr. Chairman? We in fact did come to 
an agreement with Alberta and Husky that we would have a 
memorandum of understanding on the industrial benefits, and 
that lays out the objectives of both provinces, including the 
Government of Canada, because they are contributing. And we 
will be meeting at various times to monitor and to ensure that 
each province is getting its fair share. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So what you’re saying is you have nothing in 
writing that guarantees our fair share. You’re  

saying you’re going to meet and you’re going to talk about it 
and you’re going to ensure that maybe, maybe we will. 
 
The industrial benefits policy and manpower plan that you have 
in your joint venture agreement do not indicate a rigid formula 
prescribing a required level of content or employment from 
either the province or from Canada. The only statement is that 
project requirements will be sourced equitably. 
 
And I’d like you, Minister, now, in relation to this statement, to 
explain what assurances Saskatchewan companies have in 
providing goods and services to this project. And I might add 
that about $120 million in engineering contracts have already 
been awarded, all of them to Calgary-based firms. Only one 
contract was awarded to a joint venture of Bantrel of Calgary 
and Kilborn of Saskatoon. 
 
Could you explain what assurances . . . you’ve mentioned 
meeting and having some equitable formulas derived. Is there 
something hard and fast? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
obviously wasn’t listening. I said we had a signed agreement, 
and it is a memorandum of understanding on the industrial 
benefits, signed by both Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
 
Now he wants to know what formula is within this 
memorandum of understanding. It does not have a cut and dried 
formula as you have put forth, and for a very good reason. First 
of all, if you require something within the upgrader, and let’s 
use the example that it was 50 per cent cut and dried, Alberta 
versus Saskatchewan, and you were looking at something like 
pressurized welding, we might not be able to supply the 50 per 
cent content. Alberta can. 
 
On the other hand, there may very well be a service or a product 
that we can supply 60 per cent of, or 100 per cent. So it is not 
cut and dried, 50-50. 
 
The board of directors has laid out a policy statement and their 
objectives, and it is one that states both provinces will see their 
fair share, as we’re calling it here tonight, and that is also what 
the agreement states. 
 
When I talked about discussion, I said that we would be 
meeting on a regular basis as a monitoring device to discuss, 
update ourselves, be able to ask questions — are we in fact 
getting our fair share of contracts according to where the 
expertise is. And that will indeed take place. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, when will the payments of 
the $222 million take place? Are they made in sequence, on 
demand? How much has already been made in terms of the 
payment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don’t know if I can answer the member 
specifically tonight, but I believe they are advanced by all 
partners in proportion as required. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Would you be able to tell us, either tonight or 
some other time by letter, the amounts that have been advanced 
from Saskatchewan and the timing  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1875 
 
 

of the payments and roughly when the final payment will be 
made — just a sequence of events. I would appreciate that. 
 
I want to turn now, Madam Minister, to a question regarding 
environmental impacts. I have a newspaper article here from the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald, May 17, 1989, and the title of the 
story is, “Too late to worry now about megaprojects.” And it’s 
date-lined Ottawa, Canada Press. And I quote: 
 

It’s too late to reconsider the environmental consequences 
of Canada’s energy megaprojects even though construction 
hasn’t begun, says Environment Minister Lucien 
Bouchard. 
 
“The government has made the decisions,” Bouchard told 
the Commons environment committee Tuesday. 
 
“Those are commitments and they will be implemented. I 
must deal with the present and the future.” 
 

And also in the article it says, 
 

Environmentalists say that Ottawa is promoting 
consumption of fossil fuel is by subsidizing large oil 
projects. They also say there have not been adequate 
environmental reviews of the megaprojects, which are to 
receive more than $5 billion in federal grants and 
guaranteed loans. 
 

I want to ask the minister tonight whether there’s been any 
environmental impact studies done on this project. And in 
particular, since we’ve seen the government’s handling of the 
Rafferty problem — you seem to have misplaced the law or 
broke the law on that one, and that was determined by the 
federal courts of Canada — I want to know, have you done a 
job like this at Lloydminster, or have you done the job you’re 
supposed to do with regard to environmental impacts on the 
project? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe a full environmental impact 
assessment and statement was done and approved through the 
Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re saying that, to your knowledge, the 
EIS (environmental impact study) has been done on the project 
— both federally and provincially, both Alberta and 
Saskatchewan and Canada? 
 
Okay. The minister nods in the affirmative. 
 
My question that I have to you now is more of a general one. I 
want to know what your thoughts are with regard to the 
Premier’s comments. He said he’d rather not be involved in this 
project; that the Conservative government does not want to get 
involved with these projects. Yet they happened to be involved 
in them whenever there’s an election around and they want to 
help re-elect their cousins in Ottawa. 
 
But since no private sector investors could be found to 
participate in the original upgrader deal, do you expect  

any different response from individual investors when the time 
comes to sell off your interests; and what imaginative 
privatization proposal will need to be put together on this one? 
Could you describe it for us? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, that’s all rather 
hypothetical. But I would suggest to the member that you might 
perhaps want to treat this like a utility. There’s gas line utilities; 
there’s electrical utilities; there’s various kinds of utilities. If 
you did, you might very well put it out for a public share 
offering. It might be based on bonds. There’s various 
mechanisms that one could do with it, if in fact the government 
wanted to move out and the time was right and, in fact, the 
public was interested. I can’t give him one option or another. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, one other question quickly. 
For our $222 million investment, the numbers in an article 
entitled, “Just in time”, state that you will . . . that we will 
receive, as a province, approximately 28 per cent of the 
upgrader expenditures and 36 per cent of the feedstock 
development and operation expenditures. In comparison, 
Alberta for $306 million will receive 58 per cent of the 
upgrader development. So they’ve got a little tiny more 
proportion than we do, yet they’re going to receive, not 28 per 
cent, but 58 per cent of the upgrader development and operation 
expenditures. And they’ll be supplying, not 36 per cent of the 
feedstock, but 52 per cent. I was wondering if those numbers 
coincide with your letter of agreement, or are these different 
numbers? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — You’re right. The member from Quill 
Lake for a change is right. I’m not aware of the article. I don’t 
know where the figures are from or, in fact, what the analysis of 
it is based on. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can you share with us the percentages that 
you have in relation to the equity that we have in comparative 
terms to Alberta? Do you have those handy? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The feedstock arrangement that is 
included in the joint venture agreement very clearly sets out the 
50/50 — 50 for Saskatchewan and 50 for Alberta. And that is in 
the joint venture agreement as it relates to the feedstock 
arrangements. 
 
I find it odd as to where this article got its information. They 
talk about the field development and the majority of it going to 
Alberta. That simply isn’t realistic, nor will that happen, and for 
this reason: Alberta’s heavy oil close to that area has been 
developed for some time. It is the heavy oil on the 
Saskatchewan side that will need the development, not on the 
Alberta side. So I’m not sure where . . . what kind of 
background information the person was using in writing the 
article. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well that wasn’t my question. My question 
was related to the shares in the comparative expenditures and 
feedstock supply in each province. 
 
Madam Minister, you gave a speech at the IPAC (Independent 
Petroleum Association of Canada) board of directors dinner on 
February 15, and it was a key-note address to the oil people in 
the Independent Petroleum Association of Canada. 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1876 
 
 

And your assistant deputy minister as well gave a similar 
speech to the energy conference in Saskatoon which I attended. 
And the three key words in the 1990s, you were quoted as 
saying, because your speech dealt with the next 10 years in 
Saskatchewan, the three key words in the 1990s, and I quote to 
you, Madam Minister, are: environment, environment, 
environment. 
 
And I want to know, Madam Minister, how will the 
environmental concerns of your department be incorporated, or 
the environmental concerns of your speech be incorporated with 
the oil operations in Saskatchewan? And I want to know how 
those comments square with what has been happening with the 
Co-op refinery. And thirdly, I want to know whether you’re 
going to be able to prevent some of these things from happening 
at the Lloydminster upgrader. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, let me deal with the last 
one first. 
 
As it relates to the Co-op refinery or the upgrader, and the 
Lloydminster upgrader when it comes on stream, I think it is 
very normal that you will see new upgraders go through the first 
year or so having some start up problems. I think perhaps the 
Co-op refinery has had a few more problems than what you 
would find with, for example, the upgrader in Lloydminster. 
This is an integrated project onto a refinery that was already 
there which had compounded some of their start up problems to 
do with equipment and that type of thing. 
 
As it relates to the environment, when we talk about oil and gas 
development, and mining for that matter, whether it’s gold or 
coal or uranium, there’s obviously some disturbances within the 
physical environment as that activity takes place. But I think it 
is apparent, very apparent within the oil and gas industry that 
indeed environment, no matter how you define it, is going to 
play a bigger and bigger role on some of the decisions that the 
oil and gas companies make. Some of it has to do with 
technology — technology changing very rapidly that will 
change some of the ways that they normally do their 
exploration work. 
 
I believe you were there that evening and I had talked about the 
onset of horizontal well drilling. That is very good for the 
environment because you will replace about five conventionally 
drilled wells with one horizontal well. So that tells you 
something about the physical environment that it will take place 
in and there will not be those disturbances. And of course, with 
that you also reduce the risk of spills of salt water, waste 
materials, that type of thing. That’s just one example. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not proven . . . 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, you say that’s unproven. I would 
suggest to you, given the record today of the horizontal wells in 
Saskatchewan, and I will use the Sceptre Murphy project as an 
example because it is very successful. They have done 
extremely well with it and that technology can be passed on to 
other companies. 

There’s heavy oil, and heavy oil on the average we pump 
maybe 15 barrels a day — maybe — out of the average well 
that produces heavy oil. Now the project for Sceptre Murphy, 
they are looking at about 1,000 barrels a day. So I think that the 
worth of the project is going to speak for itself. 
 
I think some of the other issues that will eventually affect 
decisions to do with oil and gas. Obviously at the refinery end 
you will continue to be required to meet public demand in terms 
of things like leaded gasoline. There will be issues that will stay 
with us such as the greenhouse effect, coal, the mining of coal, 
that in turn presents some interesting options and challenges for 
not only the oil and gas industry but indeed the mining industry 
as well. 
 
So in terms of development, I think that the education process 
and the concern from people — more to do, I guess, with the 
changing climate than anything else — has certainly raised the 
issue of environment, including on the minds of the people that 
do the actual exploration of the oil and gas. I find in discussions 
with them that in fact most of them — I wouldn’t go so far as to 
say all of them — but I will say most of them that come into 
this province are very aware that environment is a concern and 
there are guide-lines to be followed and that they must adhere to 
them. 
 
I think many of the companies that lay out a very active drilling 
program go so far, even if it is not in a sensitive area such as the 
Great Sand Hills — go so far as to lay out an environment 
strategy plan for people that will be doing work with them. And 
I think as we move along through the next couple of years, you 
will find most oil and gas companies will follow that lead. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, I have a newspaper report 
entitled: “Alberta energy industry upset with new tax.” And it 
states that: 
 

 Alberta’s energy industry is expecting to pay an extra $25 
million a year to Ottawa, thanks to a little-noticed wrinkle in 
Finance minister Michael Wilson’s new budget. As of 
January 1, 1990, the National Energy Board has been ordered 
to levy fees on the industry it regulates to recover the full cost 
of its annual operating budget. 
 

I’m wondering if the minister is aware of this, first of all, 
happening, and secondly, whether your department will be 
giving some consideration to levying a new energy tax in this 
province on the pipeline companies and others who operate to 
pay for the full amount of the cost of operating the ministry of 
Energy and Mines. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe this tax that you’re talking about 
is not yet in place. In fact, I think it’s in first reading, with some 
changes . . . legislation in the House of Commons. 
 
I think you were asking if the Saskatchewan Department of 
Energy and Mines is going to implement a tax that the pipeline 
companies would then pay for the cost of operating the 
Department of Energy and Mines. Is that . . . Have I got that 
right? 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1877 
 
 

Mr. Solomon: — The annual charges will be about $13 million 
on natural gas pipeline firms. Another 10 million will be raised 
from oil pipelines, and electricity companies will pay about $2 
million. But Alberta exploration and production firms will wind 
up paying the bill because the pipelines are expected to pass 
them on with increased shipping tolls. 
 
So it’s really the transportation, but they’ll be looking at raising 
about $25 million on that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well we are not looking at a tax that 
would pay the full recovery costs for the operation of the 
Department of Energy and Mines. I think what you are looking 
at in terms of the National Energy Board, that’s much different 
than the federal department of Energy, Mines and Resources, 
and that will still be operating. 
 
I know that the National Energy Board has had a fair number of 
hearings, probably more than what many of them would like to 
sit through, but nevertheless, they’ve served a purpose. And I 
suspect that’s one of the reasons that they’ve looked at that tax, 
has been the additional cost of the public hearings and that type 
of thing, and, I suppose, an economic measure in terms of 
tightening up their own budget and their own expenditures. 
 
The issue of who’s paying and the impact on our own industry 
closer to home is one that should be of concern for everyone. 
That is not to take away the concern that should be there in 
terms of the federal deficit, but I think you have to take a very 
hard look at the impact that it does have on Saskatchewan. It’s 
one of the many issues that I will be raising with Mr. Jake Epp, 
and I meet with him tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, I want to know what 
obligations the Government of Saskatchewan will have in the 
Husky-Lloydminster upgrader in the event the operation loses 
money. We are now equity partners to the tune of $222 million, 
we own 17.5 per cent of the operation, and we’re getting a very 
poor deal when it comes to return on investment. 
 
But I want to know, Madam Minister, what kind of contingency 
plans do you have in place if the corporation loses money? 
What kind of extra cost to the taxpayer will this operation be in 
terms of direct grants as an equity partner in the event the thing 
loses $50 million a year or $100 million a year? Can you give 
us some idea what taxpayers can expect in terms of additional 
grants to this corporation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What, are you hoping it’s going to lose? 
Got your fingers crossed this thing’s going to lose money? Yes. 
This isn’t going to lose money, Mr. Chairman. You know, I 
indicated the differential. The differential will be about $4 U.S. 
Well, he says, it’ll be the first one. You know, how’s the Co-op 
upgrader doing? 
 
The differential required on the Co-op upgrader . . . It’s 
operating, it’s not losing as you suggest, four years before it’s 
even up and running, that the Lloydminster upgrader will. Mr. 
Chairman, it is a viable project, and when it’s up and running 
the . . . it will tell so. 

Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, you say it’s a viable 
project. You won’t table any break even point analysis. You 
won’t table any evaluation. You say it’s a break even project. 
The federal Minister of Energy, Marcel Masse, in his own paper 
authored by the federal government, called “Energy Options,” 
said the project is not viable. He said it’s not viable unless you 
fork over the tens of millions of dollars, the hundreds of 
millions of dollars that the provincial governments and the 
federal government has. 
 
Husky Oil has put in a very small amount of the money. 
They’re going to be getting 54 per cent of the corporation. The 
people of this province are putting up the risk capital and not 
getting anything in return, and you call that a good investment. 
Well you should be ashamed of yourself. It’s even a worse 
investment when you look at even in comparative terms to 
Saskoil. You say Saskoil’s a good investment. It’s doing great 
guns for Saskatchewan. 
 
The problem you overlook is that you’ve given away 35 per 
cent of the company for nothing and you’ve diluted the control 
of the corporation, you’ve diluted the number of shares that the 
government holds. You go along with the president of the Sask 
Oil and Gas Corporation’s request to take over the company. 
He’s now in control of the operation. He’s got shareholders 
around this country with 1.4 per cent of the shares outstanding 
in private hands in Saskatchewan hands. The other 98.6 per cent 
are owned by people outside of this province. 
 
And in my view, Madam Minister, you’ve botched the deal. 
You botched the deal with Saskoil. You’ve botched the deal 
when it comes to protecting the taxpayers’ dollars on that one. 
And now you’re refusing to table feasibility studies and break 
even point analyses and evaluations which, you’ve said yourself 
in his House, prove that it’s going to be a good investment. Yet 
you have to borrow $222 million at higher rates after your 
Crown corporation capital debt is at 8 billion already. 
 
I don’t know if you’ve been doing something funny here, 
Madam Minister, or you thing we’re all living in wonderland. 
That’s not the case. The problem is, you’re trying to cheat the 
people of this province, in the Saskoil deal, out of control of a 
Crown corporation that has produced revenues and dividends to 
the treasury of this province to subsidize the tax expenditures of 
this government on programs like health care and education and 
even energy and mines. 
 
Madam Minister, I just can’t believe the weakness of your 
operation across the floor there — not just in your government 
but even in your own ministry. You haven’t done the job that 
you should be doing protecting the taxpayers’ dollars in this 
province. You have not been accountable, in my view, to the 
people of this province. 
 
You’re falling in the footsteps of your colleague, the Minister of 
Justice, who has attacked the auditor in a personal nature in this 
House. The auditor has even concluded that the government 
that you are part of broke the law 46 times in 1988 in terms of 
accounting for expenditures. 
 
And we’re seeing again, Madam Minister, a cover-up, in my 
view, of the deal you struck with your Tory partners in  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1878 
 
 

Alberta, your Tory cousins in Canada. And I can tell you that Li 
Ka-Shing and Bob Blair have got a very good deal at the 
expense of your naivety. These people are very astute business 
people. Have no fear, they’ve taken this government, in my 
view, to the cleaners. They’ve let you put up the taxpayers’ 
dollars of $222 million, risk it all, and they get all the gravy. 
 
(2115) 
 
That’s unbelievable, Madam Minister, but certainly consistent, 
certainly consistent with your government’s track record over 
the last number of years. And that’s why, Madam Minister, this 
province is bankrupt. You’ve got $12 billion in debt that you’re 
responsible for now, and you’re saying, well we’ve got enough 
money around to invest in risky projects like this. I think it’s a 
shame, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting to hear the 
member say we botched the deal. You know I think that . . . I 
believe that the negotiations or discussions on an upgrader for 
Husky have been going on something like 13 to 15 years and 
there was never a deal reached — 13 to 15 years. 
 
This member across here from me, Saskatoon Westmount, was 
probably sitting in that chair when some of his own members 
were trying to get a deal for an upgrader. Mr. Chairman, I think 
the success of this government in terms of the development of 
its oil, stands on its own — not one upgrader, but two. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but you know I look at what Husky 
has at risk in here, and they have $338 million at risk, more than 
the Alberta government, more than the Saskatchewan 
government. Yet he stands in his place and he says, we put it all 
in and we’ve been taken to the cleaners. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that four years down the road that this 
member from Regina may very well be wanting to buy a share 
in the Lloydminster upgrader, and that will be the success of it, 
Mr. Member, when in fact that time comes. And you can rest 
assured with the heavy oil in Saskatchewan, and what is 
happening with conventional light oil, that indeed the day will 
come when it will be giving a return far more than that $4 
differential that we talked about that is required to break even. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, I was wondering if you 
could share with the House what this $1,527,600 pertains to. 
You’ve got payments to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation of 1.527 million, which is an increase 
over last year. Could you tell us what those payments are for? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Those charges include rent, 
accommodation, capital repayment. The department is having to 
put in a new mineral filing system, and there’s a  

capital component to that. There are things like photo services 
within the geology branch, records maintenance, and mail 
charges. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 66 

 
Items 4 and 5 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Resources Division 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, . . . talking about this book 
right here. On page 109 there’s nothing on Energy. I’ve got 
Science and Technology. On 107 I’ve got Energy and Mines. 
What year do you have there? Have you got the right year? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I have ’89-90. It’s page 109, Energy and 
Mines. Item 1 agreed? 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Energy Security Division 
Energy and Mines — Vote 63 

Item 1 agreed to. 
Vote 63 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Resources Division 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1879 
 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take 
this opportunity tonight to thank the opposition for their 
patience, and in particular for my critic. I think we had a fairly 
good discussion, despite the fact that he maybe had the wrong 
year on his Estimate books. However, we did make it though. 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank the officials 
from the Department of Energy and Mines that are with us 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to extend a deep, 
heart-felt gratitude to the Minister of Finance for sending me 
about six copies of the old Estimates, and I sure know what we 
did last year, which is probably one step ahead of the 
government. 
 
But I’d like to join with the Minister of Energy and Mines in 
thanking her officials for helping her out because she needed an 
awful lot of help, and they bailed her out a couple of times, but 
there were some occasions where she stuck both feet in her 
mouth and they just couldn’t help her. Thank you very much. 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Beside me is 
Art Wakabayashi, deputy minister of Finance; immediately 
behind me John Wright of the taxation branch, Bill Jones of the 
investment side, and Keith Laxdal the associate deputy 
minister. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year March 31, 1990, the sum of 
$476,798,400 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 

(2130) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I 
wonder if you would begin with a brief explanation of what 
you’re doing. Your amount you’ve provided is neither 
one-twelfth nor two-twelfths, and I wonder if you’d give us an 
explanation as to what you’re doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I apologize to the hon. member. I 
thought that information had been forwarded over to . . . Your 
research people asked for it this afternoon; I gave it to them at 
their request. I just assumed it would be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Given my statement still stands, just 
answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll be pleased to answer it, but if you 
didn’t get the information . . . We did forward it this afternoon 
to the opposition leader’s office, so I thought that was fair. 

School operating grants will be four-twelfths, 87,446,200; 
school constructions will be four-twelfths, 16,911,600; grants to 
libraries will be four-twelfths, 1,373,000. 
 
I can go back on the school operating grants that . . . It’s 
three-twelfths . . . four-twelfths, three-twelfths in excess of the 
one. Funding required for payment of half the appropriation by 
June 30, 1989, and that’s a continuation of the past practice. 
 
The school grants construction funding required for payment of 
half the appropriation, again, I’m advised by past practice. 
Grants to libraries, funding required for payment of one-half the 
appropriation by June 30, as stipulated by the regulations. 
 
Teachers’ pensions will be two-twelfths. Funding to facilitate 
the year-end teachers’ superannuation fund, June 30. Grants for 
rural development will be two-twelfths. 
 
MCIC (medical care insurance commission) will be $7 million; 
$6 million the extra weekly run of payments to the doctors. 
That’s not a ratio of one-twelfth, that’s the amount needed. 
Urban Affairs, urban revenue-sharing: the amount in excess of 
one-twelfth is $19,618,000. Traditionally the first two quarterly 
payments under this program are made on June l and July l of 
the fiscal year. Additional funding has been requested to meet 
that commitment. And the Legislation is $2,940,400 million. 
That’s not a ratio again; that’s the additional amount that’s been 
requested for Legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The obvious question arises, Mr. Minister, 
as to why you didn’t do this earlier, a month earlier. And I think 
the answer’s equally obvious. This was a shoddy attempt to 
pretend to the public that you couldn’t provide funding until the 
bell-ringing motion was disposed of. 
 
Mr. Minister, it was a shoddy game played out at the expense of 
some people who got hurt. I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you have 
a more charitable explanation for your behaviour over the last 
two months, would you give it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well my charitable explanation is that in 
the normal practice, one-twelfth has traditionally been the 
amount that has been given, and that is correct, and as we get 
later in the session that has gone higher. So the fact is, the fact 
is if you hadn’t gone on strike for 17 days, then we could have 
perhaps even been through the estimates by now. So don’t . . . 
You want to get into the debate. I’m prepared to get into the 
debate, but I suggest to the hon. member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you’re going to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — He’s shouting from his chair that, you’re 
going to. Well that’s certainly fair, but let me tell you that we 
could have been through estimates, and the hon. member knows 
that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that is not the normal  
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1880 
 
 

practice, and if you don’t know it, you should. In 1988 it was in 
the May interim supply that you provided 20 per cent of the 
Education budget — 16 per cent of a total budget, Mr. Minister, 
which was intended to cover off the kind of shortages which is 
what occurred. 
 
If you could do it in 1988, Mr. Minister, why couldn’t you do it 
in 1999? The answer is obvious. You didn’t want to do it in 
1999 . . . in 1989, because you felt you could get out from 
underneath a severe problem by claiming the opposition was 
holding up the funding. Will you admit now that that was 
simply a shoddy game played out at the expense of the school 
boards, the municipalities, and some other groups who could ill 
afford your cheap politics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as the public’s made clear to you that 
they can’t afford the walk-outs and the strikes either by 
members that they’ve elected, let me just tell you that in your 
last budget year, when you were government, your June 3 
interim supply was one-twelfth. So let’s not get into that debate. 
 
So I’m suggesting to you that your own past practice had 
one-twelfth in the June payment under interim supply, and 
that’s in the fiscal year 1980-1981, so don’t give me that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Oh, temper, temper, temper, temper, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, in 1981 . . . I know this is beyond belief 
for people who now have to deal with the government, but in 
1981 the budgets came down in the first or second week in 
March. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And these problems had been long since 
dealt with. I say, Mr. Minister, in May you gave . . . last year, in 
1988, in the interim supply in May of 1988 we got 16 per cent 
of the total budget, 20 per cent of the Education budget, 
intended to alleviate the kind of pressures which occurred this 
year. 
 
You could have done it this year, but you were too cheap and 
too shoddy, and what you were attempting to do was to 
convince the public that the bell-ringing motion somehow had 
something to do with the fact that they weren’t getting their 
funding from the provincial government. Will you admit, Mr. 
Minister, it was a shoddy, cheap game that should never have 
occurred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But I’m happy to see the hon. member and 
his language, which is getting the great attention to the public of 
this province, to continue. 
 
Let me just tell the hon. member that in June of 1980-81 fiscal 
year, 1981, your budget, your budget, the NDP budget, you did 
one-twelfth in June — one-twelfth in June. Okay? One-twelfth. 
You had three-twelfths over a period of time before, so 
four-twelfths.  
 
The estimates were finished . . . I don’t know. When was the 
end of the session? Well all I’m saying to you . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. If members want to 
get into the debate and ask questions, they should rise  

and be recognized rather than asking questions from their seat 
because it is not recorded. 
 
I would ask members that want to get into the debate to rise, be 
recognized, and ask their questions when they’re recognized. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What I am 
saying to the hon. member is that in June, in June, when the 
pressures are there, you did one-twelfth. Okay? One-twelfth. So 
you know, if you want to take your argument to the extreme, 
you yourselves were guilty of putting the pressure onto them, if 
that’s your argument. So you did one-twelfth. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I take it from that badly crippled excuse, 
Mr. Minister, that there was no reason why the funding couldn’t 
have come out in May, and it should have. It’s just pure and 
cheap politics. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re going to return to this. Some of my 
colleagues will be returning to this, if not today, then tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to address a more general comment to you, 
Mr. Minister. If there has been a single pattern to this session, it 
has been that the government has stumbled from catastrophe to 
disaster and back to catastrophe again. Mr. Minister, everyone 
has remarked upon it. I assume that you won’t . . . that not even 
someone with your stomach will attempt to deny the disaster 
which has occurred during this session. 
 
But a number of causes of it, but one of the main ones has been 
mismanagement and just very poor administration. Mr. 
Minister, the Provincial Auditor is going to have to start 
bringing out his annual report in several volumes if you don’t 
do something about the problems with waste and 
mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Minister, in many governments the Minister of Finance is 
seen as the minister who’s responsible for the general 
administration of government, the Minister of Finance together 
with the Premier. I therefore, Mr. Minister, want to address 
some general questions to you with respect to the administration 
of this government. One of those general questions is one, Mr. 
Minister, which I am asked everywhere. The question is, why 
won’t you show the Provincial Auditor the books? So let’s start 
with that question. Why are you hiding from the Provincial 
Auditor the facts and the records and the books with respect to 
this government’s administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I understand that the matter is before 
the Public Accounts Committee, and the matter will be dealt 
with in public accounts in terms of bringing in the private sector 
auditors to advise the committee and the public as to whether 
their audits are adequate. I understand the Leader-Post’s Mr. 
Petrie is of the view that it’s not an audit if it’s done by the 
private sector auditors. Obviously he does not understand, 
unfortunately, woefully, the practice. 
 
I do believe that at the time of the debate, the public debate on 
the Provincial Auditor, that it was made clear that throughout 
the report that, in fact, information was  
 
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1881 
 
 

given. For example, I’m advised that in the potash corporation, 
although there was some concern expressed that information 
wasn’t given, that the information was given in exactly the 
same way that it had been given since the potash corporation 
was established in, I believe, 1976, so that the past practice was 
followed. Now it’s a fair question if the complaint is that the 
information was given to the auditors appointed for the 
corporation. If, of that fact that the private sector auditors have 
the information, and that is seen as not being information for 
another body, I think that’s a matter of some debate, and I 
believe that that will be cleared up in the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
But I do have some difficulty, and I know the accounting 
profession has some difficulty with the belief that because 
approximately 50 per cent of the audits are now being done by 
private sector auditors that there are, in fact, not audits being 
done. 
 
And I am surprised, and I, like I say, I was pointedly critical of 
Mr. Petrie of the Leader-Post for not understanding that, and 
it’s not an interpretation of the abilities of the accounting firms 
in this province that I have. 
 
To say, as it is implied, that private sector auditors are not doing 
audits is wrong. It’s wrong. It’s just the process is all there is 
. . . The process is quite clear, as it will come out in public 
accounts that now that there are private sector auditors, as 
happened with the potash corporation from inception, that the 
practice has been for the Provincial Auditor to go to the Crown 
appointed auditors to get the information. 
 
Some will say that’s not accessed information because it’s not 
correct; that’s something that public accounts will have to deal 
with. 
 
(2145) 
 
But again, I have some difficulty in accepting the argument 
from anyone that because private sector auditors are now being 
used that an audit is not being done. And that’s a rather 
damning attack on the audit profession and the accounting 
profession of this province. So I suggest to the hon. member 
that the information in all cases detailed, and the report was in 
fact given, was in fact given. 
 
There is some concern by the Provincial Auditor that he has to 
now go through the appointed auditors. Maybe that process has 
to be looked at. Fair debate. I mean, I think that the former 
leader of the opposition and I had that debate when we 
announced and brought in the changes in the legislation. If I can 
use his name, with respect, Mr. Blakeney and I had that very 
debate. 
 
As to the process . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, he did not 
raise that, he did not raise that. He did not raise that point. He 
raised, if you check the record, if you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, he did not, he raised the question of the 
client. He raised the question of the client. He raised the 
question of the client. The process, he was quite prepared, as I 
was, to accept that the process could be worked out between the 
private sector auditors and  

the Provincial Auditor. 
 
So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, no, that’s precisely . . . 
The hon. member says we’re not sharing the information. What 
I said, and I said very pointedly, that my understanding in all 
cases where there is a statement that the information was not 
made available, that in fact the information was made available 
and that the private sector auditor had that information. Okay? 
 
So I will be the first to recognize that the process between the 
Provincial Auditor and the private sector auditors has to be 
resolved, because there is that difference, and that difference 
has been there since we announced that we were moving to 
private sector auditors. I do wonder, when the same process has 
been used since the time the potash corporation was started, that 
now that process is not adequate. Okay? No change in auditors, 
no change in process. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, there’s been a big change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, no. No, there was not. There was 
absolutely no change when it comes to the potash corporation. 
There’s absolutely no change, absolutely no change. 
 
And that’s precisely what public accounts is going to deal with, 
precisely what public accounts is going to deal with. And that’s 
the forum that I think that the hon. member will agree that it 
should be dealt with. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, right here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, sure, ultimately it will be done right 
here, obviously. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not ultimately, now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well okay, I mean, if you think we’re 
going to resolve the process between how the Provincial 
Auditor is going to work with the private sector auditors in this 
forum, I am not saying it in any adversarial way, I just don’t 
think that that’s going to happen. 
 
I think it is a proper function of the Public Accounts Committee 
to try and to see the relationship between the Provincial Auditor 
and the private sector auditor works in every other province in 
Canada — every other province in Canada. 
 
I and the former leader of the opposition both were of the view 
that it can work here. I’ll be the first to admit that it hasn’t 
worked. I’ll be the first to admit that it hasn’t worked, but that 
doesn’t mean that it can’t work. 
 
And to stand up and say that because someone is using a private 
sector auditor, that an audit isn’t being done, that proper audits 
are not being done, is either a lack of understanding — and 
that’s the most charitable interpretation one can put on it — of 
audits and their processes. But to say that audits are not being 
done, as certainly one reporter and I think others have alluded 
to, is simply not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well when someone stands up . . . The hon. member from  
  



 
June 13, 1989 

 

1882 
 
 

Regina Elphinstone says that, well the public doesn’t have 
access to 50 per cent because they’re now using private sector 
auditor. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They won’t share it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, they’re sharing it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, they’re not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, they certainly are, in every case. In 
every case that is precisely . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
you don’t understand. The problem is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, here’s what the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. I’ve brought it to members’ attention that if they 
want to ask questions, there’s certainly lots of opportunity to 
ask questions of the minister. 
 
I would prefer if they would rise and be recognized and ask the 
questions so they’re on the record, rather than asking them from 
their seats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. So 
what I have said, and when you say that the information is not 
there, that’s not right. In all cases the information was given. 
 
Now the question, does the Provincial Auditor go through and 
do a re-audit, do it directly, and get the information directly; or 
does he go through the appointed auditor to get that 
information? The Provincial Auditor feels he shouldn’t have to 
go through the appointed auditor. Okay. 
 
I raise the question with you, is that in the case of the potash 
corporation which had private sector auditors from day one, 
things seem to have worked out all right until all of a sudden 
this year. And there’s been no change in auditors, no change in 
process, and the auditors have said that. So why can’t it work in 
the other cases? And I raise the question. 
 
I think it can work. It works in every other province. I have 
said, I know it’s not working here. I think public accounts can 
try and find out why. I think public accounts will find out in all 
the cases that the information was there and was available. And 
I also believe that public accounts will find out that the audits 
by the private sector audits are highly qualified audits; that the 
audits being done by the private sector auditors have the 
potential, and perhaps in many cases are already bringing to the 
particular corporation not only the audit experience, but they 
bring, as they do to all other corporations, they bring in their 
consulting experience; they bring in their experience from 
dealing in the particular industry in many cases; they bring in 
their national experience, and all of those experiences are 
brought to the advantage of the particular corporation. 
 
So when we stand up and say that the audits are not being done 
because we use private sector auditors is simply not accurate. 
There are tremendous advantages to the use of private sector 
auditors, not only to the corporations, not only to the 
corporations. And I have just given the  

reasons. But I believe that the use of the private sector auditor 
for the Crown corporations is to the advantage of the people of 
this province as well, and I’ll tell you why. 
 
The hon. member says the use of private sector auditors cover 
up the tracks. I suggest to the hon. member that that is an 
absolute attack on the accounting profession of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, come on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes it is, you bet it is, because I happen to 
believe . . . and I will bet that the Public Accounts Committee 
will not in any way, shape or form — with a minority opinion. 
And I don’t believe that there will be a minority report from 
public accounts which condemns all of the private sector 
auditors, or even a particular firm, an accounting firm, because 
that will be your option. In public accounts you will have the 
ability, if you are prepared to say in this Assembly, if you are 
prepared to say in this Assembly that the private sector auditors 
are not doing their job; that a particular accounting firm in this 
province is not doing its job as audit, because you said, 
covering the tracks. You said the private sector auditors were 
covering the tracks. I say that is not true. 
 
I suggest . . . I don’t know why you’re laughing. I don’t know 
why you’re laughing. I don’t know why you’re laughing when 
you sit and you’ve attacked the accounting profession — when 
you’ve said that the accounting profession is covering up tracks 
and is not doing proper audits, and that’s what you’ve said. 
You’re going to have to, in Public Accounts Committee, the 
New Democratic Party members are going to have to. 
 
And this will be the proof, Mr. Chairman, this will be the proof 
of what they said about the Provincial Auditor’s report. If the 
NDP opposition in its public accounts report, its minority 
report, or if it can prove for the majority that an audit was not 
done or was done improperly. And I bet and I will wager to the 
people of this province that the NDP will not say that in the 
public accounts report. I’ll bet they will not say that. Okay. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They voted against bringing them in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, they didn’t want the private sector 
auditors in before public accounts. I suggest to the hon. member 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Members on both sides 
of the House get an opportunity to get into the debate and ask 
questions any time they like, so I would ask them to ask their 
questions from their feet. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 
 


