


















































March 28, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 28, 1989 
 

365 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in this Assembly to present 
a petition with 1,387 signatures from families all across the 
province of Saskatchewan, with a large number of communities 
represented. Mr. Speaker, the petition calls on the Government 
of Saskatchewan to right the wrongs that the legislation and 
regulations regarding cans as the container for carbonated 
beverages have done, the results, partially, of which are: (1) 
massive lay-offs; (2) threatened plant closure; and (3) undue 
hardship and stress for employees. 
 
On behalf of these 1,387 signatures here and many others in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present 
this petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you, and to members of this Assembly, 
constituents and good friends of mine, Ken and Eileen Stone, 
who are seated in your gallery; their daughter Cheryl from 
Saskatoon Fairview constituency . . . or granddaughter; and 
Mrs. Stone’s sister, Betty Walbaum from Regina Victoria 
constituency. Ken Stone is the son of Mr. Arthur Stone, who 
was an MLA in this Assembly for many years, and a man 
whom we paid tribute to a couple of weeks ago — a man that 
we honoured. These are very active followers of politics. They 
watch the proceedings every day on TV, and I would like to ask 
members to join with me to extend a warm welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It’s with pleasure that I introduce two 
members, two special guests to the legislature this afternoon, in 
the Speaker’s gallery. I introduce Mr. Denis Rocan, the MLA 
for Turtle Mountain and the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly of Manitoba. 
 
At the Table, I introduce Mr. Binx Remnant, Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly of Manitoba. 
 
These two gentlemen are with us for two days to study our 
procedural and administrative support to the Legislative 
Assembly. I might also mention that Speaker Rocan has just 
visited us recently. He was here for the opening of our 
legislature, and we certainly welcome him again. Perhaps he’s 
looking for a seat to run in. 
 
Anyway, I would like to ask all hon. members to please 
welcome the Speaker of Manitoba and the Legislative Clerk. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Installation of Canning Lines by Breweries 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the minister 
for piratization, also the minister responsible for the liquor 
control board in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask if you will confirm for this House that last 
week you told the Saskatchewan hoteliers convention that 
Saskatchewan breweries should be installing canning lines if 
they want to survive in this province. And I ask you as well, 
Mr. Minister, how that squares with the response given by your 
Minister of the Environment in this House last June, an answer 
he gave in response to a question I asked about the protection of 
jobs with the introduction of cans in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He said, and I quote, “There may be some jobs 
lost, but we will make it as minimal as possible.” 
 
Mr. Minister, there have been 100 jobs lost already; 1,387 said 
through petition today that that’s not minimal. And I ask you, 
Mr. Minister: what steps are you taking, concrete steps — what 
concrete steps are you taking to make this job loss as minimal 
as possible for the workers and the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite is reacting to a press comment that was made at the 
hotel convention. It wasn’t in speaking to the hoteliers, it was in 
the press scrum after, that was played this morning on the CBC 
regarding the canning of beer. I take it from your statements 
and from your petition you rose early in the House, about that 
you’re opposed to canned beer, and it’s interesting to see that. 
 
Secondly, you take a figure of a hundred jobs, which I’ve long 
since learned, coming from that side of the House, you take 
those questionable assertions . . . you choose to ignore, you 
choose to ignore that there was about 120 jobs created in 
SARCAN for handicapped individuals in the collection of cans 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — . . . which, I assume, you want to do away 
with, and you choose to ignore that the environmental impact of 
cans has been well handled in this province, and in the people I 
talk to, that certainly they support cans. 
 
And yes, if I can convince the brewing industry, which is 
rationalizing, not only in Saskatchewan but across Canada, to 
bring a canning line to Saskatchewan to create further jobs in 
the canning of beer, I will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I am 
opposed to job loss in Saskatchewan, and the people in this 
province would be well served if you and your  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

366 
 

government took the same attitude as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — While we’re talking about canning lines, Mr. 
Minister, you will be aware that in 1987 Carling O’Keefe had a 
canning line in the province of Saskatchewan but, because they 
could not get approval from your government, in early 1988 
they shipped it off to Winnipeg, and that’s where the jobs are 
now. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you and your government so short-sighted that 
less than six months before introducing canned beer in the 
province of Saskatchewan you made a brewery send a canning 
line out of this province? And I ask you, do you and your 
government do absolutely no forward planning to protect 
Saskatchewan jobs? Will you answer that for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I believe, again, your assertion is 
not correct, and we have seen that right from the by-election 
down in Assiniboia, that you can’t always take what is said on 
faith. I mean, there’s a whole concern developing across 
Saskatchewan as to the facts that you people come forward 
with. I remember the closure of hospitals. They didn’t take 
place; it was just an exaggeration, and that continues to be the 
case. So if we talk about a hundred jobs, I’d like him to prove 
his facts first of all. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say the same as I did a minute ago, that I 
believe Saskatchewan people are supportive of canned drinks, 
both in the soft drink and in the beer industry. I believe that 
Saskatchewan people would like to see a canning line here in 
Saskatchewan, and I believe that we can create more jobs. 
 
As I said in that same interview, and he chooses to ignore that, 
that perhaps we should come with Saskatchewan first. Look at 
what the Atlantic provinces have done with Moosehead beer, in 
demand right across North America. I believe that we can come 
forward with initiatives in Saskatchewan. As I said in my 
speech the other day, a pride in Saskatchewan to build things 
first in Saskatchewan, that will not take away from jobs, that 
will create jobs. And I hope you will support that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I asked you about the canned line in Saskatchewan. I note with 
great interest that you carefully avoided answering the question. 
Scrutiny will point out that I represent the facts very accurately 
in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Let’s ask as well about another pricing policy of 
your government and your plans, Mr. Minister. You know that 
Saskatchewan will soon be inundated with American beer in the 
province, again to the detriment of beer bottled in 
Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan workers. 

And I ask you, Mr. Minister: have you taken any steps to 
control the price of the American beer such that the product 
bottled here in Saskatchewan will remain competitive, or do 
your free trade instincts not allow you to protect Canadian jobs 
and Saskatchewan jobs for Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite is opposed to canned beer. I get that from his 
statements and that’s fine if that’s what he is. I think most 
people in Saskatchewan are not opposed to canned beer or 
opposed to soft drinks in cans either. 
 
I also take it from your statements that you’re opposed to 
SARCAN and jobs for the handicapped. You don’t give any 
credit for that, and I believe that Saskatchewan people again 
support that kind of initiative. 
 
In regard to American beer, certainly by the GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), American beer will be 
coming into this province. As to a pricing arrangement, that has 
not been decided at this point in time because the only 
American beer that’s in Saskatchewan today is that that’s 
smuggled in. So as we develop a system, as I’ve said in the 
press, a system to distribute American beer, we will certainly 
look at a pricing policy for American beer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, a new question again to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, my positions are documented and 
they’re on record in this House. I wish that you, sir, would have 
the respect for this Legislative Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan that you would give direct answers to direct 
questions. The members of the media can note very clearly that 
you are avoiding the questions that I ask you here today. 
 
Another point, Mr. Minister. The reason that cans are selling so 
well in Saskatchewan, you and I both know, is because of your 
government’s discriminatory pricing system, done intentionally 
by your government, a pricing policy, Mr. Minister, that could 
change very easily at the stroke of a pen by you, sir. 
 
You say that you won’t give the same preferred pricing to 
bottled beer which is bottled here by Saskatchewan workers 
because of loss of revenue to the treasury. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
got lots of money for Dome Advertising and lots of money for 
your patronage appointments of your buddies, but you don’t 
have money to protect jobs of Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, this: will you give — I ask you 
very clearly — will you give the same preferred pricing to 
bottled beer as cans to protect Saskatchewan jobs for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the price of canned 
beer was brought in after a very exhaustive study  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

367 
 

of the rural hotel situation. If you will remember correctly, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are many rural hotels in Saskatchewan, 
because of population changes, because of a downturn in the 
farm economy, that were undergoing severe stress. This 
government priced the canned beer in such a way . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, we priced the canned beer 
in such a way that we took into effect the plight of the rural 
hotelier and also the consumer of Saskatchewan. And from all 
reports I’ve heard, I believe that it was well thought out, that the 
pricing structure was right on the money. 
 
Now the member opposite says: will you look at the price of 
bottled beer? I can tell you that many of the prices are under 
constant discussion, and certainly I’m looking at the price of 
bottled beer. I’m not in a position to make an announcement at 
this time, but we’re looking at this; we’re also looking at the 
price of American beer when it should enter our borders. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will know, as well as 
I, that the consumption of canned beer in Saskatchewan is 
almost exactly twice the national average for the rest of the 
country, canned as compared to bottles. I will ask you again, 
Mr. Minister, a very clear question, and I would ask you to give 
a clear answer. 
 
Will you protect the interest of Saskatchewan hoteliers and at 
the same time protect the jobs for Saskatchewan workers by 
providing the same — the same — preferred pricing for beer 
bottled in Saskatchewan as the same preferred pricing that you 
allow on cans in this province? Will you do it for the hoteliers 
in Saskatchewan, and will you do it for the workers in this 
province, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m amazed. I’m amazed to see a member 
of this legislature stand and ignore, and choose to ignore in his 
questions, the 120-odd jobs and more that are being created by 
SARCAN for handicapped people. I’m in support of those jobs; 
this government is in support of those jobs, and he chooses to 
ignore it time after time. He’s against SARCAN; he’s against 
canned beer; he’s against the hotels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that certainly as we look at the price 
of alcoholic beverages in total, I will be looking at the price for 
bottled beer, as I will for American beer, as I will for hard 
spirits, and whatever may be. And that’s what I have to report 
to the House today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Loss of Jobs in Brewing Industry 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also to 
the minister responsible for Liquor Board. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Carling O’Keefe brewery plant is in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Centre, and I can assure you that 
there are many workers who are my constituents who  

are losing their jobs because of your crazy economic policy. 
You talk about economic diversification. The brewery was 
processing what we grow here in Saskatchewan. You have said 
you’re going to bring in a canning line after Carling O’Keefe 
has shipped their canning line to Winnipeg. What do you say to 
those workers, a hundred workers, who have lost their jobs in 
Saskatoon? And what do you say to the city of Saskatoon that’s 
lost its tax base by losing those good paying jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So again, Mr. Speaker, I see another 
member of the opposition get up and choose to ignore 
SARCAN, and I guess I say, what do you say about SARCAN? 
I’d like to hear your position. It seems they’re obviously against 
that. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, at the same interview, if they would 
have been looking at it all, I indicated that I would be interested 
in perhaps bringing some of those workers involved in the 
distribution of American beer. There may be other alternate 
uses for new products for that brewery. I’m willing to discuss 
these and look at new options. 
 
So I think that should . . . take that back and tell it to the people 
who you’ve been talking to, that we’re quite willing to allow 
these people to be part of the distribution system and get in tune 
with where we are today in this province and not be crying 
about things of the past. 
 

Cost of Government Advertising 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. Mr. Premier, looking through your 
government’s returns, which were tabled somewhat belatedly, 
we see some very interesting figures. For instance, are you 
aware that during the period March 1984 to May 1988 your 
government paid out to your advertising firms, Dome 
Advertising and Dome Media Buying and Roberts & Poole, a 
total of $45.8 million of taxpayers’ money? The Minister of 
Finance will tell you that works out to $33,000 a day. 
 
Now I want to know, and the people of Saskatchewan want to 
know, is this your idea of fiscal responsibility, and is this how 
you spend taxpayers’ money while necessary services such as 
health and education have to go begging in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, any economic analysis of 
the NDP’s expenditures on advertising will show, at constant 
dollars in 1980-81 they spent about 7 million alone on the 
Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations. 
 
You bring that up to constant dollars a day and you run it over 
any five-year period, Mr. Speaker, and you’re looking at more 
money than the current administration is spending on 
advertising, and it goes to one firm or another, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s just a little bit out of context when they stand up and say 
that only one administration will advertise and they didn’t — $7 
million at constant dollars today, Mr. Speaker, and they’d 
outspend any  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

368 
 

administration in Canada. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, that’s boloney. 
 
A new question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I was asking you 
to account for your actions in this Assembly. The NDP long 
accounted for its actions in 1982 when it lost the election, in 
part, in part because you promised, and I quote you, sir, you 
promised to cease all advertising by Crown corporations except 
advertising which promotes specific productions and programs 
offered by corporations where a monopoly does not exist. 
 
Now in light of that promise, in light of your words, can you 
explain $2.5 million in advertising for SaskTel, $2.2 million in 
advertising for SaskPower, and more than $5 million for SGI? 
Explain that if you would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says that 
the NDP lost in 1982 because they spent so much money 
advertising the Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations. 
Now I will agree with that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll also say that the 
people of Saskatchewan have not forgotten what you did in ’82. 
They haven’t forgotten the fact that you would give $7 million 
or more to firms like Dunsky and Struthers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said that we would promote Crown 
corporations when they were providing service to the 
Saskatchewan public. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
provides natural gas to people all across Saskatchewan. It didn’t 
used to do that, Mr. Speaker — individual line service to 
consumers, home owners, and farmers all across the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t use to do that. Burying 
power lines for people all across the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. The power corporation didn’t use to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never did the power corporation or SaskTel offer 
bonds for people to invest in in the province of Saskatchewan 
— 500 million, $600 million in investment, because we tell 
them about a real corporation that can help them lower the rates 
and invest here in Saskatchewan, not just to advertise NDP 
monopolies, but to help people live in communities and help 
their families and help keep the rates lower. That’s the 
difference, Mr. Speaker, a considerable difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Premier, and would he please give a prescription for those 
rose-coloured glasses to everybody in Saskatchewan so they 
might understand what he’s talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I tell you, because, Mr. Premier, 
families weren’t going begging to food banks in 1982. Now my 
question, Mr. Premier, is last year in this House is was revealed 
that one Bruce Cameron, an official of your party, the PC Party, 
was writing letters to the president of your party, the PC Party, 
suggesting that  

Dome, for all the work that it does for your government, be 
required to kickback a percentage to the party. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, what is the percentage kickback on this $45 
million? Is it 10 per cent? Is it 15 per cent? Or is it something 
more? Can you tell us that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this is supposed to be the 
opposition’s time to ask questions on pressing, urgent, 
compelling issues, and they’ve asked that question last year in 
public accounts. They went through it, Mr. Speaker; I went 
through it here when I went . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I’m sure 
everybody in the House is having difficulty hearing the Premier 
respond, and I think you all do want to hear it, so we’ll give him 
that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve already asked that 
question, and we’ve been through it in my estimates; we’ve 
been through it here in the legislature. I can say to the hon. 
member, as a result of us allowing Saskatchewan people to 
invest in Crown corporations, as a result of us providing them 
with that information, not only do we have wider public service, 
but 76,000 Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, have had the 
opportunity to invest in public utilities here, and in Crown 
corporations, and that they’ve done on their own free will, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I remind the hon. member again, companies like Dunsky, 
companies like Struthers that the NDP paid $7 million a year to, 
not for people to share in, Mr. Speaker, not at all — no bonds, 
no shares, nothing — just to pay for the Saskatchewan family of 
Crown corporations to advertise a monopoly, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s the reason that they were turfed out. Seventy-six thousand 
Saskatchewan people and their families, Mr. Speaker, now can 
invest in Crown corporations and there’s a significant 
difference and they like it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privatization and Unemployment 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the 
Deputy Premier and it deals with the problem that we have in 
this province of privatization and unemployment and the 
connection between the two. 
 
Last week in the House, Mr. Minister, you unsuccessfully tried 
to mislead the public and, I say, to try to diffuse the issue of 
government broken promises as it relates to privatization by 
confusing facts. And I refer to your answer when you talked 
about no one losing their job with the merger of SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) and the 
federal Crown corporation. 
 
I want to say to you, is it not true that today — and can you 
confirm that Cameco (Canadian Mining Energy Corporation) is 
looking at laying off 100 workers and bringing in 16 people 
from Ontario to take the place of some of those workers, and 
can you confirm that that is taking place today at the Rabbit 
Lake mine? 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

369 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, that is not true. What is 
true, Mr. Speaker . . . What is true, Mr. Speaker, is that there 
will be 30 employees out of 165 employees at Blind River, and 
40 employees out of the 350 positions at Port Hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that will be eliminated. These positions are eliminated, 
Mr. Speaker, not as a result of any merger, not as a result of any 
merger . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can they say, oh! when in fact the conversion 
facility is all, as it exists, all part of what was once Eldorado. 
The merger did nothing to affect the conversion facilities in 
Ontario, absolutely zero. 
 
What has happened, Mr. Speaker, what has happened is we 
have an over-supply of uranium in the world. We have an 
over-supply of uranium in the world, and we have declining 
prices for uranium in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as it relates to Rabbit Lake, Mr. Speaker, yes, there will 
be, there will be lay-offs at Rabbit Lake, Mr. Speaker. The 
lay-offs at Rabbit Lake, Mr. Speaker, will be for a duration of 
about six months. They will commence July 1, Mr. Speaker. 
The reason for the lay-offs, Mr. Speaker, is quite simply that . . . 
quite simply, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . two reasons. An 
over-supply, declining prices, but more importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, an ore body that is approaching depletion and ore 
grades that are declining. Now, now the mill, the mill, Mr. 
Speaker, at Rabbit Lake has to be upgraded, and you can’t run 
ore through a mill that’s shut down. The mill has to be 
upgraded, Mr. Speaker, so that they can go into the 
underground ore body at Eagle Point. 
 
Now to go into the underground ore . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister 
the question again. Can you confirm that Cameco is looking at 
laying off 100 workers at the Rabbit Lake mine? That was the 
question. Is it about 100 workers that they’re laying off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’d be very happy to answer the 
question, Mr. Speaker. Now we are moving from an open pit 
mode to an underground mode, Mr. Speaker. You can’t go 
underground without digging a shaft. You can’t get ore out of 
the ground without getting underground. So there is a transition 
period. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. The Deputy Premier is 
attempting to answer the question; however, he’s being 
interrupted and we can’t hear the answer. I want to give him 
that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And during this transition, Mr. 
Speaker, during this transition while they are upgrading the mill 
so that they can take the higher grade ore from the underground 
ore body, Mr. Speaker, they will maximize the use of the people 
who would otherwise be laid off at the mine. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that there will be, I think,  

20 people transferred from Ottawa to Saskatchewan. These are 
the research and development people of what was Eldorado, 
transferred to Saskatoon to work, most of them with the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, Mr. Speaker, and nothing to 
do with Rabbit Lake. And the other four will be in the 
department of environment and safety of the new company, 
Cameco, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, anybody . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s obvious now that it’s the friends of the Tory party 
who are ending up with the mine, and the workers who are 
getting the shaft from this government, because there’s no jobs 
by privatization. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that it’s your credibility that 
is at stake here, and I want to quote from you, June 23 of last 
year: 
 

You can rest assured that the people who work at SMDC 
today will be working there in the new merged uranium 
company as well. That was a commitment that was given 
by this government and SMDC, and that will be a 
commitment that is delivered. 
 

Given that quote, how do you explain today the lay-offs and the 
fact that you gave your word in commitment? Is your word and 
the word of the Premier of this province worth nothing? Or is 
the simple fact that you’re serving your friends before you serve 
the workers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the lay-offs that 
Cameco’s talking about today have nothing to do with the 
merger or privatization. The lay-offs would have to have 
occurred, they would have to have occurred, Mr. Speaker, had 
these companies been independent, because of market 
conditions, because of prices, because of over-supplies, because 
of ore body depletions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me make one small comparison. Today, Mr. Speaker, we 
have about 1,600 employees in the uranium industry in 
Saskatchewan. Over the next 10 years it’s estimated that we’ll 
get about $0.5 billion in royalties from the uranium industry. In 
addition to that, there will be income tax and sales tax and 
further development, Mr. Speaker. Compare that to those 
people, Mr. Speaker, who have said they will close down the 
uranium industry in this province. Tell me who was protecting 
the jobs of that industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 9 — Activities of Future Corporation 
 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

370 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege today to participate in the discussion in this House, in 
particular on the motion that I will be moving at the end of my 
speech. But, Mr. Speaker, before I get into the content of the 
motion, I want to indicate to you and to the House that today in 
question period it clearly indicates why a motion like this has 
been put on the order paper. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, the government not addressing the 
issues that are facing the people of this province. They are so 
concerned, they are so concerned, Mr. Speaker, about serving 
themselves and their friends that they refuse to look at the 
reality and see what is happening in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us have a look at what the situation is today. 
We have in this province, Mr. Speaker, over 25 per cent, over 
25 per cent of our people living in poverty — 64,000 children 
living in poverty. We have, Mr. Speaker, in the city of 
Saskatoon alone approximately 10,000 people waiting to get 
into a hospital for surgery and other procedures. We had, Mr. 
Speaker, last week the announcement here in Regina, six 
schools being closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I bring these things to your attention because this 
government refuses, simply refuses to address the problems that 
we are faced with in this province. Last month alone 6,200 
people left this province. More people left this province than 
came in — a net loss of 6,200. It is estimated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that of those 6,200, at least 4,000, at least 4,000 of 
those were young people. That is why, Mr. Speaker, at the end 
of my remarks I will move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s irresponsible decision to spend millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars on an election year birthday party when 
financial constraints in departments such as Health, Social 
Services, and Education are causing severe hardship for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the crux of my words today. 
Those are the things that I want to talk about. 
 
We have in this province today a health care system that simply 
does not serve the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. We 
have an education system wherein last year alone — and the 
Minister of Education knows this — over 1,100 qualified 
students, over 1,100 qualified students were unable, were 
unable to receive post-secondary education in this province. A 
minimum of 500 could not get into the University of 
Saskatchewan, and an additional 600 students who were 
qualified, who were qualified in years past to attend education, 
were unable to do so because this Minister of Education, this 
government, will not provide the funding that is necessary so 
that our students can receive a good education. 
 
In the area of welfare and social services we have literally 
thousands — and that is no exaggeration — literally thousands 
of our children who go to bed hungry every night, who have no 
other alternative but to go to the food banks to beg for food so 
that they can get at least one  

square meal a day. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has the audacity to 
bring forward a $9 million birthday party in the year 1990. For 
what purpose? For the purpose, Mr. Speaker, so that they can 
politicize the year 1990 for their own political purposes. 
Because that is the year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are fully 
aware, is the year when this government is expected to go to the 
people for another mandate. 
 
What priorities! Where is the heart of this government? Where 
is its caring? Where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this government’s 
concern for those needy people of this province? We have 
farmers literally by the thousands who have been driven off 
their farms by the lawyers of the Minister of Agriculture, 
literally driven off the farms by actions taken by the Minister of 
Agriculture through his lawyers. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government, this 
heartless government doesn’t deserve to receive another 
mandate, and they’ll just assume . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I believe very sincerely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that as soon as this government calls the election, the people 
will speak. They will speak, and they will tell you people that 
you had your priorities wrong. 
 
We paid our penalty, and in some instances yes, we had our 
priorities wrong in 1980-81-82, but I’ll tell you people, our 
mistakes were miniscule to what you are doing today. 
 
When I hear my colleagues in this House ask about what your 
government is doing with a $45 million advertising campaign, I 
hear the Premier of this province laugh it off, laugh it off as 
though, what’s $45 million? What’s $45 million? You can’t 
turn a paper today without looking at some government ad. You 
can’t turn on radio without hearing somebody promoting a 
government program of some kind. You can’t watch TV 
without having constantly brought to your attention that this 
government is privatizing everything that they possibly can. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has its 
priorities all mixed up. They are wrong in what they are 
pursuing, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re certainly very, very 
wrong in putting an additional $9 million — $9 million — 
purely for partisan political politics. That’s what it is. Let’s call 
it what it is. 
 
Oh, there are going to be some changes made to that program 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of all the outcry that there 
has been, not only from members on this side of the House, but 
from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
and from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), and from the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation), and the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), and from ordinary people in this province. 
 
All of them, all of them have cried out to this government, have 
asked this government to cut out that program, put  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

371 
 

that program to better use, put that program into the Department 
of Education or Department of Health or the Department of 
Social Services or the Department of Agriculture which you cut 
last year. Every one of them is saying there are more important 
needs in this province than purely your own partisan politics to 
get yourself re-elected again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the time will come and the people will 
speak not only on this program or the $9 million birthday party, 
but they will speak on all the other priorities. And is it 
surprising, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it surprising that this 
government should have come to this. I can’t recall either in 
Canada or here in Saskatchewan, someone putting out millions 
of dollars to celebrate an 85th birthday. I can’t recall that being 
done. 
 
Oh there was a homecoming in 1971, planned by the Ross 
Thatcher government at that time. His idea was, we will ask 
each family to bring back in 1971 . . . in 1971 we’ll ask them 
each to bring somebody home so we can have a big birthday 
celebration. We’ll call it homecoming. Well the people spoke, 
the people spoke, and in June of 1971 they tossed Ross 
Thatcher and his government right out of office. And I tell you 
people, that’s exactly what’s going to happen to you - 
_ exactly what’s going to happen to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — You can only do so much to the people and then 
they will rebel. There are a lot of people out there very cynical. 
They are saying, why should I and my children go to bed 
hungry every night? Because the government says we don’t 
have any money; everybody has got to tighten their belt. And 
yet, they have $9 million to spend on a birthday party. 
 
Educators are saying, why can’t our children get into the school 
program that they need in order to become future leaders in this 
province? Because the government says there is no money; 
we’re on hard times and we have to cut programs. But at the 
same time the government has $9 million to spend on 
themselves for their re-election for a birthday party. 
 
The people in our hospitals, the people in our hospitals are 
saying, why can’t we have more nurses to serve us? Nine 
million dollars would put a lot of nurses into our hospitals. Nine 
million dollars would provide a lot of extra surgery spaces and 
surgery time so that the Minister of Health could cut down the 
waiting lists in Saskatoon which right now are still at about 
9,000. 
 
(1445) 
 
The people are becoming very frustrated and very cynical 
because politicians say we’ve got to tighten our belts, but at the 
same time have millions of dollars to serve themselves to make 
sure that they are re-elected. 
 
I say to you members opposite, you’ve gone a step too far. 
You’ve crossed the Rubicon, and the people are saying to you, 
we’ve had enough. And I believe very clearly that your polls 
indicate that to you, and too much is too much. You’ve gone 
too far. 

And I ask the members opposite, put some pressure on your 
Executive Council. Say to them, it’s not too late; let’s cancel 
that program. Let’s cancel it, and we’re going to show to the 
people that we do listen. And in the next budget we’re going to 
take another . . . we’re going to take 3 million of that and we’re 
going to give it to our universities so that the students are able 
to attend and get the programs that they require. We’ll take 
another 3 million and we’ll put it in agriculture to help some of 
those farmers. And we’ll take another 3 million and we’ll put it 
into health care and social services so that the starving poor in 
our province, the starving poor in our province are able to get a 
higher welfare benefit so that they don’t have to go to bed 
hungry every night. 
 
When I hear the minister of welfare say that he doesn’t know of 
anybody that goes to bed hungry, or he feels that there is 
sufficient money on the welfare stipend that the welfare people 
receive, I say to the minister that he should be out there. He 
should live with those people on welfare, and he’d quickly find 
out just how far that stipend, that welfare stipend, will go. 
 
I couldn’t help, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by reading the 
Star-Phoenix this morning, when the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster was asked about the food banks in 
Lashburn and he said, “No one has come to me; no one has 
come to me and said they were hungry.” And he said, I don’t 
see anybody going hungry in the town of Lashburn. Where has 
the member been? Where has he been hiding if those people 
aren’t telling him that? 
 
We see it every day. We get letters every day in our offices of 
people telling us that the programs of this government simply 
aren’t sufficient and they should take that $9 million and they 
should re . . . What’s the word I want? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Rechannel. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Rechannel that money — thank you. My 
colleague from Saskatoon University is helping me out . . . 
rechannel that money so that the poor of this province don’t 
have to go beggaring. And I just for the life of me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, can’t figure out how politicians can so far astray, how 
they can get their priorities so mixed up when we hear time and 
time again from the executive branch over there saying: but we 
are in tough economic times; tighten your belt; we can’t give 
any more because the treasury doesn’t have any more. And in 
the very next decision that they made, they come up with $9 
million — $9 million, Mr. Speaker — which I have not heard 
any organization in Saskatchewan support. 
 
SARM has condemned it, said it should be done away with; 
SUMA doesn’t like it. The STF is saying that hey, look it, if 
you’ve got money for a birthday party, how about some money 
for our children? 
 
And we hear individuals, we hear churches, we hear people 
from our churches saying, surely the politicians of this province 
must get their priorities straightened out. We can’t continue in 
the way that we are going. 
 
And I say to the members opposite: it is not too late, it is not too 
late. You can still cancel that $9 million and you  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

372 
 

don’t have to listen to the opposition and all the people that 
have talked to us. Listen to your own constituents. Listen to 
your own constituents. And I know, for example, the Minster of 
Health has been requested many, many times to do away with 
that $9 million program, to ask the treasury to take that $9 
million and put it to Health so that we can, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
put more nurses in our hospitals, so that we can, Mr. Speaker, 
decrease those waiting lists. 
 
And I know, I know the Minister of Education, because I, when 
I was a critic of Education and now the critic for advanced 
education, have had a number of requests of people saying, 
look, I can’t continue. I can’t continue with my education 
because I can’t get a loan. If the government were to take this 
money and put it into that program, they would help an 
individual who would in the future would become the leader, 
another leader in this province. But without an education, 
without any opportunity to receive an education, what are these 
young people doing? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they are doing. They’re 
packing their bags, along with their parents, and they’re leaving 
this province. A net out-migration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of over 
6,200 people last month alone. If that continues, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, do you know what that means? That means that by the 
end of this year Moose Jaw will be gone and Prince Albert will 
be gone, plus another 12,000 people will have left this province. 
 
Can you imagine what impact that will have on this province if 
you took Moose Jaw out of this province, the total population of 
Prince Albert, and another 12,000 people? That is going to have 
a tremendous drain on our economy, and it means that for the 
rest of us who remain, there will be a much heavier burden in 
order to pay for the programs that we have become accustomed 
to. 
 
That $9 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that $9 million could be 
put to so many different uses, so many good uses in this 
province instead of a birthday party. And I say to the chairman, 
the member, the Deputy Premier, and I say to a good friend of 
mine, Cliff Wright, I say Cliff Wright should do the honourable 
thing. He should resign from the futuristic corporation and say, 
look, I will not compromise my principles to that extent when 
all those other needs are left untouched in this province. 
 
When we have 64,000 children who live in poverty, when we 
have 1,100 students last year who couldn’t receive a 
post-secondary education, when we have 9,000 people on the 
waiting lists in Saskatoon, I think Cliff Wright would do the 
honourable thing. He should resign from that and say to the 
government, no, I won’t have anything to do with that partisan, 
political corporation that you set up just so that you people can 
get yourselves re-elected. 
 
That’s the honourable thing that Cliff Wright should do. And I 
think he might be considering that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless 
this government dramatically changes the priorities of that 
corporation and puts that money to much better use that what 
they had originally intended to do. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve talked about cynicism and frustration 
of the people in this province, and there’s lots of it. There’s lots 
of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there are so few 
opportunities available. There’s lots of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because the people are finding day in and day out that this 
government opposite is selling their birthright. 
 
And when they see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they see this 
government telling everybody that we are in an economic 
restraint, that you must all tighten your belts, and then come up 
with a purely partisan $9 million political party, that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, even enshrines that cynicism more in the 
people than ever before. 
 
And I think it’s about time that the government opposite 
recognizes this, that the people are asking you — through their 
organizations, yes, but also individually — to cancel that 
program. And maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will do this in 
the upcoming budget on Thursday. Maybe the Minister of 
Finance will finally have listened to the people and he will say, 
all right, we have had thousands and thousands of requests to 
cancel that birthday party, and I am announcing today that it 
will be cancelled. I think he could restore some of that faith that 
the people in Saskatchewan have had in their government and 
in their politicians. He could restore some of that again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I won’t hold my breath that the Minister of 
Finance will do this. I will only ask him to reconsider of all the 
needs that there are in this province, when farmers don’t have 
enough money to put in their crops. I was, just on the weekend, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking to some farmers who can’t put in 
their crop because they haven’t got sufficient money to buy the 
seed and buy the fertilizer and buy the fuel. And they don’t 
know what they’re going to do. Nine million dollars would go a 
long way, would go a long way, in helping thousands of farmers 
put in that crop. 
 
And they don’t want you people to spend that money on a 
birthday party. They want you to be more cognizant of their 
problems. They want you to say, hey look, have some empathy 
for the situation that we are in, and quit wasting the taxpayers’ 
money. You could cut in other ways too. The $9 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is just one incident of the waste that has taken 
place by this government, and it is a waste. 
 
We had today in question period $45 million of taxpayers’ 
money going for advertising, much of it to Dome. And we 
found out, not only today but in the past, that there’s a good 
possibility that some of that will be required as kickback to the 
Progressive Conservative Party. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
shameful, and it’s simply not acceptable by the people of this 
province — $45 million, add on the 9 million, you’ve got $54 
million — a lot of money. Mr. Speaker, that’s a lot of money. 
 
If you took 10 million of that, 10 million, and gave that to the 
University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, they 
could upgrade their programs and there wouldn’t be any student 
who would not be able to enter university next year. All of them 
would be able to. The university would be able to pay their staff 
decent salaries. 
 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

373 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, school boards, the Regina separate 
school boards, if they could just receive a little bit of that $9 
million they wouldn’t have to close those six schools that were 
announced last week. And it was very clear, very clear, I think, 
in the chairman’s remarks, that it was because of the cut-backs 
by this government to the separate school boards here in Regina 
that those six schools have to be closed. 
 
We’re having the same problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
throughout all the school systems in Saskatchewan. I was 
talking recently to another large school division who were 
saying that they need millions of dollars to upgrade their 
buildings. They haven’t been upgraded for a number of years, 
and if they don’t upgrade those, those buildings are going to 
deteriorate to the extent that the costs are simply going to be 
exorbitant in the future. 
 
I say to the members opposite, there are so many useful needs 
in this province, so many urgent needs. And I ask the Deputy 
Premier who is the chairman, you have a lot of power in this 
government. You have a lot . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Chairman of what? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — The futuristic corporation. If you didn’t know, 
you are the chairman. Okay? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thank you. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I ask you, will you listen to SARM? Will you 
listen to educators? Will you listen to the health experts and use 
that $9 million and redeploy it to those areas. 
 
They’ve asked you to reconsider. And I ask the Deputy Premier 
if it’s possible to think of that today. And I see him shaking his 
head that it’s not possible. And I ask the Deputy Premier, when 
we vote on this motion, to vote in favour of it so that the people 
know, yes, you are listening to them and that you will change 
your priorities so that the urgent needs of the people of this 
province are met. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many other areas that I could 
mention. But I have mentioned three of the larger ones, or four 
of the larger ones, and that is education, social services, health 
and agriculture. There are tremendous needs in those areas. 
That $9 million could be put to much better use, much better 
use in this province to serve the needs of those people. 
 
(1500) 
 
Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I believe that if this 
government changed its mind that they could restore some of 
that faith that the people in this province have always had in 
their governments. The people would say, yes, they do listen 
and they have cancelled that program; we thank them for it and 
we won’t forget it. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they don’t do that, if they don’t do 
that . . . and I say to the Deputy Premier, this is not a laughing 
matter, those people, those 43,000 people who are unemployed, 
those 6,000 people who left the province, those 9,000 who are 
on the waiting lists don’t think it’s a laughing matter at all. And 
they . . . the member opposite says yes, we’re a laughing stock 
over here, but  

the people . . . the Minister of Health says that too. And I say to 
the Minister of Health that those 9,000 people on the waiting 
lists in Saskatoon and those people who have to go out of the 
province to get their health care don’t think that this is a 
laughing matter, and they think that you should take that $9 
million and put it back into health where it belongs, where it 
belongs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And I say to the Minister of Health that when I 
was the Minister of Health the waiting lists in Saskatoon 
weren’t one-fifth of what they are today, not one-fifth of what 
they are. And it’s . . . that’s true, and you know that. You know 
that, and that’s true. And I say to the members opposite, you 
still have a chance. You still have a chance to change your 
minds and to take that $9 million, redeploy it in the next budget 
so that the needs of the people of Saskatchewan can be met and 
so that you will give some hope to those young farmers who 
haven’t got the money to seed their crop this year. Take some of 
that money and say to the farmers, we know what your needs 
are, we will redeploy that money and we will help you put in 
your crop. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with those words I will move the motion 
that I indicated earlier, seconded by the member from Regina 
Lakeview: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s irresponsible decision to spend millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars on an election year birthday party when 
financial constraints in departments such as health, social 
services, and education are causing severe hardship for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve had 
considerable time now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between the 
adjournment of the session last June and the opening of this 
new session, to travel throughout the province and talk to many 
people. And my colleagues and I on this side of the House have 
taken that opportunity to be in touch with the people in our 
constituencies and in touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have spoken to thousands of people over the last few 
months, and I can assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
people, the men and women of this province, are very upset 
with PC government policies. They’re upset with cut-backs to 
health care. They’re upset with the high student-teacher ratio 
that exists in our schools today and with an ever deteriorating 
education system. 
 
The government’s policies in education have caused stress on 
our teachers that are unprecedented in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It has caused stress on our children who are 
working in a system that is not designed to meet their needs 
because of government underfunding. It also has caused 
considerable stress on parents, a lot of stress on parents. 
 
The high teacher-student ratio has resulted, as I said, Mr. 
Speaker — because members from the other side of the  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

374 
 

House don’t believe this; they obviously think the 
student-teacher ratio is adequate — the high student-teacher 
ratio has caused stress for teachers, stress for students, and 
stress on parents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Stress on parents 
because parents are being asked to do more and more and more 
every day because the teachers are unable to meet the demands 
of the education system, the demands of the 21st century to 
educate our children, and therefore they’re relying on parents. 
 
So you’re having stress in families, stress on children, stress on 
teachers, all because this government has seen fit to underfund 
education and fund birthday parties instead, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and line their pockets with government money that 
should be used in education and health care and other social 
programs. 
 
What we see is growing tuition fees in the province for 
university students. University students are finding it 
increasingly difficult to attend university because this 
government has not properly funded our universities and 
instead has chosen to fund its Tory friends and pay itself fancy 
birthday parties, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We see unprecedented poverty in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, unprecedented poverty. And people have complained 
about that over the last few months — well, longer than that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But particularly we’ve been hearing about 
it more and more as time goes on. Something like 64,000 
children in this province are living in poverty. And in 
Saskatchewan, in the bread basket of the world, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we have the second highest rate of child poverty in the 
country — in the bread basket of this country, in Saskatchewan, 
the second highest poverty rate in this country. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shameful. It’s shameful. 
 
Ms. Simard: — My colleagues say shame, and I agree. The 
members opposite should be ashamed of their government and 
their heartless policies. 
 
We see ever increasing taxes on people, on the average person, 
while corporate taxes are not increased at nearly the same rate, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that says again where their priorities 
lie. We see a total lack of agricultural policy, of any long-term 
agricultural policy to deal with the problems and the farm crisis 
being faced by farmers. 
 
We see broken promise after broken promise. We see a 
dishonest and corrupt government, and we see the lack of any 
real commitment to child care on the part of this government. 
 
Something . . . the subsidy rates with respect to child care have 
not been increased since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Current 
subsidies only pay something like $240 a month, while costs are 
on the average of $340 a month for families. This government 
spends about 12.96 — $12.96 — per capita on child care in 
total, and Saskatchewan has the second lowest number of child 
care spaces per capita in the country. The second lowest number 
of child care spaces per capita, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The cost of 
one birthday party could buy some  

3,200 new day-care spaces in this province. 
 
We see high unemployment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re seeing 
an exodus of young people from this province because of the 
lack of the PC government to create good job opportunity for 
our young people. 
 
We see a lack of commitment to women’s shelters, for example. 
The government is critical of the Regina Native Women’s 
Association for spending $76,000 to provide a needed service. 
On the other hand, they’re prepared to waste $9 million on an 
unneeded birthday party, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Apparently each shelter currently being funded only receives an 
average of $245,000 from the government — that’s women’s 
shelters in the province — and the government spends only 1.3 
million for five shelters across this province. The cost of one 
birthday party, the cost of one of their birthday parties, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, could buy seven years of funding for 
provincial women’s shelters. One birthday party could buy 
seven years of funding for the women’s shelters in this 
province. 
 
What the people of this province want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
some hope. They want a government that is sincere, and they 
want a government that takes genuine actions in the area of 
health, education, and social services. They want to work 
together with their government to build a better society for 
Saskatchewan, and the people of Saskatchewan are ready and 
willing to work to build a better Saskatchewan society for their 
children and their grandchildren and for all people living in this 
province. 
 
But what we see instead is a government throwing a $9 million 
birthday party, a $9 million birthday party when it’s had seven 
budget deficits in a row — seven budget deficits in a row. And 
it’s throwing a $9 million birthday party to propagate their 
right-wing agenda. 
 
What we will see with this 9 million birthday party, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I’m sure of it, is a massive amount of government 
advertising. And we’re seeing that today. Every time I turn on 
the TV there’s another government advertisement propagating 
the right-wing agenda, and I find that nauseating when we have 
so many children and families who are going hungry in this 
province. And I know what their response is on the other side of 
the House. They said it last time. When I talked about children 
going hungry, what they said was, la-di-da. And that’s how 
much they care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s how much they 
care. 
 
There’s a cumulative deficit of some 3.6 billion in this province 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yet we see less money for health, 
education, and social services — less money. This deficit of 
$3.6 billion has meant that one child in four live in poverty in 
Saskatchewan — one child in four. And something like 18,000 
children went to food banks last year alone, and I think that’s 
appalling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the men and women of this province want that trend 
reversed. They don’t want the money spent on birthday parties. 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

375 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — The $3.6 billion deficit has meant that one in 
11 people is looking for work, and in February our labour force 
fell by 6,000 people and the number of people with jobs 
decreased by 7,000. 
 
It’s meant farm families cannot count on this government for 
assistance that they need and deserve. It’s meant that farmers 
can’t put their crops in this spring. And yet this government is 
going to spend $9 million on a birthday party in an election 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s meant deteriorating education for the children of 
Saskatchewan, and high tax increases. In 1988 there was only a 
2 per cent increase allocated to local school boards, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and only $3 million was added to the university 
operating grants in 1988 when inflation was at 6 per cent. 
 
So what we see is a system in Saskatchewan where students are 
having difficulty attending university because tuition fees are 
being raised. We see a situation where our children in school 
are working in a stressful situation where there are too many 
students per teacher. We see children who are going hungry, we 
see families who are going hungry, we see long line-ups at food 
banks — 18,000 children going to food banks in last year alone; 
one in four children living on poverty. What does this 
government do? It throws itself a $9 million celebration in 
1990. A celebration. 
 
(1515) 
 
What is it celebrating, Mr. Speaker? Is it celebrating the one 
children in every four that are living in poverty? Is it celebrating 
the 18,000 children that are going to food banks every year? Is 
it celebrating the students who can’t get access to a university 
because of high student tuition? Is it celebrating the children 
who are labouring in schools where there aren’t enough 
teachers per student? Is it celebrating the teachers who are 
working under stress because of high student-teacher ratios? Is 
it celebrating the parents who are under stress because of the 
lack of funding for education? Is it celebrating families who are 
under stress because lack of child-care spaces and lack of 
commitment to child care? Is it celebrating the women and 
children who are fleeing violent situations, who can’t get access 
to transition homes and shelters? Is that what it’s celebrating, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
This government’s priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are not the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people. It cuts funding and services 
in health care, education, and programs, but it spends its $9 
million on a birthday party. It spends its billion dollars on the 
political boondoggle in the Premier’s riding, the 
Rafferty-Alameda project. It spends millions on self-serving 
political advertising and millions on patronage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Our unemployment rate has exceeded the national average on a 
consistent basis, since November 1988 to be exact. And today 
in Saskatchewan one in 11 — one in 11 — people is actively 
looking for a job. And on top of this we are seeing an exodus 
from this province of our  

children. We are seeing people leaving at an unprecedented rate 
— 6,000 people leaving the province last month alone, and I 
believe 1,600 the month before that. And most of these people 
are between the ages of 20 and 29. They are our future, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re being driven out of this province by PC 
government policies, driven out of their own home, driven away 
from their families because of this government’s lack of policy 
or this government’s heartless, inhumane, ill-thought-out 
policies. 
 
At the same time we see high-priced salaries for their friends, 
high-priced salaries for Paul Schoenhals and John Gormley and 
George Hill, high-priced salaries for their Tory friends and 
give-aways to multinational or out-of-province corporations, 
but no jobs for our young men and women. No jobs for our 
young men and women. No food for some 18,000 children who 
have to go to food banks. I say that this is just appalling. 
 
And the Premier, as you recall, promised to bring our children 
home. Well I say that’s hypocrisy, total hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And in spite of all the indicators, in spite of all the 
evidence that’s out there, this government accepts no 
responsibility for its own policies. It blames the weather, it 
blames world conditions, it even blames former governments, 
but it never looks to itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it never accepts 
any responsibility for the heartache and the suffering that 
people in Saskatchewan are feeling today. It accepts no 
responsibility for that. 
 
It accepts no responsibility for high unemployment, no 
responsibility for the exodus of our children from this province, 
no responsibility for the crisis that so many families are facing 
in rural Saskatchewan and in urban Saskatchewan. It blames 
everything else but itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it justifies 
its privatization mania on the grounds that this is solving the 
problems, and yet the evidence is clear that privatization has 
resulted in lost jobs to this province and high unemployment. 
 
The government says that it has no money, it has no money, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to pay for health care services or other 
services, and therefore it has to sell off the province’s assets to 
the lowest bidder, providing that lowest bidder has a Tory 
membership. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s this government’s 
gross incompetence which has given rise to the present crisis 
we face in Saskatchewan. And it’s true that there’s been no 
money for our most vital services like health, education; no 
money to create jobs for our young people. There’s been no 
money for hungry children, no money to keep our children in 
this province, but there’s been money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there’s been money for Peter Pocklington; there’s been $9 
million to lavish a fancy birthday party; there’s been money for 
out-of-province travel for high-priced executives and 
government ministers; there’s been money for the political 
boondoggle in the Premier’s riding; there’s been money for PC 
political advertising — lots of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
not — as far as this government is concerned — there’s been no 
money where it really counts. 
 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

376 
 

Since this government was elected in 1982, revenue from 
personal income taxes jumped by 103 per cent while revenue 
from corporate income taxes only increased by 10 per cent. And 
this clearly indicates the priorities of this government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; burdens for families and benefits for 
corporations, that’s their priorities. 
 
And I say that it’s time that this government assumed 
responsibility for its fiscal mismanagement, and it’s time this 
government stopped making the people of Saskatchewan carry 
the burden of its heartless and cruel policies. It’s time for this 
government to reassess its priorities. And the first thing it 
should do immediately, today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is cancel its 
fancy birthday party, its fancy celebration in the election year of 
1990. 
 
And when we take a look at health care, in particular, we see 
that in 1987-88 there was what amounted to approximately an 
$18 million cut to the health care budget. We saw a very small 
increase last year that didn’t even meet the rate of inflation. And 
now we see, in Saskatchewan, a health care crisis that is of 
extraordinary proportions that was created by this government 
because of its underfunding and cut-backs to the health care 
system. Cut-backs for health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but a $9 
million birthday party for its Tory friends. 
 
The government’s record on health care in this province is a 
national disgrace. They have developed no long term strategy in 
health care. Instead, they’ve chosen to hack and slash in a 
piecemeal fashion that has caused untold hardship in this 
province to the sick and the elderly. They chose to do this to try 
to pay off their huge deficit — $3.6 billion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They chose to do this to pay off their huge deficit 
which was created by them to begin with because of their 
mismanagement, misplaced priorities and misguided policies. 
 
They slashed away at the children’s school-based dental plan. 
They cut, I believe, $7 million from the dental plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And the cost of one birthday party could buy back that 
dental program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Meanwhile we have some 
400 dental workers who were put out of work, 400 dental 
workers out of work as a result of their policies. And one 
birthday party could have put that dental plan back, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Not to mention the parents who are having to travel long 
distances in many cases to get their children to a dentist, who 
are having to take time off work and bear the expense of that — 
not to mention the travelling expenses — parents who are 
having to take time off in urban Saskatchewan to take their 
children to a dentist and lose a day’s pay or half-a-day’s pay, 
whatever it might take for their family. 
 
So there are hidden costs here with respect to the destruction of 
the school-based children’s dental plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
hidden costs, not simply the costs of the 400 dental workers, as 
bad as that may be. There are further costs to the parents who 
are attempting to maintain the spirit of the plan and continue to 
take their children to a dentist. Yet this government has $9 
million for a Tory birthday party in 1990. 
 
And the cuts to the prescription drug plan are another  

example of this government’s priorities. In 1988 the 
government cut 7 million from the drug plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — 7 million from the drug plan. And their cut-backs to 
the prescription drug plan caused considerable hardship to 
many seniors and elderly people in this province — 
considerable hardship, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We see long hospital waiting lists. They are almost 9,000, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this province, almost 9,000 people waiting 
to get into the hospital for needed surgery. And this is causing a 
lot of hardship to many people, and I hear from them on a 
regular basis. 
 
But what do they do? They choose, they choose a $9 million 
birthday party, a $9 million birthday party to celebrate. To 
celebrate what? — the long hospital waiting lists? Is it to 
celebrate the long hospital waiting lists and the people who are 
suffering, waiting to get their needed surgery? 
 
And we look at staff levels in hospitals. Many hospitals are 
grossly understaffed and so are nursing homes in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I hear from people who are in 
hospitals, and I hear from staff who are working in hospitals — 
patients in hospitals and staff — about the hardship that’s being 
created as a result of understaffing in hospitals. But what does 
this government choose to do? It chooses to spend $9 million on 
a birthday party instead of dealing with hospital waiting lists 
and staffing the hospitals. 
 
We see cut-backs to public health nurses. We see cut-backs to 
public health nurses in this province through a twinning 
arrangement. We hear from people around Saskatchewan about 
the hardship that the cut-backs are creating for them. This 
government says it’s interested in preventative health care, but 
it cuts back on the front line workers of preventative health care 
— the public health nurses. And the area that many of these 
nurses are serving now is far too large, and they have less time 
to spend with their clients and their patients than what they 
should have, and more time is spent travelling around the 
province and dealing with bureaucratic matters as a result of 
government cut-backs. 
 
But this government has $9 million to spend on a birthday party 
instead of staffing our public health offices across the province. 
Instead of putting more front line preventative health workers 
out in the province, they choose to have a $9 million birthday 
celebration in an election year. 
 
And when we look at what’s happening in northern 
Saskatchewan, you see understaffing of community health 
workers. You see cut-backs to the northern food transportation 
subsidy. You see cut-backs in northern Saskatchewan to health 
care workers and to food subsidies, but they’ve got $9 million 
for a birthday party — $9 million for a birthday party. Well that 
shows where this government’s priorities are, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And what we hear the Minister of Health saying and other 
members of the PC government, the Premier and other 
members, is that health care costs are spiralling out of control. 
That’s a common theme that we hear out there —  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

377 
 

health care costs are spiralling out of control. Well we know 
that’s not true. The evidence shows that that’s not true. In fact 
the SHA (Saskatchewan Hospital Association) said that there 
was no cause for hysteria; that yes, health care costs are 
increasing, but there’s no cause for hysteria. They’re not out of 
control, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The government says there’s no money for health, but $9 
million for a birthday party in its 85th — not its 75th or 100th 
birthday, Mr. Deputy Speaker — its 85th birthday, its 85th 
birthday. 
 
They have $12 million a year for empty office space, and I 
wonder how much of that is rented from friends. In fact, with 
respect to this $9 million birthday party, we saw rural 
municipality officials call on the government to cancel the 
birthday celebrations. Now I hope that this government has 
listened to that message. If it refuses to listen to us, I hope it 
will at least listen to the R.M. officials. 
 
With respect to the birthday party, I’m just . . . I read an article 
in the paper that said that there would be presentations of, I 
believe, $50,000 made for this project or that project during the 
course of this birthday party in 1990, in an election year. Well 
one of the things that we heard about, when we were 
campaigning down in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, is that some 
people were saying, you vote for us if you want your hospital. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that how they intend to use this $9 
million for its birthday party? Is that how they intend to use it, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to try and buy votes? Is that what they 
intend to do? Well with the arrogance that we’ve seen on the 
part of the PC government and the Premier, I wouldn’t doubt it, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
Yes, I’d say it’s time for this government to start behaving 
responsibly on a fiscal basis. It’s time for this government to 
stop its cut-backs to health care and education and social 
programs. It’s time for this government to start funding health 
care properly, to start funding education properly, and to get its 
priorities straight in the manner that the people and the men and 
women of this province would like them to do. 
 
The $9 million birthday party is just another excuse for 
patronage and waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another excuse for 
patronage and waste. Well, the government talks and advocates 
belt-tightening during these rough economic times, yet the 
Premier insists on spending 46,000 a year to rent an office in 
Prince Albert while a government building stands empty right 
across the street. 
 
Pocklington received, as I understand, $480,000 in grants plus 
5.9 million mortgage loan from this government to open a 
Gainers plant. In 1987 alone SaskTel paid 691,000 to travel 
agencies, yet we don’t have jobs for young people. We still 
have children starving in this province. We have long hospital 
waiting lists. We have a decimated school-based children’s 
dental plan. And the list goes on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s time for this government to get its priorities straight, to 
cancel its birthday celebration, and to start spending its money 
where it counts, and where the people of this  

province want the money spent. And that’s in our major 
services such as health, education and social services. It’s time 
for this government to get its priorities straight and to get its 
fiscal house in order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to start spending 
its money, or our money — the taxpayers’ money — 
responsibly, because that’s what the people want it to do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to second the motion. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to rise in the Assembly today to address this debate. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with some source of amusement 
that I find when I take a look at the wording of the motion itself 
— this is motion no. 9, Mr. Speaker — and in that motion the 
member from Saskatoon South refers to a birthday party. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I find it quite a waste of time to talk about a 
birthday party that in fact does not exist. 
 
And I don’t want to waste the time of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, in debating something that is fabricated by the 
members of the opposition. But I am assuming, Mr. Speaker, 
that from the wording of this motion, from the words expressed 
by the members opposite that the members must be referring to 
the Future Corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, if 
that is the case, and I do trust that it is, I will confine my 
remarks to the Future Corporation — not a birthday party but to 
the Future Corporation, and the other implications that stem 
from the motion that we have before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make the case today that the Future 
Corporation was established to co-ordinate very special 
programs and special events throughout the year 1990. These 
special programs, Mr. Speaker, will highlight Saskatchewan 
people, will promote new ideas and technology that is going to 
take us into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon South motion specifically reads, 
“. . . election year birthday party.” The member from Saskatoon 
South refers to 1990 as an election year, and that that is why the 
Future Corporation was formed. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
suggest to you, and I suggest to all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan that 1990 may not be an election year. Perhaps 
1989, perhaps this very year we will have an election. Perhaps 
the election may be called tomorrow; it may be called in 1991. 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, it is somewhat presumptuous of the 
opposition to say that 1990 is going to be an election year. 
 
When I stop and think about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps 
we should have an election soon. When I stop and look back in 
recent history, just a few months ago, 1988 was not a bad year 
to have an election. And the member who currently sits in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is good testimony to the fact that 1988 
was not a bad year for an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And I’d say, Mr. Speaker, if that is  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

378 
 

the thinking of the opposition, if the opposition does think 
there’s going to be an election soon, I would say that it would 
be fair ball . . . fair advice for the opposition to get ready, to get 
for an election, Mr. Speaker. And I say that with some good 
reason, and the reason is as follows: the NDP have no policy 
today. The NDP, and I look at them across the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, have sat in opposition for seven years. For seven 
years, Mr. Speaker, they have had an opportunity to discuss 
with the people of Saskatchewan, to discuss with the members 
in their own caucus, to discuss at their party conventions, what 
their policies and their programs and their suggestions and their 
alternatives might be. But I ask the members of the NDP Party, 
have you brought forward any reasonable solutions or 
alternatives? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is a flat, outright no. 
 
I take a look at this specific motion here today, Mr. Speaker, 
along with the first 10 or 12 or 15 motions on the blues on the 
order paper, all put forward by members of the NDP Party, all 
put forward by members in the NDP Party. And Mr. Speaker, is 
there one, is there one positive solution, alternative, or 
suggestion by the members of the NDP Party among those 17 
motions? Mr. Speaker, there is not one. There is not one. 
 
Here today is another example of something that is straight 
negative, straight critical, straight condemnation. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP got up this morning and 
they said, well what negative things can we think of today? 
What negative things can we bring forward in the Saskatchewan 
legislature? Well, Mr. Speaker, is that the tone, is that the 
mood, is that the way of Saskatchewan people? Is that at the 
heart of Saskatchewan people? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that members in opposition 
have a right and a responsibility to criticize. And I think the 
people of Saskatchewan recognize that as well. But, Mr. 
Speaker, when it is day after day, straight condemnation, 
criticizing, and not a positive alternative or solution put 
forward, Mr. Speaker, the people across Saskatchewan are 
saying, hey, what is wrong with the NDP? Their own people in 
the NDP Party are scratching their heads and saying, did we 
make a mistake electing our new leader? Have we done the 
right thing? 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there any wonder that there is 
disunity and a lack of harmony and disorganization in the NDP 
caucus today. There’s no question that that is there, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s not easy . . . pardon me, not hard to see why. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, the NDP thus far, all they have done in 
seven years is criticize. Mr. Speaker, the NDP are a negative 
bunch of people in this Saskatchewan legislature. I don’t 
believe that they’re even serving their own members properly or 
correctly when all they do is create all this negativity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I apply that directly to the motion that we’re 
talking about here today, and let’s talk directly and specifically 
about the future. And, Mr. Speaker, is it right, is it right that we 
stick our heads in the sand and we say no; well, we’re not going 
to worry about the future; we’re  

just going to let it take care of itself. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
very nature of the Future Corporation is looking into the future, 
looking at change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are living today in one of the most exciting 
and interesting times that this country and this world has ever 
seen. Technology is advancing on us so very, very quickly. 
Computerization is run amass in the public. Young people have 
the right, young people have the right, Mr. Speaker, and leaders 
in Saskatchewan and elsewhere have a responsibility to guide 
the young people in Saskatchewan, guide the entire population, 
in fact, into the future with some positive suggestions, some 
positive alternatives. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what the Future Corporation is all 
about. The mandate of the Future Corporation is to create a 
better awareness of our province’s accomplishments in things 
like research and development, computerization, technology, 
change. And how is that accomplished, Mr. Speaker? Well, 
frankly, by education — through the education system, Mr. 
Speaker. The Future Corporation will play a very, very major 
role with and alongside the educational system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon South — and I recall 
his remarks in condemning our government for forming the 
corporation because of financial constraints in certain 
departments — and he talks about health, for instance, and I’d 
like to talk about that just a little bit. And I’d like to perhaps, 
Mr. Speaker, set the record straight, set the record clear on 
health care and health care expenditures under this 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fiscal year, if my memory serves me correctly, 
approximately one and one-quarter billion dollars was spent on 
health care in this province. Mr. Speaker, if you take that and 
divide it by the population that we have, that’s about $1,250 per 
man, woman and child. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you compare the expenditures on health 
care with those expenditures made in the year 1982 by the 
former administration, that is about a 68 per cent increase. Mr. 
Speaker, when you woke up this morning, in this province of 
Saskatchewan approximately $3 million today was spent on 
health care. Mr. Speaker, that is not a cut-back. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan have every right to know 
the real figures and the real truth about health care expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a very good record when it 
comes to the expenditures on health care, and I compare that 
with the record of the NDP. And the NDP member from 
Saskatoon South today admittedly was the minister of Health 
for some time in this province, and I’d like to talk just a little bit 
about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member talked today about waiting lists in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and indeed there are waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. 
But I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, those waiting lists have been 
reduced under this administration. I will tell you further, Mr. 
Speaker, that one of the reasons for the waiting lists are such 
things as CAT scans. There’s a big demand, a big waiting list 
for  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

379 
 

CAT scans, CAT scans here in the province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you, under the NDP there were 
not any waiting lists for CAT scans, a zero waiting list. And do 
you know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because under the NDP 
administration they refused to buy a single CAT scanner for the 
people in this province. Mr. Speaker, we have spent many 
millions of dollars buying CAT scanners for the people of this 
province. So the NDP say, well, there wasn’t any waiting lists. 
You bet. Under the NDP, there weren’t any CAT scans either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give you a quotation from that very 
member from Saskatoon South who was the minister of Health 
at one time, and I don’t remember exactly the year, but it was 
under the NDP administration. And that member from 
Saskatoon South talked about waiting lists. Well, I’ll give you 
his quotation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon South, the NDP member from Saskatoon South, 
referred in a speech at one point in his career: 
 

To run an efficient hospital system, you must have a 
waiting list. I have said this on a number of occasions. A 
waiting list is an efficient way of running a hospital 
system. Those who run efficient hospital systems do have 
waiting lists. 
 

(1545) 
 
That is the current NDP member for Saskatoon South. So I 
debate the member on the point, Mr. Speaker. I say that it is 
somewhat hypocritical for him to be talking that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move on to some other areas that 
the member referred to, or perhaps some that he didn’t refer to. 
And a shining example in the health care field of what 
technology is giving the people today, and the shining example, 
Mr. Speaker, is the new computerized health card. Here is a 
card, Mr. Speaker, that a few years ago was not possible to have 
because of lack of technology. Now today, Mr. Speaker, things 
have changed. Computerization is a very, very big part of 
society today, and this administration, with the help of the 
people in Saskatchewan, has developed a new computerized 
health card system. 
 
This is technology, Mr. Speaker. This is change, Mr. Speaker. 
This is the future, Mr. Speaker, and an example of how the 
Future Corporation can adapt to such things as health cards is, I 
will just bet you, Mr. Speaker, that some of the programs and 
some of the policies and some of the efforts that that 
corporation will have with our young people will be coming up 
with other ideas similar, similar to the health card system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are opposed to the new health card. 
The NDP has said that it wouldn’t work and they wouldn’t have 
done it that way. Well, Mr. Speaker, testimony, testimony to the 
fact that that health card is a good idea is the fact that different 
jurisdictions from all over North America, and indeed in other 
foreign countries, have contacted this government and are 
today, as we speak, investigating the possibility of 
implementing a health card system similar to that of 
Saskatchewan’s. 
 

Mr. Speaker, is that something that we can be proud of in 
Saskatchewan? I submit to you that the answer is yes. Yes, we 
can be proud of the new health card in Saskatchewan. Yes, we 
can be proud of the people in Saskatchewan. And indeed the 
Future Corporation and its mandate, its very mandate of its 
existence, is to look at different changes in technologies and 
research and development, and involve the people of 
Saskatchewan, whether it’s in the educational system or 
whether it’s right within local communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this is, is representative of a government’s 
attitude, representative, Mr. Speaker, of this government’s 
attitude that we do have a strong belief in the public of 
Saskatchewan. We, Mr. Speaker, tend to try, try and be as 
positive as we can, and have that positive belief and trust in the 
people of Saskatchewan that we together can come up with 
good, new ideas; that we as a people in Saskatchewan can adapt 
to the technologies and the changes that are taking us in right 
now to the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and there’s a big, big difference. There’s a big 
difference in the fundamental belief and a fundamental attitude 
that people on this side of the House have, as opposed to the 
NDP who are a bunch of career critics, and all they can do, Mr. 
Speaker, is criticize and condemn and be negative, Mr. Speaker, 
and there’s a big, big difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have gone on and berated this whole 
corporation across this province. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, if 
there’s one thing that I will admit to here today is the fact that 
perhaps, perhaps we as a government have not done as good a 
job as we could have in telling the people of Saskatchewan 
exactly what this corporation will be doing. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
will tell you that the story will be told. 
 
And one of the best examples of that was the other day in the 
constituency of Humboldt — and I believe it was right in the 
city of Humboldt, but correct me if I’m wrong; but I do know it 
was in the constituency of Humboldt — the Future Corporation 
held an informational meeting. And it was very interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, to witness at that event some of the participants. One 
of the participants in particular, Mr. Speaker, was the member 
for Humboldt, the member for Humboldt. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that member sat in the front row, as I am led 
to believe, listened to the presentation made by the Future 
Corporation, and immediately thereafter stood openly, publicly, 
amongst his constituents and had words of praise for the 
corporation, for the mandate of the corporation, and for what is 
likely to transpire in 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that the member from Humboldt has 
some explaining to do to his caucus. I would invite the member 
for Humboldt today to perhaps speak on this issue . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come clean. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And as one member said, come clean 
with your real true feelings. Because I know that that member 
was standing, just a few days ago, amongst  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

380 
 

his constituents after hearing an address by the president of the 
Future Corporation, and that NDP member publicly and openly 
supported it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn for a few moments to the president 
or the head or the CEO, or whatever the title is, of the Future 
Corporation. That man is a man by the name of Cliff Wright. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that a very wise choice has been made by 
this government in appointing Mr. Wright as the head of the 
Future Corporation. 
 
Mr. Wright has had a long history in municipal politics, being a 
very successful mayor in the city of Saskatoon, and I believe he 
is a man who has a very, very good understanding and idea of 
the very nature of Saskatchewan people. I do know, Mr. 
Speaker, that Mr. Wright has an open invitation to go to various 
communities, give his presentation, and talk to the people about 
what the Future Corporation really means to them and really 
means to all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that in time, in a very short time, 
people will be very, very supportive of the mandate of the 
Future Corporation. I believe that the brochures are now out to 
all communities across Saskatchewan. I submit to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that interest is growing in the Future Corporation, in 
the programs that it will deploy in the year 1990. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I once again say that the members of the NDP 
have made not a wise choice in condemning this initiative, that 
they should have — as in many things — studied the facts, 
studied the facts before they jumped to their feet and assumed 
that 1990 was going to be an election year, because it may well 
not. The members should not have jumped to their feet and said, 
it is just a birthday party, because it is not just a birthday party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What it is is something that will touch the very fabric of people 
all across this province. What it will do, for instance, Mr. 
Speaker, is encourage tourism to various communities. This 
government has a firm and a solid belief in local people, in local 
communities banding together and deciding for themselves how 
they may best attract tourists, and perhaps it will be a theme 
within the Future Corporation in the year 1990 that does that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here again the members opposite do not have 
the understanding of how important the tourist trade is to the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is predicted that by 
the year 2000 or sooner that tourism will be the biggest industry 
in North America, and, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon 
leaders in the Government of Saskatchewan to encourage that 
type of an industry. Mr. Speaker, the Future Corporation is a 
prime example of a vehicle that can do just what I say and 
attract tourists to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the opposition, if it was left to them, 
would they have established a program or a policy or a 
corporation like this? No, Mr. Speaker, they would not have. 
Mr. Speaker, do the members in opposition, do the NDP have 
that trust and belief and faith in local people, taking on local 
programs and local initiatives and deciding what is best in their 
communities? No, Mr.  

Speaker, they do not have that belief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit once again to you that the Future 
Corporation will take us well into the 1990s. We are moving in 
a rapid fashion. Change is about us all over, Mr. Speaker, and 
we have to accept the change and grow towards the changes 
that are taking place about us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I definitely do not support the motion that has 
been made by the members opposite, but I do have an 
amendment that I would like to propose and this is moved by 
myself, seconded by the member for Redberry: 
 

 That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and that the following be substituted therefor: 
 
 That this Assembly commend the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the creation of the Future Corporation 
which will serve our citizens in preparing for the future of 
this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to address 
this motion. I agree with my colleague that this motion was . . . 
by the opposition, was worded inappropriately. The member 
from Saskatoon South speaks of an imaginary birthday party. 
And seeing that the Future Corporation is within the realm of 
this motion, I too will focus my attention on discussing the 
merits of the corporation. 
 
I will not speak at great lengths on this subject. It is such a 
small part of the Future Corporation, but a subject that is 
grossly exaggerated by the opposition members. 
 
I cannot understand why the members opposite chose to ignore 
the positive effects and aspects of this corporation. In order to 
get to any kind of detail on the Future Corporation, I too find it 
necessary to outline for the member from Saskatoon South the 
corporation’s mandate. The mandate is to build a better 
awareness of our province’s accomplishments in the areas of 
research and technology and to encourage the development of 
new and novel projects, projects that will be developed by the 
people of this province. The corporation endeavours to reach 
the broadest spectrum of the people in all parts of the province 
and of all age levels. 
 
Let’s be realistic. Advanced technology is impacting 
Saskatchewan’s culture and our economy. The way in which we 
handle the technical change will determine Saskatchewan’s 
success in the world of the future. The Future Corporation is 
offering to our public the opportunity to participate in the 
consideration of how we will react to future change. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have a long list of major contributions in 
the area of technical advancements. We have a list of over 100 
firsts, and I could not possibly discuss them all at this time, so 
I’ll be selective. Because the member from Saskatoon South 
took time to hit on health, I feel obliged to do the same, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Without notes, I could reel off a number of our 
accomplishments in this area, a very notable  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

381 
 

accomplishment like the new Wascana Rehabilitation Centre 
and a cancer clinic. 
 
The Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
facility that will be unsurpassed in all of Canada once it’s 
complete. The new cancer clinic is a facility with world-class 
equipment. Some of that equipment was developed right here in 
Saskatchewan, and one piece of equipment was developed by 
our very own Lieutenant Governor. We in Saskatchewan are 
achievers. We’re in the front line of the technological 
advancements in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government cares about the people of 
Saskatchewan. Look at our Everyone Wins program. It was a 
program established to motivate individuals and communities to 
engage in a healthy life-style, a program geared towards 
educating our people, towards improved and healthier 
life-styles. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is preventative health 
care. 
 
Another major accomplishment introduced recently was our 
innovative health card. That little innovative card is quite an 
accomplishment. That card is capable of recording our entire 
medical history. It will, in the near future, have recorded our 
allergies, our regular medications, our individual ailments, and 
even our blood type. I can tell you that once the card’s full 
capabilities are carried out, you and I will not be without it, and 
neither will the members of the opposition, because they realize 
what kind of advancements our government made in regard to 
health. They know what the little card is capable of. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, look at the Saskatchewan Commission on 
Directions in Health Care. They’re right now examining a wide 
range of health issues, and they are doing so in direct 
consultation with the public and with the health care providers. 
They’re looking towards the future management of the health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon South mentioned 
social services. I think my colleague who spoke before me 
made a good point in regard to welfare reform, and I’d like to 
elaborate on it. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to welfare reform. 
We are not initiating welfare reform to save money. The direct 
opposite is the case. We are providing employable people with 
jobs. If this government wanted to save money we would keep 
these people on welfare. This government chooses to address 
what the opposition members chose to ignore. We realize that 
self-respect and dignity is worth paying for. We are providing 
these people, previously on welfare, with their dignity. 
 
The members opposite surely don’t think that these people want 
to remain on welfare. They want to get their feet back on the 
ground. We’re giving them a chance. Surely the members 
opposite don’t want these people on welfare. Just because it’s 
cheaper for a government doesn’t mean it’s right. 
 
I think the people opposite are out of touch with the  

people. They criticize welfare reform. They say that we’re 
forcing people to take low paying jobs. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those jobs are an incentive. They pay more than 
welfare does, and we want to see that more are offered to our 
employable welfare recipients. 
 
And seeing that I’m on the topic of social services, I feel once 
again compelled to brag about another first, the development of 
a fully automated computer system for social assistance 
programs in Saskatchewan. This computer system was 
implemented province-wide to improve client service and to 
strengthen program control. Mr. Speaker, this system is the 
most advanced of its kind in North American — again, Mr. 
Speaker, in North America. 
 
Yet another area that the member from Saskatoon South 
discussed was education. Well I say that education is what the 
Future Corporation is all about. You can say that $9 million that 
the member from Saskatoon South refers to is actually going 
towards education. Education is where the future lies, and 
education is the base for future growth. 
 
I say our PC government has made education accessible to 
more students today than it has ever been in Saskatchewan. 
Distance education and a new SCAN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network) program, just introduced 
on March 8, have ensured that education is accessible to our 
students wherever they may be in the province. Through 
distance education, rural students have the opportunity to take 
university and technical institute courses in the regional college 
in their area. 
 
Credit courses, Mr. Speaker: this government is working with 
those educational institutions to ensure that these credits are 
transferable in the smoothest way possible. Rural students can 
keep on working on their family farms or keep their part-time 
job in their communities while attending a post-secondary 
institution. They can live at home and attend university. We are 
giving them an option. They don’t have to move to go to 
school. 
 
Through SCAN, students in remote areas in Saskatchewan will 
have access to educational programming via cablevision and 
satellite broadcast. Students of all ages will benefit from SCAN. 
Professionals can upgrade from their home. Single parents who 
find it hard and difficult to leave the home now have access 
through SCAN to education that they may not otherwise have 
had the time before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Future Corporation projects and programming 
will also reach these people. Any group, organization or 
individual can apply for a grant available through the Future 
Corporation. They can hold seminars and they can organize 
science fairs. They can even hold a celebration of sorts in 
appreciation of Saskatchewan’s past and future contributions to 
research and technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the people of this 
province. The Future Corporation mandate is to build a better 
awareness of our province’s accomplishments; its mandate, to 
encourage the development of new projects. The grants 
available to our  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

382 
 

people through the Future Corporation will foster new 
development. Because of this, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the 
proposed motion, and I will definitely second the amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 14 — Opportunities for Northern 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be moving the 
resolution which will be also seconded by the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
The essence of the resolution, resolution no. 14, is the overall 
aspect of the PC government neglect of northern Saskatchewan. 
And this is not a new story because this has been happening 
since 1982, and every year we have introduced a resolution of 
this regard basically because the situation gets a lot harder for a 
lot of children, seniors, and families and workers of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It also, as time goes on, shows that the traditional resource users 
such as trappers, and fishermen and women, and also the 
small-business sector and the wild rice growers, and so on, are 
seeing a lot more and more positive benefits for big business in 
northern Saskatchewan and a lot less for them. 
 
In regards to the central aspect of the resolution, the thing that 
really concerns a lot of people time and again throughout all 
these years is the whole question of unemployment. I must say 
that the people have been very positive and they’ve always been 
providing a lot of suggestions for action all these years, but 
these suggestions have fallen on deaf ears. The fact of the 
matter is this: when a lot of people are looking at an over 9 per 
cent unemployment rate for the rest of the province, we have a 
50 to 80 per cent unemployment in northern Saskatchewan, and 
that is absolutely devastating. 
 
Most of the records and experiences of people throughout the 
world and also here in Saskatchewan, whether we look back in 
the early 1900s or during the Dirty Thirties, or at times when 
the unemployment rate has risen, the fact remains is that the 
pressure on families becomes unbearable and many things start 
happening. 
 
One of the most important things that have happened in the past 
six years, over six years, and has happened quite continuously, 
is that there is a rising level of suicide rates in northern 
Saskatchewan. When you look at the research base, it states 
very clearly that for every 1 per cent rise in unemployment 
there’s a 4 per cent rise in suicide rates. And as I looked at the 
records, in particular as I looked at the story of my own 
community back in the about ’82, ’83, ’84 period at a time 
when the housing pretty well stopped because of PC federal 
policy and because of PC provincial policy, the lack of jobs for 
the summer so that they can continue their benefits through the 
winter, created a crisis condition. And for a community who 
was very, very proud of their history of working in the mines 
and working in the forests and working in the farms, they 
became to be involved in a situation where it was  

becoming difficult for their youth to look forward into the 
future. 
 
As a result, a lot of the people started seeing a lot of breakdown 
in their communications with their youth. And many of the 
youth took on to drugs and alcohol and started rebelling against 
some of the advice that more elderly people and their parents 
were saying at the community level. During that period in time, 
there was a tremendous amount of community upheaval; a lot 
of the students were crying out for help but nobody was 
listening. The government was not listening. In that particular 
three-year period, about 13 people committed suicide — all 
relatively young, or young families. 
 
And as I look back in history, I recognize the fact of that it is 
such a tremendous, terrible impact for people, and this has 
continued. And although people try to get groups to work 
together to try and resolve this problem, it can never recover the 
loss of losing a loved one in regards to the suicide rates. And 
many people recognize, as there is pressure taking place right 
now in Saskatchewan, that it causes not only the tendency for 
greater suicide rates to increase but it causes a lot of family 
problems. 
 
There’s a lot of family breakdowns. Not only do the youth try 
and argue for a job, but because there isn’t one, they develop 
conflicts within the family. But also the spouse who finds a job 
comes back and is laid off and tries to look for another job and 
is laid off again. Then he tries to look for another job, they can’t 
find it, and after doing it about three, four times, they quit going 
to look for a job. And it’s very disappointing during that period 
because a lot of the family fights take place during that time. 
People start blaming themselves because they cannot get a job, 
and as a result, a lot of fights take place between the man and 
the wife. 
 
And in that regard, a lot of the family breakdowns occur 
because there is really a lack of economic support, basic 
support, you know, for the family as a whole because at the 
same time you are getting a lot more children who are hungry. 
And I’m glad that we are starting to recognize that problem that 
one out of every four children is now going hungry because 
that’s the impact of unemployment. It really, really, really 
destroys the future that all of the children are really looking for 
when they are growing up with their parents at the community 
level. 
 
So I see it from a direct basis that a lot of people don’t 
experience, as I come to the South. A lot of them are 
experiencing it at a 9 per cent level. I see it and experience it at 
an 80 per cent level. And I can tell you that it’s a highly 
destructive force. 
 
Many times when the need for jobs was there and it was 
requested and the social aid programs came, the welfare 
programs came, many people said, we do not want the welfare 
programs; what we want are jobs. We want those pay cheques 
in the same way as anybody else, not the welfare cheques. We 
want to be able to make sure that we provide and are 
responsible for our own families. And that is the essence of the 
message that I was raised with and I was born with as I lived up 
in Cumberland and having travelled around at the community 
level. 
 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

383 
 

So the impact of unemployment is very destructive, not only to 
the individual children and the individual youth who are trying 
to look forward to the future, but also the families. It destroys 
families. 
 
Many people fight. I’ve seen people who never used to fight 
before when I was growing up, now fighting at the community 
level at a greater rate than I’ve ever seen before. And the same 
thing with child neglect. It was really unheard of before; now 
we see it today. And those are the hard core facts of 
unemployment as we look at the question when we raise it time 
and time again. 
 
(1615) 
 
When I looked at the . . . So overall I may say that 
unemployment is a destructive aspect on the individual, it’s a 
destructive aspect on the family, and it’s also a destructive 
factor in breaking down a lot of our communities. 
 
And when I looked at the record of the Progressive 
Conservative government in the past six years, I looked at the 
one characteristic about PCs and Conservatives in general, and 
that was the whole issue of the upholding of law. There’s a 
great ideology within the Conservative ranks about making sure 
that we follow the law, that we don’t break the law, that indeed 
the regulations that are provided by our legislatures, by our 
system, are important and we should not break them. 
 
But when I look at the record, what people are telling me in the 
North is this: that the law is bent for the big corporations, but 
the law becomes very strict on the people. And I’ll provide an 
example. For many years, people have been saying that the 
unemployment rate is unacceptable and that we should have 
definite goals of improving the number of people employed at 
the mines. 
 
And that came to be a big issue in the ’70s, so an affirmative 
action lease agreement strategy was brought in by the NDP 
government. And that, when I looked about it in the past, was 
the most successful thing in the history of employment in the 
North. Although there was a need for improvement of the 
particular record, even within the NDP years, there was a 
greater level of employment than ever existed before. Not only 
were people employed during the construction phase but in the 
operational phases as well. 
 
Because what tended to happen in the past was this. When 
people went into the construction jobs in the North and they 
built, let’s say, Sandy Bay or Island Falls hydroelectric power 
development and they built the dam there, or when they built 
the mine in Flin Flon, a lot of Indian and Metis labour was used. 
And during that period in time a lot of people went on their own 
and got the jobs there because they wanted to partake in 
economic development, and a lot of them . . . and their record is 
not known. 
 
I talked to and did research for the community of Sandy Bay 
and I interviewed people who had worked 40 years for the 
company, but they never received anything, or they received 
very little. And it’s very important therefore to recognize that a 
lot of people had wanted to be part of  

development. They always will be part of development. They 
wanted to be part and have a fair share of the jobs that exist in 
the North. That’s exactly the precise message. 
 
And when I look at the whole aspect of the ideology of law by 
the Conservatives, it’s to make the people pay that are poor, is 
what I see. Be very harsh with the law when it comes down to 
the poor. When it comes down to the trapper or the fishermen 
and women who are out there on their species limit, hire 
helicopters to look after them, because that’s what’s happening. 
We see sometimes people going with video cameras, chasing 
people out on the lake, acting like they’re tourists and looking 
at that, and spending a lot of money in trying to track down 
people trying to make a living. 
 
And when I look at the record that you have a 50 per cent hiring 
clause for northern Saskatchewan, which is the law and the 
regulation in this province, this government turned that from a 
good record, which was about 50, 55 per cent, and now it’s 
down. It went all the way down to about 15 per cent, 19 per 
cent. And now I look at the records, it’s 28 per cent. But the 28 
per cent is on Northerners, on native people, which is the intent 
on the human rights code. It’s only about 12 per cent. And so 
we’re looking at a fact that the law is not being followed. 
 
And at the same time . . . I just got a call, even yesterday, by 
one of the tourist outfitters who is trying hard to make a living 
up in the North. He said that he was being harassed basically 
because the officers had made a mistake in regards to one of the 
charges that they were trying to give him, but they didn’t find 
sufficient enough proof. So that they were harassing him and he 
was finally told, I think, yesterday that he had to watch himself. 
And it’s a very sad situation, you know, for people to have to 
put up with that. When they want to try hard to make a living, 
they are pressed and pushed hard for regulating you. 
 
And it’s not that people don’t want regulations. They want these 
regulations because it saves their livelihood in the long run, 
because it’s for their own protection. But they are saying, why 
are you regulating us at such a tight level when you will not 
follow the regulations of the big corporations? You’re 
deregulating the big corporations. And that is what the message 
of the people is in regards to the aspect of law. 
 
They say very straightforward, there is one law for the rich and 
the big corporations and the friends of the Tories, and another 
law for the people who are trying hard to make a living in 
northern Saskatchewan, whether it’s small business, tourist 
operators, trappers, fishermen and women, or many other 
people who are trying to find employment in the North. So 
that’s the central message that I see that’s happening. 
 
The other aspect that’s very important to recognize, you know, 
for the record, is this. People are always saying, why doesn’t 
the government consult with us? And I must say for the record 
that, you know, for the first time now we had a minister that 
does a lot more travel in the North than ever before. Now what 
I’m seeing is the lack of action, though. 
 
The fact is this, that when I looked at the ads and I looked  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

384 
 

at the fact that there was supposed to be a model of 
co-operation in regards to northern development, and I 
mentioned it in the throne speech before, that the model of 
co-operation was such where the people took a strong stand in 
Cumberland, and they did it in such a way that the government 
wasn’t listening, and they tried to get back at the government 
that they weren’t listening. So they finally brought in the media. 
And they brought in that . . . and built in the weir at 
Cumberland, and brought in public attention so that there was 
action taking place after that. 
 
But I think what the people are saying is that they’re very open 
and they want to co-operate. They don’t only want to co-operate 
in settling, you know, 60-year agreement on compensation in 
Sandy Bay or a 35-year lack of compensation efforts in regards 
to Southend, but they want also to co-operate in regards to the 
construction that takes place on the roads that lead to the mine. 
They want those roads upgraded because a lot of them are fairly 
dangerous when those great big trucks come rolling down there 
with a lot of the dangerous chemicals that are sitting in the back 
of those trucks, and a lot of people are forced off the roads. 
 
What our people are saying is that, let’s improve those roads. 
Not only should they be big enough to carry the big trucks so 
that they could travel around and take the ore out from northern 
Saskatchewan, but those roads should be built safe for the 
people to travel in. That indeed it would create a lot of jobs, not 
only the highways from P.A. to La Ronge, but also the highly 
unfinished one from P.A. to Creighton, and also into 
communities like Sandy Bay, into communities like 
Grandmother’s Bay, the roads from Cumberland to the mine, 
the roads up to Southend, the road up to Wollaston Lake, 
building the road not only to the mine in Wollaston Lake — 
there’s a road right up to the mine, but there isn’t one to the 
community. There isn’t one to the community. Right there in 
Wollaston the people want those roads. It means a lot of jobs 
for the people. And I think that is what the people are saying. 
They are not opposed to the development. They would like to 
see the development continue in the North. They want to 
partake in the development. 
 
The other point that is mentioned quite often is this. Not only is 
there a lack of jobs or a lack of real consultation, but there is a 
lack of economic support for the people at the community level. 
They say about a billion dollars is taken out from the North, and 
I mean a billion dollars. That’s a tremendous amount of money. 
 
Last year one of the uranium mining companies made $385 
million. They sold $385 million worth of uranium — $385 
million worth of uranium. There was $60 million clear profit. 
That same company makes 52 million this past year, clear 
_cut profit. 
 
What the people are saying is this. They don’t want the whole 
60 million. All they’re saying is, why don’t you take $10 
million for community development so that our children can 
drink fresh water. Many of the places do not have running 
water. They would like to have the jobs to build the sewer and 
water systems in the North. Many of the people still have the 
basic necessities and in having to deal with ordinary, common 
everyday living. 

And I think what the people are saying is that the economic 
subsidies for the big corporations is there. We see 32 miles of 
road being built for Weyerhaeuser every year and, of course, the 
government says oh, we’re doing all kinds of positive . . . of 
course, it’s positive. It’s positive for Weyerhaeuser. But there 
used to be subsidies for trappers to build roads for themselves 
as they went into the new areas to trap. Because when they 
depleted, you know, one aspect of their trap line, they would 
move to another area and there would always be growth after a 
few years. And they would need a little bit of economic support 
to be able to build those roads because the costs of gas was so 
so expensive — about three, four times the rate in some of those 
communities than we do over here. 
 
And it’s very important to recognize that that’s what the people 
are saying. They said, we don’t want hand-outs, but we want 
support when we want to build our roads so that we can make a 
living for our children and our families so we can get to the trap 
line. That’s what the trappers are saying. 
 
When I talk to the fishermen and women, they say we want the 
transportation subsidy, you know, that was taken away from us. 
We made a little bit of money from pickerel, but it seems that 
every time we make a little bit of money off something, you 
take that subsidy away. But on the other hand, you will still 
subsidize liquor in northern Saskatchewan. You will not 
subsidize the food that the fishermen and women can get for 
their family, but you will subsidize liquor. 
 
And that’s the biggest contradiction that people see in the 
North. There used to be a full transportation subsidy plan 
before, but it’s all gone. It was replaced by a $25 grant to 
welfare people which can only buy you four quarts of milk in 
Stony Rapids. Four quarts of milk, a family can drink that up in 
a day. 
 
And those are the types of things that the people of the North 
are saying in regards to development that the subsidies are 
always there. I recall, I put . . . in the newspaper a little while 
ago that the a . . . in November, that the uranium companies had 
gotten an extra tax holiday on that rate of 1 per cent, and that 
amounted to about $7 million. And this is about the amount that 
people are requesting for in regards to just dealing with basic 
economic development. They want about $10 million to be able 
to do a lot of development because what the people are saying 
is this: you are exploiting the resource right now. You are 
taking a lot of our forests. You are mining out our forests. The 
American giant is mining out our forests. The Cameco, the new 
privatized corporation, is mining out and exploiting the ore 
bodies at a high rate right now. And what are people going to 
do 5, 10 years down the road? 
 
And I looked at the promises made — and this is the other 
aspect that the people of the North always mention — they said, 
in 1982 when the Tories were campaigning, they said they 
would live up to their promises on jobs. But as I look back on 
the past seven years, that just hasn’t been the case. They won’t 
even follow the law in regards to the Key Lake agreement. 
 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

385 
 

(1630) 
 
In regards to today, the news came out now. The privatized 
company, the privatized SMDC which is now called Cameco, 
today of course said, we are now going permanently . . . we’re 
going to eliminate 100 jobs out of 350. And I listened to the 
minister, and he said it was only a lay-off, you know, 
temporary, for six months. It’s going to be a six-month period is 
what he had said. But as I examined the news release, it says 
they’re going to eliminate 100 jobs. 
 
Last year, as the critic for SMDC, as I sat across the table from 
him, and I asked him very directly, I said: Mr. Minister, what 
about the jobs in the North, I asked. Oh, he says, not to worry, 
not to worry, they’ll be there. And I said: but we can’t live up to 
your promises. We have heard these promises for the past five 
years, I said, at that time. I said, you could not keep those 
promises. You’ve never kept them before. Why would I want 
believe you. No, no, he said, you just wait and see; there’ll be 
more jobs for the people. Privatization provides jobs, and that’s 
automatically the way it is, and that’s what it’ll do. 
 
And then I asked him, I said, well why don’t you, if you are so 
sure of helping the people in the North, why don’t you back up 
your promise? And I said, why don’t you legislate a clause in 
there for the protection of jobs for people in the North and 
protection of jobs for Indian and Metis people? Well, he says, 
we don’t really need that. He said, we’ll be able to provide 
those jobs. 
 
And when I meet with the people in the North they always say, 
how come they never live up to their promises? How come 
what they say means absolutely nothing? Why is it that when 
they say something, they just cannot live up to their word? 
 
The history and culture of people in the North is to live up to 
your word. And what we see now is a government that will 
simply — and a Premier and a Deputy Premier that will simply 
not live up to their own words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And I think I mentioned the aspect for a real 
need for consultation. The new minister, of course, as I 
mentioned, was travelling through the North last year. And 
what I found out was again more promises. And then what I’m 
looking at is this. If they’re going to promise something, why 
doesn’t the minister in charge of the North follow the law in 
regards to the Key Lake agreement? Why doesn’t he have a 
strong training program to be able to get those jobs they’re now 
planning? It doesn’t take five, six years. We’ll be into seven 
years and he will still have not lived up to that agreement. 
 
Not only that, one of the things that I’ve noticed in this regard is 
in history a lot of the people said, we want to be involved in the 
process of decision making. We want to be involved in the 
process of monitoring, because we have been promised many 
times, but we are not involved in monitoring. So when the Key 
Lake agreement came to be the NDP government brought in, 
institutionalizing the agreement, a monitoring committee. This 
monitoring  

committee was supposed to look after small business 
development in the North to make sure that the small businesses 
were getting the contracts from the mine. And many of them 
were getting contracts at that date. But what was happening was 
that this monitoring committee was not going to be even 
mentioned. 
 
Now this monitoring committee was also to look after hiring 
rates. But nobody hardly ever knows about the hiring rates until 
we bring them out in the news through the legislature. That’s 
the only time people . . . but it’s not made public because the 
monitoring committee was supposed to look after . . . and 
people who were in the monitoring committee were directly 
people from the North. They would have known right away 
how many people were hired throughout, but this government 
wanted to keep it secret — they wanted to make it a big secret. 
They wouldn’t want the people to know anything so they 
knocked off this monitoring committee. 
 
The other aspect in regards to the monitoring committee is the 
fact that many of the people were supposed to consider — and 
again, this is part of the cultural heritage of the North — many 
of the people said: we not only want the jobs, we want to make 
sure that our people who work there work in an environment 
that is safe, that the workers’ health and safety has got to be the 
best in the world. And they also said that we wanted to make 
sure that environmental controls were simply the best. And so 
the monitoring committee was supposed to look after that. 
 
But again, what did the PC government do? They knocked off 
the Department of Environment workers who were supposed to 
work with the monitoring committee to be able to do effective 
monitoring. And also they . . . they say basically because they 
wanted to keep everything secret. They wanted to keep their 
records away from the people. And to this day, I never see those 
records publicly displayed. 
 
As we look at the overall aspect, I guess, the only thing that we 
can get in the North nowadays is the . . . when we fight for jobs, 
when we fight for consultation, and we want to fight for real 
input into decision making, what we get in return is just plain, 
simple promises and ideological messages that the saving grace 
will be privatization of the North. And again we’ve heard from, 
you know, the minister in charge of privatization, we’ve heard 
the Premier, we’ve heard the Deputy Premier, and they said: 
never we’re going to lose jobs. You will see that it is the basis 
of our diversification, and we’re going to have jobs and jobs 
and more jobs. 
 
And when I look at the record, I see the youth leaving the 
province. I see 43,000 people out of jobs. Of course that’s only 
the official statistics; 80,000 are probably more like the figure. 
We have 60,000 people on welfare. A lot of people realize that 
there’s been not only a realization at the Canadian level of a 
significant increase in welfare, the records show that there’s 
been a 25 per cent increase in welfare since 1982. And so the 
only economic development strategy this government has 
brought in was welfare economics. And the other aspect of it is 
of course large scale welfare to the big corporations. And that’s 
the record of this government. 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

386 
 

So as I talk to this resolution, I thought I might bring into 
perspective this whole ideology of . . . this false ideology of 
privatization which is merely the same old open for business 
strategy of 1982, and all it means is that as we provide more 
money for the corporations in the past seven years, we all end 
up paying. 
 
A lot of the middle class in Saskatchewan were initially very 
positive of what was going to be happening, because everybody 
likes to be positive, but then after a while they started seeing the 
reality. There was . . . pretty soon by this year we have $4 
billion. And all the taxpayers have now to pay over $1 million a 
day on interest payments — $1 million a day. Over 300 million 
a year — $300 million a year goes down the drain to pay for the 
interest rates so that the big banks can prosper. And at the same 
time you have an 80 per cent unemployment rate in northern 
Saskatchewan. There is absolutely no justice in this form of 
governing. 
 
I’ve mentioned the aspect of mine work. I’ve mentioned the 
aspect of the need for help for the trappers and the fishermen. 
There’s also the need for more help for the wild rice growers, 
and there’s also a need for help at the community infrastructure 
levels so that the community leaders can look forward to hiring 
some of the youth that are being puzzled and withdrawn by the 
alcoholism that has overtaken a lot of them. 
 
And they want to be able to say yes, we want to make a positive 
stand with the other people of this province. But as they go 
around, all they get in return is the government will take them 
on a trip to the nuclear power plant in Ontario; or the Premier 
will say, hey, great things are going to happen from China; 
great things are going to happen from Japan; everything will 
save us in the American free trade agreement. 
 
And the people in the North are still waiting. They’re waiting 
for the Premier to come down to Sturgeon Landing in northern 
Saskatchewan to see the situation for himself, for the Deputy 
Premier to see the unemployment situation in Timber Bay, to 
see the fact that the people are living in many situations . . . I’ve 
looked at the senior living in a one-room shack in northern 
Saskatchewan. They want to stand up and be positive, but they 
say, the government doesn’t hear us; they don’t listen to us. 
 
So as the resolution mentions, there is a real need for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to start going to the people in 
northern Saskatchewan. I certainly hope that the new minister 
can go and not take a confrontational approach — we don’t 
need a confrontational approach — join with the people and the 
opposition in making sure that there are jobs for the people, that 
you follow the law in regard to the Key Lake agreement, that 
you indeed, when there are new mines opening up, that you 
make special plans to involve not only the small-business sector 
but the workers in the North; that when you go in to planning 
and to cut new pulp in new areas, that there is consideration for 
the foresters of northern Saskatchewan, not so that they take 
only the jobs that are the poorest, but they want some of the 
cream of the crop too, and not only Weyerhaeuser gets the 
cream of the crop. 
 

They want you to quit making promises. They want action. 
They want to see you promoting not only job development 
strategy but tourism right in the North. They want to you 
promote the trapping industry. They want you to promote the 
fishing industry. They want you to promote all those things that 
are very important for the lives and the families of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And with that I will pass the following resolution, which is 
seconded by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its neglect of northern communities and 
northern people, and for having imposed increasing 
hardship on the families of northern Saskatchewan, and 
urges the Government of Saskatchewan to make a sound, 
positive and meaningful commitment to provide 
opportunities to northern people. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise to speak to this this afternoon. And my 
comments will be brief because I think the people of this 
province have got a clear understanding of why we have 
resolutions such as this before the legislature, why we have 
hardships in northern Saskatchewan and, indeed, throughout 
this province. And I think it’s becoming clear to the people of 
this province that what we lack is leadership. 
 
We lack the leadership of a Premier, someone who will speak 
out for Saskatchewan, someone who will speak up for hungry 
children, someone who will speak up for Northerners who 
demand to be employed in their province rather than having to 
sit at home on social assistance with no hope for the future, or 
leave this province as some 6,000 people have done in 
February. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the people of this province are 
looking for is a Premier who will speak out on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people when the ever-growing problem of high 
interest rates starts to stifle the economic growth of this 
province. They’re looking for a Premier who will speak out, 
who will speak out to make sure that a commitment to the 
farmers of this province, made during an election time, will be 
fulfilled. They’re looking for a Premier who will speak to the 
Prime Minister of this country and explain to him concisely the 
problems of the people of this province and the problems that 
they’re facing. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no longer 
believe in this Premier because he can’t be trusted — promises 
made, promises broken, and a litany of a lack of understanding 
of what average Saskatchewan people are facing. 
 
He hasn’t been addressing the problem of high interest rates 
that business people of northern Saskatchewan are facing. And 
this weekend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was back in my 
riding and I was talking to some of the business people in 
Prince Albert, and I was talking to  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

387 
 

some of the people who do their accounting, they’re starting to 
understand what the minimum wage economy of this 
government means. They’re starting to understand that it means 
bankruptcies, and that it means small businesses closing their 
doors, and that it means families breaking up because of lack of 
employment opportunities. They’re starting to understand that 
this people is hell-bent on destroying the middle class people in 
Saskatchewan and really don’t care about what the 
consequences of that are. 
 
They’re starting to understand that there’s no basic economic 
support for northern people or for people in the urban 
communities, small-business people, working people. And I 
would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, if this government were to 
have the courage to go to the people, that they would be 
chastised severely. 
 
They know full well that this government is willing to subsidize 
liquor sales in northern Saskatchewan, but not milk or bread or 
eggs. They know where this government’s priorities lie. And 
they know when they read a column from the member from 
Rosthern who indicates that in a privatization meeting he found 
no evidence of public disdain at their desire to put more liquor 
outlets in this province, they understand clearly where these 
people are coming from, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that may be 
one of the reasons that that particular member plays a lesser role 
in this government in the last few days. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province are looking for 
leadership, leadership that can be and will be delivered by the 
member from Riversdale. That’s what they’re looking for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — They’re not looking for a Premier that 
goes on a month-long junket at public expense. They’re not 
looking for that kind of a Premier. They’re looking for the kind 
of a Premier who is sincere in what he’s doing, sincere in what 
he wants to accomplish on behalf of the people of this province. 
 
When you look at an out-migration of some 6,000 people from 
this province in the month of February, and at the same you can 
see members of this government stand up and praise and 
applaud the Premier who’s caused it all to happen, can you 
expect anything less than the people of the province are fed up 
and are leaving? There’s no hope any more. 
 
And why is there no hope? Because this government doesn’t 
have a vision. Oh yes, they’ve got a vision for Pocklington; and 
they’ve got a vision for Weyerhaeuser; and they’ve got a vision 
for the people that run Manalta Coal now; and they’ve got a 
vision for Remai. Those are the people that they have a vision 
for. But I tell you it’s a small group of people in this province 
that they have that vision for, and the rest of the people of 
Saskatchewan are simply not going to put up with it any longer 
than they have to. And as I suggested, were an election to be 
called, I would suggest this Premier would be dust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lautermilch: — And they want more than a brochure, a 
glossy brochure from the minister responsible for northern 
economic development, with her picture in it some 17 times and 
they want to see more than her aircraft flying into their 
community to deliver another promise that they know full well 
is never going to be fulfilled. That’s not what they’re looking 
for. That’s not what they’re looking for and that’s not what they 
expect from a minister of the Crown. 
 
I want to say to you, Madam Minister, that they’re as happy 
when you leave as they ever could be simply because they don’t 
want to hear any more of your stories. What they want is jobs. 
They want some security for their families. They want some 
hope for the future, none of which, Madam Minister, your 
government can deliver because you’re not governing for those 
people. 
 
They want some basic economic support and some decency and 
some honesty from government. And, Madam Minister, it’s a 
sad thing to say, but clearly your government can’t deliver any 
of those, because either you don’t have the knowledge or you 
don’t have the desire, or maybe it’s a combination of both. They 
know who your vision is for, and they know they’re not 
included. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is much more that can 
be said on this particular issue. There’s much more that needs to 
be said on this issue and on others, but as I said, I want to allow 
some other members of this legislature . . . And I would 
particularly be interested to see if the members opposite might 
be interested in addressing this issue of hunger and 
unemployment in the North, but I doubt that’s going to happen. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to take my place, but 
before I do I want to challenge the minister to get up and defend 
her record in northern Saskatchewan. It would be a very short 
speech, because she would have little to say. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that I’m very 
pleased to support this motion because I know that the member 
from Cumberland who introduced this motion to the floor of the 
legislature, understands clearly what the problems are. And I 
await the minister’s response in terms of this motion. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to respond to the misinformation and unreliable 
statements not only made by the member from Cumberland, but 
his seconder — his seat I forget, but it’s one of the Prince 
Albert seats. 
 
At the onset, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to inform the House 
that at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving an 
amendment to resolution no. 14, an amendment which will 
commend the Government of Saskatchewan for designing and 
promoting a vision of northern Saskatchewan, and promoting 
that vision by providing for what will be the most exciting, 
most prosperous, and I think, most productive period of time 
that the North has ever been witness to. 
 
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

388 
 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland has fallen into the 
old CCF-NDP trap, along with all his colleagues. Not one of 
them, not one of them since this House has opened, has talked 
about the promise, the potential, the pride of Saskatchewan 
people. Not one of them. To listen to them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you would think that we were, as my colleague said, a 
fourth-world country. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has recognized the special 
needs of our northern people, and in understanding their issues, 
have opened doors of opportunity for northern people. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to read into the record part of a 
letter I received from the northern village of Pinehouse which 
says — and I hope the member from Cumberland listens 
because he sure doesn’t listen when he goes up North, if he ever 
does: 
 

Dear Madam Minister: It seems apparent that the province 
of Saskatchewan has taken a bold step in recognizing the 
abilities and the responsibilities of Northerners. Over the 
last few months the province has continuously allowed us 
a voice in the social and economic direction affecting 
northern Saskatchewan. We have what you may call come 
of age, where we are fully capable to deal with the 
directions necessary to guarantee economic and social 
stability in each community. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, yes I have travelled extensively in northern 
Saskatchewan and I feel privileged to do so. And I feel 
privileged to do so because of the people, the leaders that I have 
met in the northern communities, leaders like Greg Ross. He is 
not a person who does not speak for northern Saskatchewan. 
The leaders that I have met in northern Saskatchewan, duly 
elected by their local villages and local towns, they speak the 
same way that the mayor of Pinehouse does. 
 
They feel that they have the ability, they feel that they have the 
capability, and they feel that they have the desire to face the 
problems that are facing northern communities. But they are 
looking at working with government, with this Tory 
government under our Premier, the member from Estevan, to 
come to grips, to come to an understanding of some of the 
issues that are facing them. 
 
But one thing that they recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
there has been open for them a window of opportunity right 
across northern Saskatchewan. And it’s through the innovative 
approach of this government to the North that this government 
is responding to the special needs and the special desires, as 
articulated by northern mayors and northern councils, the 
desires of northern Saskatchewan people. And we are 
developing an action plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which focuses 
on the issues that are crucial, that are crucial to the success of 
the northern part of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was this PC government that ended the 
26-year-long dispute with Cumberland House and SaskPower in 
1988. And the member opposite says, oh well they had six years 
to do it; six years it took you, six years to settle this 26-year 
dispute. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, his party had 11 years to 
solve that dispute and  

did not one thing. Not one thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — And it was this government, under this 
Premier, the member from Estevan, that said, let us resolve this 
long-standing irritant, and that’s what we did in December of 
1988 with a historic $23 million settlement to the people of 
Cumberland House and the Indian band of Cumberland House. 
And you did nothing to promote that. Not a thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say on this particular subject 
because these people travel, not very far north, maybe not much 
farther than Prince Albert, but the misinformation, the 
deliberate misinformation that that member sends out and that 
member sends out and that leader sends out, Mr. Speaker, is 
unparalleled in our parliamentary tradition in this province. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I have more to say on this, 
and I hope to have the opportunity next private members day, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The division bells rang from 5 p.m. until 5:04 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 32 
 
 Muller   Klein  
 Duncan  Meiklejohn  
 McLeod  Martin  
 Andrew  Toth  
 Berntson  Sauder  
 Lane   Johnson  
 Taylor   McLaren  
 Smith   Petersen  
 Swan   Swenson  
 Muirhead  Martens  
 Maxwell  Baker  
 Schmidt  Wolfe  
 Hodgins  Gleim  
 Gerich   Gardner  
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the hon. members know that 
it’s a well-practised tradition that we allow the vote to be taken 
with as little interruption as possible. I’d ask for your 
co-operation. 
 
 Hepworth  Saxinger  
 Hardy   Britton  
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just want to inform the House that the 
vote will not proceed if there are constant interruptions. 
 

Nays — 21 
 
 Prebble  Goulet  
  



 
March 28, 1989 

 

389 
 

 Rolfes   Hagel  
 Shillington  Pringle  
 Lingenfelter  Lyons  
 Koskie  Calvert  
 Mitchell  Lautermilch  
 Upshall  Trew  
 Simard  Smart  
 Kowalsky  Van Mulligen  
 Atkinson  Koenker  
 Anguish  
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:07 p.m. 
 
 


