


















































June 7, 1989 Hansard


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 7, 1989 
 
 

1695 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to 
members of the legislature, a city councillor who is seated in 
the opposition gallery. 
 
Doreen Hamilton is a hard-working councillor in her second 
term right now. She topped the polls in Regina in the last civic 
election. I urge all members to join me right now in welcoming 
Councillor Hamilton to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce a group of 24 grade 8 students from St. 
Catherine School who are seated in your gallery. They are here 
for a visit to the legislature. I am going to be meeting with them 
for pictures and for drinks later on, and a discussion of the 
proceedings of the House. 
 
They’re accompanied by Dan Folk and Ernie Nadon. I hope that 
they will enjoy their stay here and find it informative, and that it 
will be useful to them in days to come as they prepare for their 
final exams some time later this month. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to, on behalf of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a group of grade 12 students seated in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. These students are from the Sedley High School 
in Sedley, Saskatchewan. They are on tour here this afternoon, 
and I do understand that they will be meeting with the member 
for Indian Head-Wolseley a little bit later in the day. I’d ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming this group of students 
from Sedley, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to point out to our guests, who we 
are always happy to see, that their participation in the 
proceedings are not part of the House procedure. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you, and through you to the other members 
of the legislature, 23 grade 7 and 8 students from Briercrest 
School in Briercrest, Saskatchewan. They are located in the 
west gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ralph 
Light, and chaperon Mary Tremain. 
 
Briercrest is about 15 miles down the CN tracks from my place, 
and even though I might know some of the students personally, 
I’m sure I know most of their parents. I hope that you have a 
good visit to the legislature today, that you enjoy watching the 
proceedings in question period. 
 

And I’ll be meeting with the students afterwards for a visit and 
pictures and refreshments, and we’ll discuss what you’ve seen. 
Give us a passing or a failing grade on our performance as 
MLAs, as I know your teachers will soon be doing with your 
final exams at the end of June. 
 
Please help me welcome the students from Briercrest. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Wage Gap Between Men and Women 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Minister of Human Resources, Labour, 
(and Employment). Mr. Minister, in the last several years 
statistics show that the average wage earned by a woman in 
Saskatchewan actually fell by about 2.5 per cent when 
compared to a similar job performed by a male, and that now 
stands on average, the salary return, about 66 per cent of the 
equivalent salary for a male worker, or about two-thirds. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware that in every other province except 
Nova Scotia, the wage gap has actually narrowed, while here in 
Saskatchewan it’s gone in reverse and widened. How do you 
explain this injustice — it can only be described as an injustice 
— and, more importantly, what are your government’s plans to 
deal with the problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I will point out 
that this government has taken procedures to help remedy the 
wage gap between males and females. But the labour laws of 
this province are the same labour laws that the Leader of the 
Opposition passed when he was in government, and if he 
concedes that they are not proper, we will examine them; and as 
a matter of fact, we are examining them with a new 
employments standards Act, the new employment benefits Act. 
 
In Saskatchewan and other places, one of the key problems is 
choice of occupation, and it turns out that men have been 
choosing occupations that pay more. We have equal pay for 
equal work in this province, and men have been choosing 
certain occupations; men, through their unions and their 
seniority, have been able to attain higher wages in some of 
those occupations. And also we have a situation of education, 
and it is important that my department has stressed ever since I 
was minister, and part of that, that women seek out education 
that will give them higher incomes. 
 
We have set a record for women going into business — 52 per 
cent of new businesses are started by women. We also know 
that with our commodity prices down, business is not a high 
income profession these days, and that explains some of the 
difficulties. It is not a problem for just women, it is a problem 
for men and women, and they’re solved through economic 
solutions. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1696 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. I’m not talking about the difficulty of finding jobs 
which are equivalent for men and for women — we know that’s 
the case in the province of Saskatchewan under your 
administration. I’m talking about the gap, the wage gap, the 
discrimination between working women and working men. And 
it’s not correct to say about the labour laws. It was your 
government that amended the labour laws, Bill 104, the 
infamous labour law. It’s your government that has only 
introduced one minimum wage increase in seven years of office 
since 1982, and I think that’s only 25 cents. That’s your 
government, sir. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: in recent years in 
the country the wage gap between men and women — this is 
what I direct your attention to, Mr. Minister — has closed by 
only about 7.5 per cent. Here in Saskatchewan, as I say, your 
government seems intent on turning back that clock. And you 
stand on this record, talking about all kinds of factors which are 
not relevant to the issue before you today. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you stand in this House and tell the women 
of the province of Saskatchewan, tell the legislature, that your 
government takes this problem seriously; but more importantly 
than just the commitment of taking the problem seriously, how 
about specific, hard information as to a comprehensive strategy 
to close that gap? What is your strategy to so overcome this 
injustice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday we were 
criticized for part of the strategy. I can’t display this in the 
House, Mr. Speaker; I’ll keep it down. But this is a pamphlet. 
Yesterday I was accused of putting out a pamphlet, “Focus on 
your Future”, to grades 7, 8, and 9, and I was criticized for that. 
We are getting at the root of the problem, and that is education 
for everyone, male and female. 
 
Yesterday I was criticized for this pamphlet that I can’t show in 
the House, and it costs 56 cents per pamphlet to deliver it to 
students to encourage them to stay in school. It gives role 
models for young women — a computer sales person, a 
publisher that are women. It talks about jobs and education, and 
it is aimed at men and women in the school system. And then 
yesterday we were criticized for this plan which costs 56 cents 
per person to encourage people to stay in school and become 
entrepreneurs, to become employers, and to become 
professionals where they will have higher paying jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister, and I really do beg the minister’s attempt to try to 
answer the question that I’m putting to him. We’re not 
concerned here about a pamphlet and education, because I want 
to tell you, there are as many well-educated women in the work 
force as there are educated men in the work force, and they get 
paid less — only two-thirds. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — They get paid less, two-thirds. Those are the 
statistics. 
 
Now my question to you, sir, is this: will this government, will 
your government, will the Premier and this legislature — will 
you undertake today to tell us that you’re going to introduce a 
pay equity Bill for government employees? That’s a small step 
that can begin now, something that would at least solve the 
problem directly under your jurisdiction — a pay equity Bill for 
the workers of the civil service in the government. 
 
And at the same time, can you undertake to tell the legislature 
whether you’re going to make government contract compliance 
with pay equity also a part of that legislation. If you did that, at 
least you’d show some serious intent to overcome this injustice. 
How about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, government employees 
should have pay equity, and if there are instances where that 
doesn’t happen, then clearly there’s something wrong with the 
collective agreement that has been negotiated between this 
government and the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union), which is amply represented by the 
members of the opposition. And clearly, if there’s a problem 
there, it should be negotiated in the contract, which comes up 
every second year. 
 
And so if the members opposite think that there’s something 
deficient in the contract, then they can consult themselves, 
because they are also part of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour by their constitution. They can consult themselves, and 
we will negotiate a proper contract. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Facilities to Treat Spousal Abuse 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Human Resources and Labour. Mr. Minister, one of the most 
grievous concerns facing our society today is spousal abuse. 
The services we have in this province to deal with the problem 
are overtaxed, as you know. Women and children fleeing 
violent situations often do not have any place to go. 
 
For example, in Saskatoon there were 256 families turned away 
last year; in Regina, 167 families turned away; in North 
Battleford, 62 families turned away. And those are some of the 
statistics, Mr. Minister. 
 
Could you explain why your government only increased the 
grants to transition houses in this province by less than the rate 
of inflation, when you had 5.25 million for Guy Montpetit to 
line his pockets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
opposition conveniently forget about the Saskatchewan  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1697 
 

pension plan which has been primarily to the benefit of women 
in Saskatchewan. They didn’t think of it, so it’s not any good if 
they didn’t think of something, and anything this government 
has done is wrong, even if it helps people. 
 
They haven’t considered that the Department of Justice . . . and 
the Leader of the Opposition was attorney general for 11 years 
and did not crack down like our minsters of Justice have on the 
crimes of spousal abuse, which are actually assault, not abuse. 
This government has cracked down and prosecuted those 
crimes. 
 
This government has more than doubled the money spent on 
assisting families — more than doubled it. I have another 
$700,000 for family support centres in this budget which we 
cannot get approved because the members went on strike for 17 
days, and now they complain nothing is being done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. It 
has not been demonstrated, Mr. Minister, that the pension plan 
in any way benefits low income women. 
 
You’re quite right — you are spending a lot to assist families 
like Guy Montpetit and George Hill’s family and Paul 
Schoenhals’ family . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the federal government last year 
developed a program which provides 22.2 million for the 
construction of transition houses. Saskatchewan’s share of that 
money is 608,000, which Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation estimates that this money would have provided 19 
emergency shelter spaces in this province. The only catch is that 
your government has to be prepared to make a commitment of 
operating funds for these shelters before CMHC (Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation) will provide the money. 
 
Now we have a situation in northern Saskatchewan where La 
Ronge women and families have to flee to P.A.(Prince Albert) 
to get to shelter. We have a situation in rural Saskatchewan 
where . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The hon. member, 
I think, should be getting to her question. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a situation 
where rural women have to flee to the city, so my question to 
you, Mr. Minister, is: with all that in mind, could you tell us 
how many emergency shelter spaces have been constructed in 
this province with the money provided by the federal 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
opposition have forgotten that the $700,000 that is in my budget 
for family support centres, to support families in need, is being 
held up by the filibustering tactics of the members of the 
opposition. It’s being held up by the striking of the opposition 
. . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The opposition is more interested in 
politics than they are in families, and therefore I cannot free up 
the money to support families in the manner we would like to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the minister to bring 
forward the estimates this afternoon — this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — We’ll deal with it. We’ll deal with it this 
afternoon. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you never answered my question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, given that your government has 
$20 million a year to spend on political advertising, when are 
you going to get with it and establish more transition homes in 
this province? You have access to federal funding. Are you 
going to get with it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we bring forward 
this spending proposal, and if the members of the opposition 
find that the money is not spent in the manner they approve, 
paid to the people that they think should receive the money, if 
their friends are not hired for these jobs, then what assurance do 
I have that they won’t walk out of the legislature on strike 
again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Families Living in Poverty 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is also directed towards that 
minister. Mr. Minister, under the rule of the PC government, 
increasing poverty has become a fact of life in this province. 
Between 1981 and 1986, the number of families living in 
poverty in our province increased by 6,000 families. Seventy 
per cent of Saskatchewan children living in female-headed, 
single parent families are now living below the poverty line. 
Forty-five per cent of all food bank users in our province are 
children. 
 
Saskatchewan has the second highest poverty rate in Canada. 
One in four children, or 64,560 children, are growing up in 
poverty. Mr. Minister, where are your policies to deal with this 
disgraceful situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, we do not deny that things 
have been tough on the farm, and therefore the people who 
elected us have been going with less and less  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1698 
 

income. The people of rural Saskatchewan predominantly had 
less income due to world economic situation. And then how do 
you calculate that poverty? When my constituents live on less 
money than your constituents, and my constituents can still feed 
their children, then I say that you got to go to the character of 
the people and what they can do with their dollar. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are not living in poverty. Yes, 
there are people who could have more money; there are people 
who could have a higher standard of living. 
 
Unfortunately, the members of the opposition filibuster and go 
on strike when we tried to introduce legislation that will build 
jobs for people, jobs that will employ people so that they can 
have a higher income and take better care of their families. 
When we do that, they’re filibustered by the members of the 
opposition. They’re against jobs. What are they for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — This government used the excuse that things 
have been tough on the farm. Well your government’s been 
tough on the people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now let’s look at the facts. A family headed 
by a single mother with two children, collecting social 
assistance from your government, after the basic rent and 
utilities allowance would have $78 a week left over. According 
to Agriculture Canada, it takes $80 a week to feed a family. So 
before adding in the cost of clothing, transportation, personal 
and household effects, this family is already $2 in the hole a 
week. 
 
Would you care to explain to these families why your 
government felt it necessary to ensure that months after he had 
blown $4 million of taxpayers’ money, you were willing to 
ensure that Mr. Guy Montpetit of Montreal was receiving 
$18,000 per month in a travel allowance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, given the opportunity to 
let democracy take its course and let this House deal with 
legislation and estimates, I am prepared to bring in a Bill that 
will allow my department to crack down on single fathers or 
whoever it is that is responsible for the care of these children. 
 
Yes, I agree, single mothers should not bear the total 
responsibility of raising and supporting children, nor should the 
state and single mothers bear the total responsibility. 
 
I am prepared, should democracy take its course in this 
Assembly, to bring in a Bill that will crack down on every 
father who does not support his children, so that those children 
have enough to eat, they have clothes and books, and that those 
women do not have struggle while the men run around doing 
nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the minister who seems to 
avoid the answers to the questions. Now, Mr. Minister, many 
working women are earning the minimum wage, a wage your 
government has increased by nothing since August of 1985. 
That’s practically four years, Mr. Minister, and expenses have 
gone up in this province, as everyone knows. A single person 
earning minimum wage in this province receives $1,653 below 
the poverty line, and many of our minimum wage workers in 
this province are women trying to raise families. 
 
With these women working day in and day out to hold their 
families together, Mr. Minister, how does your government 
explain paying $200,000 a year to George Hill to mismanage 
the Rafferty-Alameda project and privatize SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation), and $100,000 a year to Paul Schoenhals to 
privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? How do you 
explain that to the working poor in this province, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I say to those people in 
this province who are poor, that the solution for them is not 
welfare but jobs. And to have jobs you have to have 
management. To have good management you have to pay for 
good management. Good management’s wages are justified. 
The poor employ no one, so therefore we have to have 
employers and employees. 
 
The members opposite don’t understand that. You cannot work 
for no one; you have to work for someone. There have to be 
employers and employees. There has to be a total economy. 
Simply raising the minimum wage, which would also raise the 
price of clothing and hamburgers, is not going to be a magic 
cure. We have to build jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Licensed Day-care Spaces in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — My question is to the Minister of Social 
Services. Mr. Minister, I have here the latest report from the 
National Council of Welfare regarding day care, and it shows 
that this province under your government has the second lowest 
number of licensed day-care spaces for our population of any 
province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, in this province there are licensed day-care spaces 
for only 7 per cent of the children of working parents compared 
with 13 per cent of the national average, and in rural 
Saskatchewan only 6 per cent of all the spaces in the province 
are in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now this is truly a shocking situation and my question to you is 
this: how do you explain to Saskatchewan families your 
government’s appalling record that has led to a situation where 
we have fewer licensed day-care spaces for our population than 
any province in Canada other than Newfoundland? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 
member of the opposition asked that question because he  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1699 
 

and his colleagues are holding up the child care Act that we are 
proposing to pass. The . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — In addition, under the regulations that 
the government has operated under and that the former 
government set, all the other provinces have commercial child 
care and non-profit, parent-run child care. This province has 
made it illegal for about 15 years to have anything other than 
parent-run child care. So the other provinces have had the 
benefit of more child care because we have outlawed a large 
amount of the child care that we could have had. We have to 
address the question of accessibility rather than the ideology on 
child care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
say to you, bring in your child care legislation today and we’ll 
debate it in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — But we are proud of our record which is 
ensuring that funds spent on child care will go to the support of 
children, and not to the support of profits for private 
commercial operators. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I have a new question, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the minister’s day-care Act. And that is, Mr. Minister, 
that your day-care Bill will restrict the percentage of spaces 
which are eligible for subsidy in existing non-profit, day-care 
co-ops or family day-care homes. Now, Mr. Minister, more than 
90 per cent of the spaces in these non-profit day cares are 
subsidized right now. So my question is this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. That’s what I was going to 
mention to the member, that he was taking a long preamble and 
should get to his question, which he is, which he is. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, my question is this: any attempt 
to restrict the subsidy of spaces in those day-care co-ops will 
drive them under. Isn’t that really your objective, Mr. Minister, 
to restrict the subsidies to the non-profit child care centres in 
order to increase the subsidies to the private commercial 
centres, and to ensure that clientele will go there while the 
non-profit co-ops are driven under? Isn’t that the real purpose 
of your day 
_care legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member of the 
opposition is behaving in true radical fashion, playing to the TV 
cameras and to the crowd in the theatre here, using false . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. If hon. members are 
going to intrude with a constant stream of interruptions, we 
can’t hear the minister, and I’m sure all  

our guests as well as the members would like to hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to do 
something so radical as pay subsidies to the parents, and the 
members opposite say, shame, subsidizing the parents who are 
in need. 
 
The members of the opposition have no policies. The only one I 
can think of is their ding-ding policy of ringing bells. If I can 
get an assurance that they will respect democracy and vote on 
the Bill, we will bring it in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to address a comment with respect to the remarks made by the 
minister. If indeed child care or families in poverty were a 
priority, one would have thought the Government House Leader 
would have called that today, not this silly motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister knows full well, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Government House Leader can call anything. And if the 
legislation was a priority, one would have thought . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member knows that 
that debate has been finished. We’re on a new debate, rule 
33(1), and I ask him to direct his remarks to that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
only pointing out, and I will not belabour the point that we are 
on bell-ringing, because nothing else seems to be their priority 
except this. 
 
We have repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, suggested that the 
Government House Leader stand consideration of this — it is 
nobody’s priority except theirs — and go to something that is of 
some importance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m being invited by members opposite to vote . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order! I ask both 
sides of the House to co-operate. Allow the hon. member from 
Regina Centre to proceed with his remarks. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1700 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I was being invited by the Premier to vote 
for democracy, Mr. Speaker. The most effective vote that could 
take place would be a general election in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, we have suggested to 
members opposite, to the Government House Leader and to the 
members of the cabinet, that there is no need for this legislation. 
There is no pressing necessity for it. The only reason that they 
are continue, obstinately and stubbornly, to insist that this 
matter be dealt with in advance of everything else is, I think, in 
part a pettiness, in part, Mr. Speaker, if you just had . . . in part, 
Mr. Speaker, they have a hidden agenda. 
 
Their hidden agenda is to bring back SPC, the SPC 
privatization. Their hidden agenda is to bring it back, ram it 
through notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the public 
have said no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The public have said SaskPower should 
not be not be privatized. They have said SaskPower should 
remain a public utility. Mr. Speaker, they’re . . . either the 
members opposite are totally irrational, and there’s some 
evidence that that is the case, or their motive for proceeding 
with this and insisting that this be proceeded with is that they 
want to bring back the privatization of SPC and turn it over to 
their friends instead of having that public utility serve the public 
of Saskatchewan as it has done so well for the last 40 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, we have suggested to 
members opposite that there is no need for this legislation. We 
have suggested to members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
unlikely to be another bell-ringing incident unless they bring 
back SPC. 
 
We have suggested to them, Mr. Speaker, that there’s other 
priorities. We had a good deal today to say about the role of 
women in our economy. It is pathetic, Mr. Speaker. We ought 
to be discussing those issues and dealing with measures which 
would advance the role of women in our economy instead of 
this bit of pettiness on the part of members opposite . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Rosthern invites us to vote it off. We think, Mr. Speaker, the 
suggestion made by the Minister of Justice initially, and that is 
it go to a committee, is a far sounder notion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice made a suggestion in this 
Assembly, suggested that this matter could be dealt with best in 
a committee. We agreed with that. The member from 
Riversdale said, in responding to that, that it was a positive 
suggestion. He said we would consider it in a day or so. Mr. 
Speaker, we did; we responded positively. We had an 
agreement, in fact, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think we should just let  

this debate continue without sub-debates taking place. Each 
member will have their opportunity, and right now it’s the 
member from Regina Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster seems to think that anyone who opposes 
this government’s a radical. I don’t know whether or not he’s at 
all bothered by the fact that two-thirds of Saskatchewan people 
oppose this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know whether that gives him any 
cause for thought or not, Mr. Speaker. If members opposite 
were a little less stubborn, a little less intransigent, and a little 
more thoughtful and in touch; if they spent a little more time in 
their riding and less hitting the high spots, here and abroad, the 
members opposite would know what I am saying, and that is 
that the public don’t want the SPC privatization. They do not 
want SaskPower to be sold to their friends, for the benefit of 
their friends. They want Saskatchewan Power to remain a 
public utility so that it will serve the public of Saskatchewan in 
the outstanding fashion which it has done for the last 37 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Since in fact this is, in every real 
sense, a debate about the future of SPC, the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, I want to touch for a moment — and I 
won’t spend an inordinate amount of time on it — but I want to 
spend just a moment on some of the reasons why we think, and 
I think the public think, that SaskPower should remain a public 
utility for generations to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite — I think those who are honest 
with themselves, Mr. Speaker — I think members opposite 
would admit that this debate would never be taking place had 
they not decided to break an election promise and privatize 
Saskatchewan Power. That undertaking to the people of 
Saskatchewan, given to the public before this government was 
elected in 1986, was given in the most unmistakable terms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former member from Regina Elphinstone, Mr. 
Blakeney, in the election, revealed and displayed documents 
which suggested that the government was considering the 
privatization of SaskTel and the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. Members opposite not only denied it but acted 
with outrage at the very suggestion. They said members of this 
Assembly on this side were scare mongering, telling untruths 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the member says, hear, hear; hear, 
hear. I may say to the member from Rosthern, if you really 
meant that, then you’d feel some pangs of conscience about the 
fact that the member from . . . that Mr. Blakeney was in fact 
accurately prophesying the future when he said that they would 
be privatized. And you should feel some pangs of conscience 
about that fact, and about the fact that the Premier clearly . . . 
the Premier’s undertaking, so clearly given, was broken. You  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1701 
 

ought to feel some pangs of conscience about that. 
 
So when the member says, hear, hear, it’s very strange that he 
can say, hear, hear, and still sit in this Assembly and vote for a 
motion which is ultimately going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You won’t let us vote. Let’s vote. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Rosthern is anxious to 
vote. The member from Rosthern is anxious to cast his vote. I 
say to the member from Rosthern, the only reason that you’re 
anxious to cast your vote with respect to the bell-ringing is that 
you want to get on to the privatization of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. 
 
If this government did not have an agenda for privatization . . . 
Mr. Speaker, if members opposite didn’t have that agenda, this 
wouldn’t be on the agenda either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember the Premier stating, with what has 
turned out to be such delicious irony, that privatization would 
be the NDP’s Alamo. Well indeed, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly 
what it has been. As is the case with so many things, the 
Premier is an admirer of things which are American but not a 
very deep student of them. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has indeed become our Alamo. This issue has 
indeed become our Alamo. It’s worthwhile reminding members 
of the Assembly that the Alamo was a Texan fort. At the time 
of the battle, Texas was a province of Mexico, and had been for 
200 years prior to that a Spanish province; defended by never 
more than a hundred Texan irregulars, including the famous 
frontiersman, Daniel Boone; was besieged by a massive army 
from Mexico City of 300,000 people. It is true that in the short 
run the Texans lost, but, Mr. Speaker, the Alamo and the 
outrage which Texas people felt at that slaughter had a 
galvanizing effect upon the people of that province. It enabled a 
hard-drinking card-sharp from Tennessee by the name of Sam 
Houston to raise an army and to forge that far-flung province of 
Mexico into a community and a nation, and 18 months later the 
Mexican’s suffered overwhelming defeat at San Jacinto. 
 
So indeed, I think the Alamo is the NDP’s . . . indeed, I think 
privatization is the NDP’s Alamo. Whether or not we suffered 
any sort of a setback in the short run is, I suppose, yet to be 
decided. But there is a lesson in the Alamo for members 
opposite. The lesson is that overwhelming numbers, combined 
with overwhelming arrogance, can often lead to disaster. Many 
historians believe that if the Mexican general, Santa Anna, had 
allowed the Texans to go free, he would have easily won the 
War of Independence. 
 
So I say to members opposite, when the Premier said this is our 
Alamo, I think it’s going to be just that. I think it may in the 
short run be a setback, but in the long run it’s going to propel 
the member from Riversdale into the Premier’s office, just as it 
propelled Sam Houston into the governor’s office in Austin, 
Texas. So I say to members opposite, when your Premier said 
this is our Alamo, with some delicious irony I think he was 
right. I think he was right. What is more, I think members 
opposite, with the  

benefit of hindsight, many members opposite think this is our 
Alamo as well. 
 
The Alamo is not treated in either Texan history or Mexican 
history as a Mexican victory or a Texas defeat. It is treated as a 
great Texas victory and the date from which most Texans count 
the founding of the state of Texas. Indeed it is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s almost a shrine. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Saskatoon says, it’s 
almost a shrine. It is a shrine — it is a shrine. 
 
So when the member from Rosthern says, hear, hear, he wants 
to vote on it, he might think about the Alamo, an utterly 
inconsequential fort in south-western Texas, and he might think 
about the lessons to be learned from that battle. The member 
from Rosthern might give some careful consideration to what 
happens to members and governments which use overwhelming 
numbers to achieve unpopular results. I just ask . . . when the 
member from Rosthern says, hear, hear, I just want the member 
from Rosthern to think about that particular battle which, as I 
say, has some lessons in it for you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am . . . I want to summarize the comments that I 
made yesterday and I will be relatively brief in doing so. 
 
An Hon. Member: — As always. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There is a good deal which — as always, 
says one member — there is a good deal which could be said on 
this subject. Regrettably, I have to be out of the House very 
briefly, and I am unable to do justice to this subject. So in a 
relatively brief period of time I’m going to have to take my seat. 
 
I invite members opposite to (a) enter the debate, and hopefully 
they’ll do so with more substance than the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who said, in substance, he was glad to 
be here and proud to be here. And all I can say is we’re glad 
he’s glad and we’re proud he’s proud, but we really wish 
members opposite would contribute something to the debate 
besides such pointless drivel . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 
the member from Swift Current thinks this is a valuable subject 
and an important subject, then I invite the member from Swift 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would invite the hon. 
member to get onto the topic which he has only been on very 
peripherally, as I’m sure he realizes, and I ask him to get onto 
the motion under discussion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I know that members opposite wait with 
breathless anticipation to hear my comments on the subject, so I 
will deal with the subject. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we oppose this for a number of reasons 
and I’m going to, as I say, going to summarize them and then 
take my seat. We oppose this because it is out of keeping with 
the traditions in this House. We think those traditions have 
served this Legislative Assembly very well and should be 
maintained. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1702 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are told by others who have researched the 
subject, there’s no instance in Saskatchewan history, in the 
history of this legislature, where changes have been brought 
about unilaterally as is being done now. 
 
We point out to members opposite that whatever happened, we 
don’t know, but the initial suggestion which came from the 
Minister of Justice that it go to a committee was a sound one. 
 
Nothing, Mr. Speaker, is written in stone. All things change. 
This is not an institution whose rules, whose customs are 
unchangeable. This is an institution which must grow with time, 
must change with changing habits and changing perceptions. 
 
We recognize that the rules should be reviewed periodically and 
that there may be things that should be changed. Even with 
respect to bell-ringing . . . Before I take my seat I will repeat my 
defence of the tactic, but I say, even with respect to bell-ringing, 
it may be that there is a need to consider that. 
 
It may be that there are other guarantees which could be given, 
Mr. Speaker. It may be that there are better ways of assuring an 
opposition that they won’t be trampled under the heel of a 
government which suffers from too much enthusiasm. 
 
So we say to members opposite, there may be a better way. The 
simple abolition of the rule is not a better way. But we say to 
members opposite, there may be a better way of accomplishing 
this. We’re prepared to consider that. We’re prepared to join 
with members opposite to review the operation of this House. 
 
It has changed and will continue to change. Mr. Speaker, when 
I first came to this Legislative Assembly the House sat Friday 
afternoon. I just raise that as something that was abolished very 
early, and I think with good reason. Members have 
responsibilities not only in the Assembly but out of the 
Assembly. Members have the responsibility to go back to their 
ridings, to get in touch with their ridings, and to inform 
themselves . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And some go back to their offices. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And the odd one gets back to their office 
now and then. I notice government benches are full. I notice 
government benches are full, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just mention that as a change that was brought 
about; there are any number of them. One of the most dramatic 
changes and most far-reaching changes was, in fact, the 
introduction of television. More than anything else, I think that 
has changed the manner in which this applies. 
 
That was done, Mr. Speaker, through a committee. It was done 
through a committee which had all members on it, government 
and the opposition, and the roles, I might add, then were 
reversed, Mr. Speaker. There were some members of 
government that felt that that would improve the effectiveness 
of the opposition because the opposition is, in the nature of 
things, usually on the offensive; the government’s usually on 
the defensive. It’s  

the nature of this as an institution. 
 
Nevertheless, it was an all-party committee. Government 
members were eventually persuaded to try it. And I think most 
people would agree, it has greatly improved the effectiveness of 
this institution. Mr. Speaker, that would never have been 
accomplished had it not been for the tradition of all-party 
committees whose decisions are respected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I say, and I make the point to members 
opposite, that the tradition of using all-party committees is a 
valuable one. It has served the opposition well and it has served 
the government well. It is a tradition which we should maintain. 
 
I point out to members opposite that if you live by the sword, 
you may die by the sword. If you insist on moving in making 
unilateral changes to the rules, you should . . . That is a tradition 
with which members could be comfortable if they assume 
they’re always going to be in office. If you assume that no 
election will ever change, then, Mr. Speaker, that’s a tradition 
they could feel quite comfortable with because they’ll always 
be in the driver’s seat, and presumably their present mood is 
that they always know best, whatever the public sentiment 
might be. 
 
But that of course is not the history of the province. The 
average term that a member serves in this Assembly is 
somewhere between five and six years; average term of a 
government is two terms; and all things change. Members 
opposite might consider what their position might be if they’re 
not always in a majority. It should give members opposite some 
cause for hesitation with respect to this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think that the tradition of this Assembly should 
be maintained, and we urge members opposite to find some 
face-saving way of avoiding what is a very serious mistake. I 
say to members opposite, in case they believe otherwise, that 
we’re anxious to find a face-saving way whereby we can get on 
to other business. We think that this continued debate would not 
be as valuable and would not serve public interest as would a 
discussion of day care or agriculture. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or potash. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the member raises the potash. I say 
with respect to members opposite, you have no more of a 
mandate to privatize the potash industry . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The process of 
changing rules is certainly relevant. Any specifics outside of 
that are not relevant. There is a Bill on the order paper on public 
participation, which is Bill No. 1, and certainly it will be 
debated. There is Bill No. 20, which is the potash 
reorganization; that will certainly be debated at another time. 
But the debate now is on motion 33(1), the rule change. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That was probably a correct ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. The member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden asked for my 
assistance with respect to the potash issue, and I just thought I 
would render my assistance and give  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1703 
 

him what enlightenment I could. So it’s perhaps an excess of 
compassion for the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden that 
drew me outside the strict bounds of this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summary then, we think that this is the wrong 
way to approach a problem. We don’t think it’s the problem. 
We don’t think that the bell-ringing has ever been misused in 
any real sense. And I will summarize my comments in that 
regard as well in due course. But we don’t think it’s a problem. 
We don’t think there’s any evidence of that, nor have members 
opposite given us any illustration of when it has been a 
problem. Apart from the member from “really glad” and “really 
proud”, I haven’t heard any comments which suggest that this 
has been an actual problem. 
 
(1500) 
 
We say that because the times when bell-ringing has been used, 
it has, in fact, Mr. Speaker, been used to ensure public opinion 
is respected by a government. And I don’t think there’s any 
exceptions to that. Every time the bells have been rung for a 
lengthy period of time, the government has violated public 
opinion. They have violated it in the sense that they have 
attempted to ignore it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg wonders how they could 
have an opinion on a subject when they’ve never seen the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SPC Bill was extensively discussed before it 
was introduced. I’m just assisting the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — he asked me a question and I do my 
best to clear up their doubts. If I do, Mr. Speaker, they may vote 
for it. I thought that was the tradition here. So the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg asked for some assistance. I was 
lending it in spirit of good will and brotherhood, so I’ll . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ned, why don’t you go to your meeting? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Ah well, indeed. The sparkling wit and 
charm of the member from Arm River is brought to bear. 
Where all was darkness, now there is light. We have the 
comments of the member from Arm River who wonders why I 
don’t go to my meeting. The member from Arm River has no 
direct interest in my meeting, and I think therefore probably not 
any direct interest in the time at which I arrive at that meeting. 
However, as I say, we always appreciate the charming and 
stimulating comments of the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will leave that alone since I took it from the 
Speaker’s reaction to my comments to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that I was once again erring on the side 
of compassion for members opposite in attempting, as I was, to 
assist them with this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said as well, and I want to emphasize this 
because it is really fundamental to this debate, that bell-ringing 
is very much in keeping with the tradition of parliament and 
very much in keeping with the function of a parliament. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, in addition to  

his other comments made from his seat, on his feet said he 
wanted to come back and debate the issue, and therefore the 
bell-ringing prevented him from coming back to debate the 
issue. 
 
I made fun of his enthusiasm when he said how glad he was and 
how proud he was; perhaps I shouldn’t. There’s nothing wrong 
with enthusiasm for this institution, and one should never make 
light of someone who enjoys the work of this Assembly and 
looks forward to the work of this Assembly with anticipation. 
So I did so in a kindly fashion and not intending to be critical of 
him. Never be critical of a member who has enthusiasm for the 
work we’re doing here. 
 
What I want to point out to members opposite though, is that 
parliaments have traditionally been institutions which draw 
perimeters around which the executive works. Unlike the 
congressional form of government which is the U.S. system, 
members of this legislature are not part of government. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said he wanted to 
get back and debate the issue, treated this institution as if it was 
a debating society and the goal was to see who could provide 
the most sparkling and inspiring debate. This is not a debating 
society . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s generous of the 
member from Morse . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’d ask members 
to allow the member for Regina Centre to make his comments. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying before the 
member from Morse commented on my popularity or lack 
thereof, that legislatures and parliaments serve a different 
function than a congressional form of government. 
 
As is the case with our good neighbours to the South, and that is 
all . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Wilkie is 
concerned about the fact there’s only two radicals here with me, 
as he styles them. I want to say to the member from Wilkie that 
I don’t have to make a real effort to persuade the people on this 
side of the House. Most of them agree with me. 
 
My comments are directed to members opposite who don’t 
seem to have the same understanding of this issue. So I don’t 
really need . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The member 
for Regina Centre, all he’s done since he’s been speaking this 
afternoon is just making a speech commenting on comments 
from the colleagues over here. Is that anything to do with the 
bell-ringing? And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, please have him get 
back on the Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The point of order is not well 
taken. If members were not heckling the member that is 
speaking, he would have an opportunity to make  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1704 
 

his comments and the Chair would certainly have an 
opportunity to make sure the comments were relevant to the 
issue before the House. 
 
So I would ask members of the government benches to please 
keep their comments until they’re on their feet and have an 
opportunity to speak, which they will have. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
pointing out in summary form that a parliament acts as a check 
on executive power. That’s what a parliament is. I pointed out 
yesterday, and I will review it only in summary form. 
Parliaments came into being in that atmosphere. 
 
Unlike the American experience, unlike the French experience, 
unlike the experience of almost all of the countries in the 
Americas which lie south of the Rio Grande, English parliament 
was not born out of a revolution — did not have its beginning in 
that experience. 
 
It had its beginning in what at the time might have been a minor 
scuffle between King John and the nobles. They didn’t, as they 
might have at the battle of Runnymede, they didn’t dispose of 
him as they might have done. There were clear victories, there 
were clear victors, and the Royalists were clear losers. They 
might have disposed of him and set up an institution to govern. 
They didn’t do that. They simply sought to impose some 
restrictions on how he operated. In those days the kings 
operated executive power. 
 
That isn’t the beginning of parliament as such, but it is perhaps 
the most important event in British history, because it was the 
beginning of a peaceful evolution towards a democratic 
government; it was the beginning of a limit on executive power. 
 
Parliaments came into being actually 300 years later — came 
into being not to govern, as was the case in France after the 
revolution, or in the U.S. after the American revolution. They 
weren’t sent there to make laws for the nation or to govern, they 
were sent as a check on executive power. They were to approve 
spending if appropriate, not approve it if not appropriate. 
 
The Plantagenet kings of the era still made the laws; laws were 
all royal decrees. The kings — there were no queens during that 
particular era — raised the money; they set the taxes. 
Parliament met once a year to consider whether or not there 
ought to be some limit upon the king’s power. 
 
During a later period in time, during the Hanover kings and 
after the Tudor monarchy was finished, the monarchs of the era 
could not speak English — the early Hanover kings could not 
speak English. That occurred at the time of a constitutional 
crisis, the South Sea Bubble. 
 
Power was then transferred to the cabinet, Sir Robert Walpole, 
but the parliament never did assume a function of governing. It 
was always, Mr. Speaker, always the function of parliament 
was always to set the limits and never to govern. And that was 
true not only before what is said to be the first prime minister, 
Sir Robert Walpole, but was true afterwards. 
 

Sir Robert Walpole set up a different system. The cabinet 
governed, but parliament never did. It’s the unique feature — 
and it has remained true to this day — it’s the unique feature of 
parliament, is that parliament does not sit to pass laws, as is the 
case whether one would be in North Dakota or Washington or 
Paris, France, or in Mexico City or in Buenos Aires. Parliament 
sits here and in England to call the government to account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing is very much within that tradition, 
very much within the tradition of providing some effective 
limits on the exercise of executive power — very much within 
the parliamentary tradition. 
 
We were seeking nothing different in principle during the 
bell-ringing than the English nobility was seeking when dealing 
with King John. We seek not to replace them — that will occur, 
I think, in due course — but we seek to simply, with the 
bell-ringing, provide some effective check on their behaviour. 
 
So I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that bell-ringing is very much 
within the tradition of this parliament. And it is a parliament in 
the sense of a small “p” parliament. It’s very much within the 
tradition of this legislature, very much within the tradition of 
the Mother of Parliaments sitting in England. 
 
When members opposite say they want to get back to debating 
or to governing, I think they misunderstand our system. We are 
not part of government. We have virtually no influence on what 
happens — recognize that fully; spent some years learning that. 
When I first came, I thought I was going to change the world 
for the better, both in government and opposition — find out 
that’s not the role of a legislator. The role of legislator is 
something quite different. You in effect provide an effective 
check if there’s any need to call the government to account. 
 
So we say, Mr. Speaker, that the bell-ringing is very much 
within the tradition of parliament. It is what parliaments have 
always been about from the beginning. It was what they were 
about when they first began to meet during the Middle Ages. 
That continued to be the function of parliament after the 
transition of executive power from royalty to a prime minister 
and cabinet during the Hanoverian kings — remains true to this 
day. 
 
Members opposite behave as if this were some sort of an 
illegitimate tactic. We think it is very legitimate. It is true that if 
it were done in Washington or Paris, to use the two outstanding 
examples of congressional government, it would be different. 
But one should never confuse a parliament with a congressional 
form of government. They are very, very different. They 
operate differently. It has some strengths and weaknesses, but 
it’s ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all I know there may be bell-ringing in 
Washington and France . . . in Paris, too, but I . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Member from Saskatoon says it needs to 
researched. I’m not in a position to do that on my feet, but 
indeed, perhaps it should be researched. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
summarize what were our goals in ringing the bells. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to deal . . . I want to summarize that relatively 
briefly. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1705 
 

We sought in ringing the bells to, in part, to dramatize the issue. 
We thought the issue of absolute, fundamental importance. We 
live in a different environment than we did in the ’70s. This has 
been a period of . . . I think historians will treat these last 15 
years as a period of very rapid change in this country. 
 
During that period of time, at least two things changed. One 
was that the constitution . . . The government of Pierre Trudeau 
returned the constitution, a goal which I think everyone shared, 
and in so doing, inserted something that is not within the British 
tradition or had not been within the Canadian tradition — that 
was a charter of rights. He did so, I think, with the broad 
support of the Canadian public, who felt it a good thing. But we 
now have a charter of rights. 
 
(1515) 
 
It is not to me self-evident that we could do in the ’90s what we 
did in the ’70s. 
 
I suspect if we attempted to, there would be some constitutional 
challenges to it. One can challenge virtually any action of a 
government on constitutional grounds. The courts have taken a 
very active role, Mr. Speaker, in challenging government. That 
was not true before the introduction of what it is, in name, the 
Canada Act, but in fact Canadians call their charter of rights. 
 
That was not true in the ’70s. Courts very rarely challenged 
what government did. They were thought to be separate, 
watertight compartments. This government has learned that — 
and I won’t get into the issue of the Rafferty dam - 
_ but this government has learned how very active courts are in 
challenging governments. 
 
It is not self-evident to members of this side of the Assembly 
that we could simply take over, to decide we’re going to take 
over two-thirds of the potash industry and do it, Mr. Speaker. 
So we felt that the issue which we’re dealing with was of the 
absolute, utmost importance. That, combined with the free trade 
Act, may mean that these actions which the government was 
taking were irrevocable. We felt they were fundamental . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I don’t see how that relates to 
the bell-ringing issue. I would ask the member to keep his 
comments on the motion that’s before the Assembly. 
 
I have asked the member this many times. I’ve allowed a lot of 
latitude, and of course I have quoted rule 25(2) from the 
members’ handbook and what parameters the Speaker has to 
deal with this. So I would encourage the member to certainly 
get back to the issue. You’re bringing other specific issues into 
the debate that I don’t believe are relevant, and with that I just 
warn the member once more. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is conceivable that 
I was canvassing the subject with some degree of thoroughness. 
I was simply pointing out that we rang the bells. Our motive in 
so doing was to bring to the attention of the public what was 
being done. In that regard, we felt  

that to be of, as I said, the most fundamental importance. This 
was not a trifling issue. 
 
In that regard, the bell-ringing was very effective. I was 
genuinely surprised that there was so much public support for 
the bell-ringing. I was genuinely surprised. I never would have 
thought that only 22 per cent would oppose it and 67 per cent 
would say, yes, we support the bell-ringing. I was genuinely 
surprised at that. I would never have believed that to be 
possible. 
 
And during that period of time, I gave some thought to why 
there was such public support for bell-ringing. If members 
opposite haven’t gone through this same thought process, then I 
hope you keep your veterinarian practice alive, or whatever it is, 
because you’re not going to be in this Assembly long if you 
don’t give this matter some thought. 
 
This is the most dramatic event. If I was asked — school kids 
often come and ask you what’s the most important thing you 
did, and so on — if I was asked to name the most dramatic 
event that I think I’ve been through, I think it might well be the 
events of this spring. Members might well give themselves . . . 
so members should give this some thought. This was a unique 
and a very different experience, certainly from my vantage 
point it was. 
 
We didn’t go out with the intention of staying out for 17 days. 
We didn’t go out with the intention of staying out for half an 
hour. We will know, Mr. Speaker, that votes on first reading are 
relatively rare — a recorded vote on first reading is relatively 
rare. I don’t think that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I shall 
respond to that in a moment. The member, and I don’t know the 
identity of the person, but the member said we got lucky. I’ll 
deal with that in a moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went out; we found a great deal of support. 
Almost from the moment we went out to vote, the telephones 
started to ring, Mr. Speaker; the public started to phone and say, 
right on, keep it up. From the very beginning we had a good 
deal of public support. 
 
Members say we got lucky. I don’t think it was luck at all. We 
were opposed to the Bill. We decided to voice our opposition in 
the most dramatic possible fashion, and our judgement turned 
out to be accurate. The public were opposed to it. Our dramatic 
opposition to it in fact galvanized the public opinion. 
 
It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that after ringing the bells for 17 days 
we had a higher level of public support when we came back 
than when we went. 
 
Why did the public react so calmly to bell-ringing? I think 
because they appreciated having the matter brought to their 
attention. They did not object to it because it involved them. 
 
If we’d have sat, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly for 17 days — 
not in the Assembly, but sat in the building for 17 days — that 
might have been different. But we had a second goal besides 
dramatizing it. The 17-day walk-out gave us an opportunity to 
communicate with the public, and we did so with as much 
energy as we could muster. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1706 
 

And there’s a lesson in this for members opposite. You don’t 
persuade public opinion with massive advertising budgets. A 
little bit of advertising is a useful thing, but there are rapidly 
diminishing points of return. A few radio ads are useful. A 
massive amount of radio ads are counterproductive. We didn’t 
do it, in part, perhaps, because we didn’t have the money. We 
did a very modest bit of radio advertising. 
 
We worked as hard as we could to organize rallies on very short 
notice. We sent out letters to select people whom we know to be 
activists and interested, all of which cost us and the taxpayer 
very, very little. A lot of shoe leather, a lot of energy. We 
criss-crossed this province back and forth in a fashion which 
could only be described as hectic. But in doing so, everybody in 
Saskatchewan knew what we were saying. Everybody 
understood our position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the end of that 17-day walk-out, only 11 per 
cent of people were undecided — very, very low. This is by the 
poll. I think there’s 11 per cent of the people can’t hear properly 
when they pick up the phone. I mean, to have 11 per cent who 
say they’re undecided, I don’t know, is a very low percentage. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we used the 17-day period to communicate 
with the public. We did so effectively, and to that extent it 
shouldn’t be decried. The public thought the 17-day walk-out to 
be a useful exercise. They appreciated, I think, the effort we put 
into it to communicate. They turned out in massive numbers to 
the rallies. Members opposite didn’t go out, then or now. They 
sent out bureaucrats, and I don’t mean to use the word 
bureaucrats in a pejorative way, but they didn’t go out 
themselves and face the fire; they sent others out, and people 
just didn’t come. Bet you the only people came to the meetings 
organized by members opposite were people who were opposed 
to it. 
 
You might ask . . . I think members opposite might give some 
pause to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is getting back 
into specifics. The question before the Assembly is the change 
to the rules and the limiting of the bells, and that is rule 33(1). 
The member is straying away again from the issue before the 
Assembly and getting into specifics, so I would ask the member 
again. The process of changing rules or the rule change is 
certainly relevant; specific issues are not. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I was simply attempting to 
point out, and I think it is relevant to the debate and I may not 
have been making the point with any clarity, but I was simply 
attempting to point out that the use of the bells for 17 days 
enjoyed broad public support. I was attempting to make the 
point that that wasn’t because they misunderstood the issue or 
the bell-ringing, it was because the bell-ringing served a useful 
purpose. I was simply trying to make the point that when they 
abolish this, they’re abolishing something the public found 
useful — something we made good use of, that’s true, but 
something the public also made good use of. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is true that the bell-ringing . . . I think it’s true, 
in the history of this country, it has not been misused. I think 
that’s accurate. It could not be called a misuse of the 
bell-ringing when in fact the purpose of it was to communicate 
our views to the public. 
 
In summary, that’s what I was saying was that the purpose was 
to communicate; was (a) to stop the government, but (b), more 
important, to communicate our position to the government. 
 
We never went out with the view that we were never coming 
back until the government said “uncle.” That, I think, would 
have been misuse of the tactic. We went out with the view that 
something dramatic was needed, (a) to bring this government to 
its senses, but (b) to bring the matter squarely, put the matter 
squarely before the public — that’s the use that was made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to members opposite that is a legitimate use 
of a tactic. And that is why I think the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That is why . . . That could not be commented 
on by me, could it? I could comment on it, but I don’t know that 
Mr. Deputy Speaker will let that proceed for long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might give some cause to 
consider, and I said this earlier, members opposite might give 
some cause to consider why our support from the public was 
higher after we did it than it was before. We think it was 
because the tactic wasn’t misused. The tactic was used to 
communicate with the public. It was used to bring our views to 
the public and to give them a chance to communicate with us — 
done with great effectiveness. 
 
I say in a somewhat peripheral way, if this government 
attempted to do the same, rather than the massive advertising 
program, or sending out bureaucrats, or a commission whose 
credibility, with every respect to Lloyd Barber, a commission 
whose credibility was destroyed by the Premier as he set it up 
— I think the terms of reference destroyed the credibility of that 
commission — if members opposite communicated with the 
public on the issue, as distinct from asking advertisers to do 
your job for you, I think members opposite would come to the 
conclusion we were right about SPC, and therefore . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The question is not the 
specifics of why you went out of the House. The question here 
is the issue of the proper use of the bells and the rule before the 
House. 
 
Order, order. Order. I have allowed a lot of latitude, like I’ve 
said before, and I certainly have called the member to order 
many times, and quoted. And I can quote again, if he wishes, 
rule 22(2) out of the members’ handbook. But I’m warning the 
member once more that if he does not stick to the issue before 
the Assembly, that the Chair certainly can call for the next 
speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in making . . . in abolishing 
the ringing of the bells we think the government is seeking to 
blunt the effect of public opinion. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1707 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — For after all, Mr. Speaker, the ringing of 
the bells was a vehicle through which public opinion was 
brought to bear on the issue of the day. 
 
Members opposite will deny that. Members opposite are of the 
view because they were elected with a majority of seats — not a 
majority of votes, that should be kept in mind, the members 
opposite as well; they were elected with a majority of seats — 
anything they do therefore represents the popular will. There’s 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, a degree of arrogance in that view. 
There’s obviously a degree of arrogance. 
 
That is a hazard of a government being in office too long. We 
think the bells . . . We think the ringing of the bells brought 
public opinion to bear squarely on the issue. It didn’t cause the 
government to back off, I regret to say. I regret to say the 
government didn’t say. Maybe our judgement on this issue 
wasn’t perfect; maybe we ought not to have done it. It instead 
simply caused them to try to reach the same goal through a 
different route. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we say that this tactic should remain. We say 
that this tactic of bell-ringing should be available to the 
opposition. We think there’s no evidence, Mr. Speaker, that it 
was misused. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No evidence of misuse? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No. Member from Melfort says, with a 
note of surprise in his voice, no element of misuse. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if one examines the issues when the bell 
has been rung, one will find that to be true. It has been used to 
thwart and stop a government in office, and it’s been used to 
limit executive power, but each time bell-ringing has been used, 
it has been used to give effect to popular will. I think that’s true. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, the instances of bell-ringing longer than 
six hours are as follows. I don’t know what’s going on in 
Ontario at the moment, to be perfectly honest. I understand the 
bells are ringing there, and I’m told that they have now perhaps 
been shut off, I don’t know. So maybe that’s been resolved. So I 
leave that outside the discussion because I’m not familiar with 
the issues. 
 
I am familiar with the first time the bell-ringing was used. It 
was used in Ottawa by the Conservative opposition who took 
umbrage because the Trudeau government of the day sought to 
limit their effectiveness as an opposition by including a Bill 
they opposed, a Bill which in effect established the national 
energy program, together with some unrelated legislation. They 
took umbrage at that. The public supported them. After 11 days 
the Trudeau government wisely backed down and thought 
better of it. 
 
One could not call that to be a misuse of bells, when the ringing 
of the bells was intended to . . . gave effect to public opinion, 
made public opinion effective. 
 
It was used, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba, again by a  

Conservative opposition who opposed the Pawley government’s 
attempts to provide a degree a of bilingualism in Manitoba in 
what many felt was quite an unrealistic decision. The Supreme 
Court of Canada mandated the Manitoba government to bring in 
bilingual statutes. I may well support the Pawley government, 
but I wouldn’t argue for a moment that the Conservatives didn’t 
have solid public support. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ve heard all this. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The members opposite say that they have 
heard it. There’s nothing in the comments of members opposite 
to suggest you understood it. You may have heard it, but there’s 
nothing to illustrate that you ever understood it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other time it was used dramatically illustrates 
why we need bell-ringing. The only other time it was used in 
this province illustrates very dramatically why bell-ringing may 
still serve a useful purpose. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, that laying at the bottom of this is a lack of 
trust between the two parties in this legislature. That’s what 
underpins this issue and underpins the problems that we’ve had 
in this session. I know that Mr. Deputy Speaker wouldn’t me to 
get into that, but the member from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It’s very difficult for the Chair to hear 
the member speaking when there’s discussions going across the 
floor between both sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, underlying this debate is a 
lack of trust, a lack of confidence of us in them. We simply 
don’t trust the government to be fair; we don’t trust them to 
play by the rules. And that underpins our whole opposition to 
this bell-ringing. 
 
That is illustrated by the last use that was made of this. I won’t 
get into this in detail because I did so earlier in my speech. 
Suffice it to say, suffice it to summarize briefly, I made a 
comment in this legislature. I was sued by a person, Mark 
Silver, of Silver Developments (Ltd.). We raised it as a point of 
personal privilege in the Assembly. The then Speaker found a 
prima facie case that that was accurate. What happened? There 
are many ways that the Government House Leader of the day, 
the member from Lumsden, could have dealt with it. He chose 
to deal with it, however, by in effect giving those who were 
suing me full rein. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that incident illustrates why bell-ringing still 
serves a purpose. Members of this side of the Assembly can’t 
function if we’re going to be sued. We will often, as is the 
nature of oppositions, raise issues of undue influence. Such 
comments are usually a ground for libel. We simply cannot do 
our job if we’re going to be subject to libel actions. 
 
What the government did in that instance, five years ago, was 
an attempt to open up members of the opposition to a libel 
action. We rang the bells. The public, once again, Mr. Speaker, 
agreed with us, and after four days the member from Lumsden 
did what he should have done in the very beginning — asked 
the solicitor to withdraw the  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1708 
 

action, and they did. That illustrates why bell-ringing still 
serves a purpose, at least as long as you have a government of 
this ilk in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t any evidence that this government 
respects the traditions of this House. There isn’t any evidence 
that this government respects the way that this House has 
functioned. There isn’t any evidence that this government in 
fact understands how this place functions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . the last decade has been a tumultuous 
one in Saskatchewan politics. The turnover in members has 
been extremely high, much higher than has normally been the 
case. It has meant that there are few people on the opposition 
benches who actually ever served . . . I’m sorry, there are few 
people in the government benches who served on the opposition 
— three or four, I think, is all there are left. It may therefore 
make it difficult for members opposite to understand why the 
bell-ringing is on occasion a legitimate tactic. 
 
So I say to members opposite, I’ve said before, put yourself in 
the opposition. Because if you’re successful, if you get back to 
your constituency, if you prove to be a good listener, you may 
survive the defeat of this government. And all governments are 
defeated. You may be in opposition. That’s when this as a 
safety may well be useful to you. 
 
Some of you are never going to see opposition. I will not pick 
out names, but the average term of office is about five years. 
About one-quarter to one-third of you who are elected for the 
first time will get re-elected. So most of you will not see the 
opposition, statistically speaking. But some of you will, and you 
should think about your role in opposition . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m not counting out the member from 
Rosthern or anyone else. I am simply saying that, statistically, 
most of you will not see the opposition. You won’t survive that 
long unless things change. 
 
Politics is probably getting more tumultuous, not less. So think 
about what you need and what protections you’re going to want 
when you’re in opposition. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — I would like to ask for leave, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members in the Assembly, some students from my constituency 
of Yorkton. They are 46 students, grade 4, from the Dr. Brass 
School, and they’re seated, of course, in your gallery, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s a real pleasure to have you at our Assembly this afternoon. 
We trust you’ll enjoy the proceedings of the Assembly. We are 
debating, at the present time, motion no. 33. 
 

And these students are accompanied by two of their teachers, Jo 
Ann Zandee and Marilyn Pearson; and chaperons, Tracy 
Kwasniowski, Shirley Guest, and Debbie McDowell and Laura 
Chaban — am I pronouncing that name correctly? I hope I am. 
 
We hope you enjoy the proceedings. Have a good visit to 
Regina. Have good summer holidays, and we wish you all the 
success in your exams. And I will meet with you a little bit later 
to have pictures taken and to have some refreshments, and 
hopefully I can answer some of your questions as to what 
you’ve seen here this afternoon. 
 
So with that, I’m asking all members to please join me in 
welcoming the students from Dr. Brass in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I’m near the end of my 
remarks. I want to just address a comment to the schoolchildren 
who are in the gallery. In 1962 when I was a little older, I think, 
than most of those kids would be, we caught a train. We lived 
on a farm, caught a train into — that’s another bit of nostalgia 
they’ll never see — caught a train in and came in, came to the 
legislature. Happened to arrive as the medicare debate was 
being — I’ll be quick — happened to arrive as medicare was 
being debated and a filibuster was in progress. 
 
The then premier met us; didn’t take advantage of it to tell his 
side of the story; simply said that the legislature was doing what 
the legislature should do, and that is examining the government 
actions and holding the government to account. 
 
That was my first experience, Mr. Speaker, with the Assembly. 
It made an indelible impression on me, not only with the 
Assembly but with the man himself. In the midst of that 
emotional debate, he took no opportunity to take advantage of 
it, simply stated what I’ve been trying to say and what I say to 
the children, and that is that we are taking the position that in 
this bell-ringing debate we are attempting to preserve the right 
of the legislature to hold the government to account. 
 
We seek to preserve this as a safety valve for members, so that 
members’ rights will not be trampled, as they have been in the 
past, undeniably — as undeniably, Mr. Speaker, in the scheme 
of things, will happen in the future. It is not all evil that’s 
behind us. It will happen again, just as surely as someone’s 
rights were trampled in the past, as I think mine clearly were in 
1985, so — in 1985, yes — so someone will be again. One of 
you will be in the position I was in. 
 
(1545) 
 
Think about it. I ask members opposite to think about it  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1709 
 

when you’re there. Think about the use that has been made of 
this bell-ringing tactic . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’d dearly 
like to respond to that comment, but I’ll do the member from 
Melville a favour and overlook it. And I am doing the member 
from Melville a considerable favour when I overlook that 
comment he just made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members opposite to think about not the 
immediate issue. In the scheme of things, that is probably not as 
important as the way this place functions. It has functioned 
very, very well. We look across the Pacific Ocean, see the 
world’s largest nation in turmoil, on the brink of civil war — 
have every reason to be thankful for these institutions. They 
have served us very, very, well. The vast majority of nations on 
earth and the vast majority of people do not have access to 
them. 
 
Before we change them dramatically, we should think about it. 
We should consider that together, as civilized people, and 
consider that in a civilized way, not in this tug of war which 
shows no sign of coming to a conclusion. But in the fashion in 
which we’ve always done, we should send it to a committee 
where, as civilized men and women, we can consider the 
matter, and, as I think those committees have done, determine 
not only what is in our personal best interests but what is in the 
best interests of this institution and the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
With those words, Mr. Speaker, I implore members opposite to 
adopt a more reasonable approach to this issue and either 
withdraw it or vote against it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to speak to this motion proposed by the Minister of 
Justice, the member from Kindersley. I believe this is a very 
important motion. It is so important that we have to deal with 
this motion and deal with it right here in this House. 
 
The way not to deal with this motion is by hijacking this 
legislature, and I mean by hijacking, I mean 17 days — 17 days 
of bell-ringing. This is not the democratic way with dealing 
with legislature. This is not the reason that people sent us here 
to this legislature. The reason they sent us here to this 
legislature is to deal with it in this Assembly, and I strongly 
believe the people out there have got that message. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was out and I was talking to many, many people 
in my constituency. I talked to lots of R.M.s and talked to lots 
of towns that people that sit on those as councillors, aldermen, 
or whatever you want to call them. They asked me what all this 
bell-ringing was all about, and why they were ringing the bells. 
The first thing I said, I wasn’t quite sure why they were ringing 
the bells, because I’m not so darn sure that they even knew why 
they were ringing the bells. They walked out of here. I’m not so 
sure that they knew how long they were going to be out until 
some of the people across the way got to some of the other 
people across the . . . maybe their seat mates, and maybe said, 
we’ll test them. 
 
And I think this is the wrong way to test the Assembly,  

especially when there is many, many people out there that are 
waiting for some of the Bills to be passed in this House, some 
of the Bills that are on the agenda. We will turn to those Bills 
and the question that was put to me: how long is this going to 
last? 
 
Well the same thing as the member just said from Saskatoon 
South, and he said this the other day — we will be here for a 
long time. The member from Regina Centre said, we don’t trust. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to be here for a 
long time because we are the government and we will stay here 
as long as it takes to do what the people want us to do. 
 
And talking about trust, good faith, and behaviour, you talk 
about behaviour — that is not behaviour over there. 
 
As I was saying when I was talking to R.M.s and to towns, I 
said, put yourself in this place. If you have six councillors and 
two of them walk out and you can’t pass any motions or any 
by-laws or anything, what position would you be in? They said, 
we wouldn’t let it happen; that’s not democracy. I would like to 
tell you what it really is, but I don’t think this is the place to do 
it. 
 
Anybody that’s been in business — I don’t know how many of 
you people across the way have been in business, but it’s 
probably a very few — but anybody who’s in business wouldn’t 
do their business the way we’re doing it, the way it has 
happened in here. They would stay in here and they would sit 
down and they would negotiate, and when it was done, whether 
you were for it or against it, you went along with it. 
 
The opposition has made statements, along with Barb Byers, 
they we’re going to make this province ungovernable. I repeat, 
Mr. Speaker, unworkable. That was the House Leader, along 
with Barb Byers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s Barb Byers? 
 
Mr. Gleim: — I think everybody knows who Barb Byers is. 
And that is why we need to change this rule. They travelled the 
province telling the people of this province what is not in the 
Bill, the SaskEnergy Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ve brought members of the 
opposition to order because of getting into specifics. The Bill 
has nothing to do with the debate before the House. The debate 
before the House is rule 33(1) and the process of changing 
rules. Specifics outside of that are not debatable under this 
motion. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — I have to apologize, Mr. Speaker. You do know 
how to run a business, as I was talking before, and that’s the 
way to run a business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — As I was saying before, as I was travelling the 
province — and I did travel the province a little bit on the 
weekends out of my constituency — but in my constituency 
alone I had many, many phone calls. Not phone calls saying, 
what are you doing in the House; they  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1710 
 

were phone calls where: how much longer are you going to be 
there? And I said, well, that is actually up to the opposition; it is 
up to the opposition how long we’re going to be here. If the 
opposition want to co-operate, I guess we won’t be here too 
long, but if they don’t co-operate, who knows. 
 
And I guess that is why it’s so important that we have this 
motion and we think about this motion and we pass this motion, 
because if we don’t, what is stopping you people from across 
the way from walking out and never coming back? which some 
day you probably won’t have to bother coming back. 
 
I guess it shows the opposition leader, the member from 
Riversdale, really has no control over — I guess I should say 
like the article in the Star-Phoenix last week — over his 
radicals. Those radicals over there still believe they are 
government. The people of this province, in 1982 and 1986, 
sent those people over there a message. That’s why they’re 
sitting over there. We are the government. We set the agenda. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That doesn’t give you the right to be a 
dictator. 
 
Mr. Gleim: — I would like to . . . Mr. Speaker, I guess with 
that kind of control over his caucus, the opposition leader across 
the way has his problems. I’m glad they’re his problems. He has 
to deal with them, and I’m not so sure that he’s dealing with 
them. 
 
I believe the opposition want to get their views across to the 
people. If the opposition really want to get their views across to 
the people by ringing the bells for 17 days — yes, Mr. Speaker, 
they did ring them for 17 days — they should take their 
beach-balls, their play toys or whatever they got, go on home 
and do the honourable thing and resign, Mr. Speaker. Resign, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — They’re calling for the members over here to 
resign. This is the government that’s trying to set the agenda. 
They don’t want us to set the agenda; they don’t want to 
co-operate. So I think you should do the honourable thing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, will not forget the 
opposition. They will never forgive you. They’ll never forgive 
you just over this Bill, just because this Bill does mean that you 
can run a House the way it should be run. 
 
But I think, as you all know, that all across Canada there is 
many, many provinces . . . there’s only two provinces that 
aren’t under this same . . . have this same legislation. And as 
one of the members mentioned this morning, there was a debate 
went on in 1956; I think it was a pipeline Bill. They debated 
that; they brought in a rule, said you have to get on with 
government orders, get on with doing what you are here for to 
do. Maybe that is the way to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk . . . Just one little thing I’d like to 
mention. Maybe I’m not supposed to say this, but I heard the 
opposition members say that the energy Bill has been 
withdrawn. The energy Bill has not been withdrawn; it  

has been stood. I’d like to just make that clear and go on record, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of this province want to have a look at this Bill. 
They have the time to look at. They have the time until October 
to look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I think you have to give 
this government credit for that. 
 
I heard the member from Regina Centre make a remark 
yesterday about doing some shopping in the Cornwall Centre 
while he was out on his 17-day break. And he was standing in 
the Cornwall Centre talking with some people, and he 
mentioned the young PCYF (Progressive Conservative Youth 
Federation) group, that is, the young Conservatives, and how 
the people around him chased those people out of the Cornwall 
Centre. I talked to those young people, Mr. Speaker. They 
weren’t chased out of the Cornwall Centre. It was the man from 
Regina Centre that left them. They were still standing there 
when he walked away. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s his name? 
 
Mr. Gleim: — I can’t repeat his name. It was the member from 
the Cornwall Centre. They started at a debate and they couldn’t 
finish the debate because he wasn’t there. He wasn’t there. He 
disappeared. 
 
I think it’s time that we got on with business in this House. 
Business as it has been, and I want you members from the 
opposition across the way to think very strongly about this. 
Think about what it can do. You have always mentioned, some 
day you’re going to be sitting over here. Well that’s hard to 
believe that you will be sitting here with the way you’re 
thinking right now, because I don’t think the people are going 
to allow you to sit over here. And if you want to have a debate 
with the people, you wait — we will call an election, then you 
can debate the Bill. You can debate whichever you want at that 
time, and I think the people will make that decision. 
 
I think the time has come that we have to be very serious. We 
have to get serious. That’s why the people sent us. I will be 
supporting the motion put forward by the member from 
Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, and I urge all members on 
this side and on the other side — the opposition — to do the 
same. That you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to congratulate the member for Shaunavon for taking part in 
this debate as one of the few government members who have 
seen fit to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . one of the few, I said, 
one of the few who have seen fit to stand and attempt a defence 
of this motion that this government has put before the House. 
 
So I want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member for 
Assiniboia, or happy and glad, or happy and proud, also for 
taking some initiative anyway to attempt to defend, although 
I’ve noted, Mr. Speaker, that their attempts to defend this 
motion have been very short and with very little substance, I 
might add. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1711 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I note that many of the questions proposed 
by members on this side of the House regarding this motion and 
its motives and its process are not being addressed when 
members opposite do get up to speak. Therefore it would say to 
me that the points being made by members on this side of the 
House are well taken, and the government members opposite 
have no defence on those points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of my remarks in this debate I hope 
to consider a variety of areas. I want to take some time to look 
at the situation that has brought us to this day, to this debate, to 
this point. 
 
I want to take some time in looking at that argument that’s been 
advanced by government members, and again we heard it 
advanced by the member for Shaunavon, that somehow the 
ringing of the bells in this case, which brought forward this 
motion, is somehow undemocratic. I want to look at that 
argument of theirs. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that 
argument is in my view hypocritical for them to advance, and 
secondly, it’s wrong. 
 
I want to look also at why, in my judgement, the bell-ringing 
provision that has existed, and I hope will continue to exist in 
this legislature, is indeed a means for the flourishing of 
democracy. I want to spend some time on that. I want to spend 
some time, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks, describing why in my 
view this particular motion is totally inappropriate, totally 
inappropriate for five good reasons. I want to spend time on 
that. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend time on describing 
what in my view would be an appropriate way for this House to 
go in dealing with this situation, a way that I think all 
reasonable members could agree with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a Chinese proverb — either a blessing, 
or is it a curse? I believe it is the Chinese who say, may you live 
in interesting times. Well there’s no question, anyone who has 
observed proceedings in this House in the course of this spring 
— and you, sir, are in the best position to do that — must say 
that we have seen, at best, interesting times in this House, made 
interesting by a series, a whole series, of unprecedented events. 
 
Clearly 17 days of bell-ringing in this province is 
unprecedented — clearly. Also unprecedented, Mr. Speaker, in 
my view, is the event which brought on that bell-ringing, the 
introduction of legislation in this House to privatize SaskPower 
— unprecedented simply because of the unprecedented nature 
of the betrayal of a commitment. Mr. Speaker, that was 
obviously an unprecedented betrayal of a commitment that 
brought on the bell-ringing, which has brought on the motion 
which we now debate. 
 
We have seen, in the course of this spring session, the 
unprecedented attack of a government minister on the 
Provincial Auditor. And now we have an unprecedented motion 
which is being followed up with an unprecedented debate. Mr. 
Speaker, anyone following events in this House would agree 
that these have been interesting times. 
 

The motion that we are debating, number 14 on the order paper, 
a motion to amend rule 33(1) of the functioning of this 
Legislative Assembly, a motion that would amend the rules and 
procedures that govern us all in this House — this motion seeks 
to limit bell-ringing in Saskatchewan legislature to a period of 
one hour — no more than one hour. 
 
Now what is unprecedented in my view, Mr. Speaker, about this 
motion which we debate, what makes this motion totally 
unprecedented in the history of this legislature . . . I wish the 
Minister of Highways would pay more attention to the speaker 
and less to the students. Mr. Speaker, I realize . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I argue that this motion is unprecedented for two 
reason. One is that we are here dealing with a change in the 
rules of the functioning of this legislature. Never before in the 
history of this legislature has a rule change been introduced in 
this fashion. Never before in the history of the Saskatchewan 
legislature has a majority government sought to change the 
rules unilaterally. To my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, that has 
never happened before in the Saskatchewan legislature, 
particularly with a rule change of this degree. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker . . . the unprecedented situation that 
we have here is that a government has come into this House, 
with a majority, with the wish to ram a rule change through 
without consultation or conversation or negotiation with 
members of the opposition. Mr. Speaker, in my view that’s 
plain wrong and entirely unprecedented. 
 
But this rule change, Mr. Speaker, or this proposed rule change 
is unprecedented on another front because, in my view, this is 
the first rule change that has been proposed in this legislature 
for purely political reasons — for purely partisan political 
reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on other occasions when the rules have been 
changed in this legislature, as from time to time they will, and 
must and should be changed, the goal of that change has always 
been to strengthen the institution; to make the functioning of the 
Saskatchewan legislature more appropriate to the needs of the 
day; to make it possible for all members to contribute to the 
work of this legislature and therefore to contribute to the 
province; to strengthen both roles, both the role of the 
opposition and the role of the government. 
 
In every other incident or rule change in this legislature, the 
motive has been to improve this legislature and to improve its 
functioning and to improve the role of both government and 
opposition. In this case, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
unprecedented situation of a rule change introduced unilaterally 
by a majority government with a partisan political motive, a 
partisan political motive that has no precedent in Saskatchewan 
legislative history. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why would they do that? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Why are they doing that, Mr. Speaker? To 
achieve a goal they could not otherwise achieve, and that’s to 
force through the privatization of SaskPower. It’s obvious to 
everyone in Saskatchewan that what this rule  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1712 
 

change is, is a back door route to force the privatization of 
SaskPower on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in my view that’s totally 
inappropriate, and therefore I describe this proposed rule 
change as it exists today on the blues, on the order paper, as 
unprecedented — unprecedented because here for the very first 
time in the history of the Saskatchewan legislature we have a 
majority government attempting to impose a rule change on all 
members without the very traditional meeting of members, 
negotiating between members, the all-party committee that can 
join together to forge that rule. 
 
Now in this case we have a unilateral move on behalf of a 
majority government attempting to ram this rule through. That’s 
unprecedented. And secondly, it’s unprecedented because the 
motive in this case is not for the betterment of the legislature, 
not for the betterment of the democratic process in this 
institution, but for partisan political purposes; a rule change 
with a partisan political goal, that goal being to force through 
the privatization of SaskPower which the people of this 
province have so firmly rejected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to look at that situation which has 
brought us to this debate. This debate essentially began on that 
day when the government sought to introduce first reading of its 
Bill to privatize SaskPower, to sell off the natural gas division 
of SaskPower. That’s where this debate really began. 
 
And you recall, Mr. Speaker, you recall that in the last election, 
the people of Saskatchewan were given every assurance by 
every member running for that Progressive Conservative Party, 
given the solemn promise of the Premier of the province, that 
we would never, never, he said, privatize the utilities. 
 
Well on the day that this debate began, the debate that leads us 
to this day and this motion, on the day that this debate began, 
that commitment was broken. We saw a Premier and a Deputy 
Premier making commitments a year ago in this House. When 
the Premier was asked by my colleague from Rosemont, is the 
formation of SaskEnergy the first step to privatization, the 
Deputy Premier said no. Well the day that that legislation was 
introduced, or they sought to introduce it in this House, it was a 
betrayal of that commitment and that promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, on that morning the bells in this 
legislature began to ring. They rang that morning; they rang that 
weekend. And in the course of that weekend, we left this 
building and we talked to people in our own constituency; we 
consulted with peoples in other constituencies. We travelled the 
province that weekend. We received the phone calls here at the 
caucus office, here in our own constituency offices, and we 
determined that the public support for our stand was growing. 
 
We determined also that the public wanted a voice in this 
debate. They wanted their voice to be heard in this legislature. 
To give them that opportunity, the  

opportunity that should belong to the people of Saskatchewan, 
the opportunity to voice their opinion and to have it heard by 
government, the bells of this legislature put on hold the 
functioning of this legislature for some 17 days — I think 11 
sitting days, Mr. Speaker — a total of 17 days, about two 
weeks. For about two weeks, the functioning of this legislature 
was put on hold. 
 
What happened in that two weeks? Well, the people of 
Saskatchewan were given an opportunity to speak on this issue, 
on the issue of the privatization of SaskPower, and speak they 
did. Mr. Speaker, it’s not entirely germane to this debate, but 
you and I and everyone in Saskatchewan know the public 
opinion that was expressed during that 17 days when only 22 
per cent of the people of Saskatchewan supported the 
government — no to the privatization of SaskPower. 
Twenty-two per cent only were supporting the government. 
That was the public opinion voiced in the 17 days that the bells 
rang. 
 
It was obvious then that the people had spoken, obvious that the 
people had spoken, obvious that the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan people wanted this government to stop its 
foolishness in the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
We returned to this House with that public opinion. Mr. 
Speaker, we came back to this legislature not only with the 
public opinion polls in place, we came back armed with 
petitions taken from across this province — tens of thousands 
of names. We’ve presented almost a hundred thousand names in 
this House already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that 17 days the people of Saskatchewan 
expressed their opinion. They said what they wanted to be heard 
by the government. They said, save SaskPower. And they knew 
full well, they knew full well what this government was about. 
It was about the privatization of SaskPower. They can call it 
what they want. The people of Saskatchewan understand what it 
was about: the privatization of SaskPower. And they expressed 
their opinion, Mr. Speaker. They expressed their opinion in that 
two weeks that the function of this legislature was silenced. 
 
Now did the government listen, and did the government listen 
to that outpouring of public opinion that the ringing of the bells 
provided? Did . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Minister 
of Commercial Affairs, from his seat, wants to know what my 
parishioners think about this. Well, like the rest of the people of 
Saskatchewan, those people that I’m acquainted with of the 
church, a good 80 per cent of them oppose what your 
government is doing. You won’t listen to them either. It doesn’t 
matter where you go. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were given an 
opportunity to speak. They took that opportunity and they spoke 
with a clear voice. They said to us, stop this government. 
They’ve said to this government, stop your foolishness. But did 
the government listen, Mr. Speaker? Did the government listen? 
Well now they’ve put it off — fair enough, they’ve put off this 
privatization. They’ve established a road show to travel the 
province and try and sell the idea, but it’s not working. It’s not 
working. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1713 
 

So we returned. Then what happened, Mr. Speaker? Then what 
happened? Well obviously this government had been burnt by 
the experience, and obviously they never want to see it happen 
again. Obviously they do not want the people of Saskatchewan 
to voice their opinions. They don’t really want the people of 
Saskatchewan to have an opinion, for that matter, other than the 
opinion that they hold. 
 
So what is the first thing that we get handed to us coming into 
this legislature? A motion to stop bell-ringing. What for, Mr. 
Speaker? So that they can bring back, so that at some future 
date they can bring back their political agenda, which is to sell 
SaskPower and to ram it through. They did not listen, Mr. 
Speaker; they did not listen to the public opinion that was 
expressed in that 17-day period. And that saddens me. It 
saddens me when any government has grown so out of touch 
and so arrogant that they will no longer listen to the people they 
were elected to govern. 
 
So we have this unprecedented motion, unprecedented in that 
we have a majority government attempting to ram through a 
rule change affecting the rules of this legislature and the 
functioning of all members, an unprecedented motion that has 
as its goal the eventual privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and members on this side of the House are not 
the only ones who hold this view. We can summarize the course 
of events with comments from political columnists in our 
province. Leader-Post, May 31, Wednesday, May 31, a noted 
political columnist in our province describes this course of 
events in a few short sentences, when he writes: 
 

Next was the Tories’ ill-fated SaskEnergy privatization. 
What was to be a bold move, giving them unstoppable 
momentum on the privatization issue, turned into a 
political nightmare. 
 
It has disrupted the Tories’ entire timetable and 
undermined their credibility on privatization. At the same 
time, it has forced the government to radically change its 
legislative plans, delaying legislation indefinitely (now, 
Mr. Speaker, get this), while seeking to impose limits on 
the opposition’s ability . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s happened here, that’s what’s 
happened here. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we come to one of the more peculiar turn of 
events in this entire scenario. We returned to this House after 
providing the opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to 
their express their view, as they did. We returned to this House 
ready to do government business, to debate the budget, to do the 
estimates, to debate important legislation which the people of 
Saskatchewan are waiting for. First thing we’re given is a 
motion, a proposal to change the rules. 
 
Then, I guess, realizing that the public of Saskatchewan could 
see the arrogance of what they were doing, the  

Minister of Justice seemed to have a little change of heart. He 
seemed, at one point, willing to retreat somewhat from the 
ramming of this rule change through. In his remarks, he seemed 
to extend the olive branch, as it were; to propose what we have 
proposed often in this debate — a legislative committee to look 
at this rule change, among others. 
 
And I want to just quote, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice in 
this House on May 11, 1989. He said, and I quote: 
 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I still am concerned about 
this concept of the rule changes being introduced in this 
way. 
 

He’s referring to the government unilaterally introducing the 
rule change and ramming it through. He said, on May 11, I’m 
concerned about that kind of a concept as we are concerned, as 
all members should be concerned. 
 
He went on to say: 
 

And before I take my place, I make this point to hon. 
members. If the opposition will stand in their place and say 
that the major concern they have is the process; the 
concern that they have with the issue is the process, then I 
ask them to do that. 
 

Well we’ve done that over and over and over again, Mr. 
Speaker. Members on this side of the House have said over and 
over again that one of our major concerns in this debate is a 
majority government unilaterally ramming a rule change 
through. We’ve said that over and over. 
 
The Minister of Justice went on: 
 

And if the process is what is wrong with this action today, 
then I invite the hon. member to ask to adjourn this debate, 
to put together two members or three members from the 
opposition and two to three members from the government 
to go and see if we can’t collectively come to a resolve to 
find out what would be a fair rule as it relates to 
bell-ringing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a wise, a wise suggestion on the part of the 
Minister of Justice; a suggestion that we would be more than 
happy to follow up. 
 
He went on to say: 
 

. . . I offer that challenge to the members opposite. If they 
are interested, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition, primarily, and 
in the process, Mr. Speaker, that they will take up that 
option. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have said over and over again, we are ready 
and willing to take up the option that was brought into this 
House on May 11 by the Minister of Justice. 
 
He concluded by saying: 
 

We can get into this battle, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps this is 
an opportunity by which together we can preserve the 
tradition of changing the  

  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1714 
 

rules, but at the same time bring some discipline to the 
ringing of bells. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I agree entirely with what the Minister of Justice 
was saying in this House on May 11. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was well said. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It was well said, as my colleague from 
Saskatoon says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader, the Leader of the Opposition, the hon. 
member from Riversdale, in his response that very day, in his 
response to this motion and then specifically to the offer made 
by the Minister of Justice, this is what he said. I’m quoting, Mr. 
Speaker, from page 1091 of Hansard, May 11, 1989, the Leader 
of the Opposition: 
 

Now having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of 
Justice has suggested a committee of two or three, as I 
understand it, from each side, be set up, established in the 
next reasonable while to consider the issues pertained by 
this motion. I think that that’s a suggestion which is worthy 
of consideration, careful consideration, by this opposition. 
 

Further down, he repeats: 
 

I think therefore the suggestion of the Minister of Justice 
bears further, very serious consideration. And I’ll 
undertake to him, as Leader of the Opposition, that we will 
get back to him within the next . . . I would hope the 
government would at least give us over the weekend . . . 
 

This was a Friday, Mr. Speaker, Friday, May 11. The leader 
asked if we could consider over the course of the weekend, and 
committed to the Minister of Justice that we would respond to 
his offer on Monday of the following week. 
 
He says in conclusion, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

I think we’ll take up that suggestion and take an example 
of it for the next two or three days and consider it carefully, 
and get back to the government proponent of the mover, 
the Minister of Justice. 
 

We were at that point, Mr. Speaker, in this debate where I think 
we should be today and should have stayed then — the Minister 
of Justice proposing a legislative committee to deal with the 
rule change in the traditional fashion. Because the Minister of 
Justice said that day he was concerned, concerned about the 
precedent of a majority government ramming through a 
unilateral change regarding the rules of the House, rules that 
affect every member. The Minister of Justice made that point. 
 
We have responded yes, we are concerned about that process. 
We’ve said it over and over again. The Leader of the 
Opposition clearly gave every indication to the Minister of 
Justice that we would be willing to very seriously consider that 
proposal and respond in a very timely fashion. 
 

An Hon. Member: — But you can’t trust us. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The member opposite says we can’t trust 
them, the member opposite. That’s the member from Saltcoats 
. . . from Esterhazy and Saltcoats. I’ll tell you who can’t be 
trusted, is a minister who comes into this House on a Thursday 
and offers a legislative committee, and then by Monday of the 
next week pulls the offer. 
 
The next time we come back to the House on this motion, the 
offer is gone and we’re right back to where we were prior to 
Thursday, May 11, when the Minister of Justice comes in and 
says we’re going to ram through the rule change. We’re right 
back to where we were. 
 
Now I ask, who can be trusted when a minister of the Crown 
comes into the House, makes an offer; we in good faith say that 
we will give it serious consideration. Indeed we have 
recommended the very same thing over and over again. The 
Minister of Justice, the very next week comes into this House 
and withdraws the offer, pulls the offer. Now I believe it was 
the Thursday of the next week — Wednesday or the Thursday 
of the next week. So much for trust. 
 
Now that’s what we’re faced with, Mr. Speaker. We’re faced 
with an offer made and then an offer pulled, unilaterally pulled. 
We would not be into this debate today if that committee could 
have been established — and we were ready to establish it. We 
would not be into this debate today. But here we are. That’s the 
situation that it’s got us here. 
 
We’ve got a government that’s just bent now, just bent on 
pushing this thing through. Because I guess in their own 
considerations they feel there’s no other way they’re going to 
accomplish that political goal of privatizing SaskEnergy. This 
has become their cause célèbre privatization, the privatization 
of SaskEnergy. And if you need this tool to do it, well then they 
are determined to get this tool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this debate members on this side have said, and 
I say it again, we are ready; we are ready to form that 
committee to consider rule changes in this House. Obviously 
it’s not just the rule regarding bells that needs to be considered 
— whole wide variety of other rules, and I want to talk about 
that. We are ready. If members opposite would caucus and 
decide let’s get out of this situation by doing just that; let’s get 
out of this situation by coming together in that committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this debate government members when they’ve 
spoken both in the debate and other occasions in the House, in 
Crown Corporations Committee and other places, in public and 
the press, they have consistently said that the 17 days of 
bell-ringing, the 11 sitting days, about the two weeks when this 
legislature was not functioning, that that was undemocratic. The 
member from Shaunavon today in his remarks used that phrase 
on a number of occasions — undemocratic. 
 
Well you see, Mr. Minister, that might be a little . . . it might 
make more sense if it were coming from another government, 
or from other lips. But in this case, when this  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1715 
 

government, members opposite describe as what happened in 
those 17 days as being undemocratic . . . Well one, I think 
firstly that they’re wrong. I think they’re wrong. It’s simply 
untruthful. But secondly, I think that’s hypocritical. I think it’s 
the height of hypocrisy for these members to suddenly describe 
themselves as the great defenders of democracy, and to describe 
an occasion when the people can express their opinion as being 
undemocratic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this debate other members have reviewed the 
notable examples when bells have been rung in Canadian 
legislatures and parliaments, and they are few in number, which 
is an indication that this rule has not been abused neither in this 
legislature nor elsewhere. 
 
But the members have reviewed those situations. There are 
notably four, I guess, counting the incident here in 
Saskatchewan when the bells rang. Today the member from 
Regina Centre reminded us of that other occasion in this 
legislature when the bells rang for more than a few hours, that 
situation that dealt with him as a member and a matter of 
privilege. 
 
The two other significant examples, the one, as you well know, 
Mr. Speaker, occurred in Manitoba. In that situation the 
Supreme Court of Canada had ordered the translation of laws in 
Manitoba. The government of the day introduced legislation to 
see that done. 
 
It was extremely unpopular in Manitoba, as you well know and 
we well know. And the Progressive Conservative opposition . . . 
Mr. Speaker, I remind you it was the Progressive Conservative 
opposition in Manitoba who rang the bells on that occasion, 
protesting that legislation. And they rang the bells knowing that 
they had wide public support. They wouldn’t have done it had 
they not enjoyed that wide public support. 
 
The other and perhaps more notable example of bell-ringing in 
Canadian parliaments was the bell-ringing that took place in 
Ottawa in 1982, in March of 1982. And again you recall, Mr. 
Speaker, the events of that bell-ringing. 
 
The federal Liberal government at that time had moved an 
omnibus energy Bill with any number of provisions. The 
Progressive Conservative opposition of the day in Ottawa, 
wanted the Bill split into more manageable portions, more 
debatable portions, more reasonable portions. The federal 
government of the day, the Liberal government, refused, and 
the Progressive Conservative opposition, federal opposition of 
the day, rang the bells. 
 
(1630) 
 
And they rang those bells for 14 days; they rang the bells in the 
House of Commons for 14 days — the Progressive 
Conservative opposition in Ottawa in 1982. They did it, Mr. 
Speaker, because they felt that to be a significant public issue. 
And I agree with them; it was. And they did it because they 
knew that Canadians from coast to coast shared the view — 
shared the view that it was inappropriate that that kind of 
legislation would be brought forward in the House of Commons 
and debated. 
 

They rang the bells. And in essence they won the day, because 
eventually the Bill was divided and debated. Now that, Mr. 
Speaker, was the Progressive Conservative opposition in 
Ottawa that rang the bells for 14 days. It was the Progressive 
Conservative opposition in Manitoba that rang the bells on the 
French translation issue. 
 
Now why I say it’s hypocritical for these members now to be 
describing the ringing of bells as undemocratic . . . you see, in 
those days, when their members were ringing bells elsewhere 
— not a peep, not a peep. In fact, they were congratulating their 
colleagues. And I understand that. They were congratulating 
their colleagues for using that tool — for using that tool to 
promote public discussion; for using that tool to let the people 
of Manitoba in one case, to let the people of Canada in the other 
case, express their opinion on an important issue, on an issue of 
public concern. 
 
Not once did the Progressive Conservatives in Saskatchewan 
describe what their colleagues in Manitoba were doing or their 
colleagues in Ottawa were doing, as undemocratic. You see, 
Mr. Speaker, the ringing of bells only becomes undemocratic 
when it’s the arrogance of members opposite that is somehow 
being challenged, or when it’s their policy that’s being 
challenged. That’s the only time it becomes undemocratic. Mr. 
Speaker, I find that hypocritical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it hypocritical also that this government 
should describe the act of an opposition, and this opposition in 
this situation, as undemocratic for putting the function of this 
legislature on hold for a period of two weeks. They describe 
that as undemocratic. 
 
But I ask them, what about the nine months, the nine long 
months that this legislature didn’t sit; when this legislature was 
absolutely silent because the government opposite didn’t recall 
this legislature. The Premier and the cabinet refused to call this 
legislature. And this is just in the past year. 
 
For two weeks the bells rang in this legislature, enabling the 
people of Saskatchewan to express their opinion, their view on 
the privatization of SaskEnergy. That’s undemocratic, 
according to them. If people have a voice, that’s undemocratic. 
 
But for nine long months in this past year, this place sat silent; 
no members present, no public debate of important issues. 
Why? Because the Premier, the Deputy Premier, his cabinet and 
the caucus, decided this legislature would not sit. Now which is 
the undemocratic? When it’s absolutely necessary to their 
political ends, then they will recall the legislature. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if they could get away with it, I 
wonder if we would ever sit. They describe a two-week 
suspension of activity in this House while the people of 
Saskatchewan debate an important issue, as undemocratic. And 
yet they are the government who will let this legislature sit idle 
for nine months, stifling all public discussion of important 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the people who now want to describe 
two weeks of public discussion as somehow  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1716 
 

being undemocratic. These are the people that left the 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview without a sitting member 
for a year — refused to call a by-election for a year — I think at 
that time the largest constituency in the province. The largest 
constituency in the province, population-wise, without a sitting 
member for a year. That’s the view of democracy this 
government takes. 
 
We come back after the nine-month delay, and what’s the first 
thing that happens in this legislature once we’re recalled? Bill 1, 
An Act to Establish the Department of Public Participation. 
And if that Bill passes, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, all sorts 
of power, all sorts of power scooped up into the hands of 
cabinet — taken from the legislature, taken from all members, 
taken from the people, scooped into the hands of cabinet. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I believe the hon. member is straying 
from the topic. I’d like to bring that to his attention. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite describe the reasoning for this motion, their 
reasoning for limiting the ringing of bells in the Saskatchewan 
legislature is because an extended ringing of bells is somehow 
undemocratic. Mr. Speaker, I find that hypocritical. These are 
the people who refused to recall this legislature; these are the 
people that have introduced Bills into this legislature that, in my 
view, place much too much power in the hands of cabinet. For 
this government to somehow today describe itself as the friend 
and defender of democracy, I view as hypocrisy, and hypocrisy 
of the highest order. 
 
And I remind you, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t hear a peep, not a 
word, not a sound of the accusation of somebody being 
undemocratic when it was their own members, their own party 
that were ringing the bells for what were good reasons in 
Ottawa and in Manitoba, from their point of view. 
 
And I go back to this point, Mr. Speaker. When their 
colleagues, the PC opposition in Ottawa and the PC opposition 
in Manitoba, rang the bells, they did so and could only do so 
because they knew they had the support, the vast public support 
behind them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we rang the bells in this House because we knew 
that support for what we were doing in this House existed in 
this province in vast numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a check and a balance built into 
bell-ringing. No political party in opposition can undertake the 
ringing of bells lightly. Because if you do not enjoy public 
support for what you are doing, you will pay a heavy political 
price. There is no question about that. It cannot be undertaken 
lightly. 
 
That has its own check and balance within it. This rule cannot 
be abused. If it is abused by any opposition — and I don’t care 
who is sitting on this side of the House — if that rule is abused 
by any opposition, there will be a political price to pay, and 
anyone in opposition will know that. It can only be used when 
public opinion supports what an opposition is doing, and that 
was the case in this province. 
 

The people of Saskatchewan were saying, stop this government, 
stop it from its sell-off of SaskPower. They wanted a chance to 
express that opinion; we gave them that chance, Mr. Speaker. 
And so I would argue in this debate, I would argue that the 
ringing of bells, rather than being something anti-democratic, is 
an important tool in the democratic functioning of a society. 
 
In our British parliamentary system of government, the ringing 
of bells can be a very democratic tool. Because I would argue, 
Mr. Speaker, that during those 17 days democracy in 
Saskatchewan was not stifled. Democracy in this province was 
not stifled. In those 17 days democracy in this province 
flourished, in my view, simply flourished, as it hasn’t for years 
and years and years and years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the bells of this House rang, it focused 
public attention on an important public issue. Attention was 
focused on this issue because the bells were ringing in this place 
in a way that no other tool could have provided. What happened 
in those two weeks when this legislature, when this room was 
silent, but the political debate was happening outside? Well all 
over this province it wouldn’t matter where you go, people were 
talking about the privatization of SaskPower. I submit you 
could go to any town in Saskatchewan and that was the subject 
of conversation during those 14, 17 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during that time I had opportunity to travel to 
Swift Current to meet with people in the community of Swift 
Current over this issue and discuss this with the press in Swift 
Current. On my way down to Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, I 
stopped at a coffee shop. I was alone; I sat down alone. Behind 
me, in the booth behind me, four people were sitting. Now 
we’re into spring, but the conversation wasn’t about the 
weather. We’re into hockey finals. The conversation wasn’t 
about hockey. We’re almost into seeding, but the conversation 
wasn’t about seeding. The conversation at that table was the 
privatization of SaskPower . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
those four people . . . I admit to the member from Rosthern, I 
eavesdropped. I couldn’t help it; I was sitting there and they 
were speaking loudly. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell that 
member they were some upset with his government and what 
his government intends to do with SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And he would be well-advised to visit some of 
the coffee shops in his own constituency and hear what people 
are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that conversation in that small coffee shop in a 
town along the Trans-Canada Highway, I submit, would not 
have been taking place, would not have been taking place if the 
bells of this building were not ringing. The ringing of the bells 
in this place, in this Assembly, gave the people a focus. The 
people of our province were given a focus. And that, as the 
Leader of the Opposition says, is a very democratic act. What 
could be more democratic? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1717 
 

Mr. Calvert: — All across this province, anywhere I travelled, 
anywhere members of this caucus travelled, people were talking 
about the privatization of SaskPower and they were saying 
everywhere: what has gone wrong with this government? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member is getting into 
specific issues outside of the issue that is before the legislature, 
and I’ve certainly called government and opposition members 
to order on this. The issue before the legislature is rule 33(1), 
and specific issues outside of that can be debated at other times. 
There is motions on the order paper, or the members can put 
motions on the order paper to discuss different issues, but the 
issue here is the process of changing the rules, or the rule 
change. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This rule that we’re 
now debating, this motion, this motion to change the rules so 
that the bells of the legislature could ring for a maximum period 
of one hour, I would argue, could never provide that same 
opportunity for the wide public discussion to take place on any 
issue, on any issue of public importance, as this issue clearly 
was. 
 
In one hour that debate just couldn’t happen, just couldn’t 
happen as it did in this case. And I argue again, it can only be 
on a very, very significant issue that bells are rung. They can’t 
be rung indiscriminately. I mean, an opposition would soon 
suffer the political consequences. But on an issue of extreme 
public importance the ringing of bells can provide an 
opportunity for wide public discussion, discussion that extends 
from kitchen tables to coffee shops to work places to 
neighbours meeting on the street. Mr. Speaker, this is not the 
only forum for debate and discussion in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It is more than appropriate in my view that 
issues like the privatization of SaskPower be discussed in the 
coffee shops on the No. 1 Highway. So Mr. Speaker, I would 
view therefore this rule change to be anti-democratic in that 
sense. 
 
During that two-week period — 17 days, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— people across this province . . . And again, no matter where 
you wanted to go in this province, people signed petitions. They 
signed petitions voicing their opinion that what the government 
was doing in this case was completely and absolutely wrong. 
They wanted their opinion to be heard in their legislature. They 
took that age-old practice of petitioning their government. 
 
They had the opportunity to do that because the bells were 
ringing; they had the opportunity to do that because the bells 
were ringing. They had the opportunity to get petitions and take 
them to their neighbours, and I know this happened all over the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all over the province. 
 
They had the opportunity to take those petitions. Residents of 
nursing homes were taking petitions; senior citizens in 
high-rises were taking petitions. We had young people, 
teenagers . . . I met young people, teenagers, taking petitions 
and finding that residents of the province wanted to express 
their opinion on this very significant  

public issue. They had time to do that. They had time and the 
opportunity to petition their legislature, to petition their 
government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Calvert: — . . . to petition their government to stop — stop 
the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during those two weeks, during that time when the 
functioning of this House was put on hold to allow people to 
voice their opinion on the privatization of SaskPower, 
democracy, in my view, flourished. It flourished in a way it 
hasn’t for years in this province. We saw people gather, not 
only the four people who gathered in the coffee shop, not only 
gathering by fours, but by gathering by hundreds and thousands 
to discuss this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those gatherings took place because the bells were 
ringing in this legislature, because the issue was focused, 
because people fully understood — fully understood — what 
their government was doing. And they took that opportunity — 
they took that opportunity provided by this opposition — to 
meet, to gather, and to express that opinion. And they came, 
Mr. Speaker, by the thousands. They came by the thousands. 
 
I had the opportunity to attend one or two of those meetings and 
I . . . Mr. Speaker, there were people at those meetings who I 
would not have expected to see at a meeting that was obviously 
sponsored and involved with the New Democratic Party. I saw 
members of all political parties at those meetings, expressing 
their displeasure with this government’s intention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those meetings were possible, those meetings 
were possible because the bells were ringing in this House. The 
right to meet is surely a democratic right. Mr. Speaker, we gave 
that opportunity, we provided that opportunity when we rang 
the bells. I say, Mr. Speaker, democracy in this province 
flourished. It flourished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when those bells were ringing in this House, it 
gave we who are elected members, on all sides, an opportunity 
to go to the people that we represent; to the people of other 
constituencies. It gave all members the opportunity to travel the 
province and to hear what the people of Saskatchewan were 
saying; to view what the people wanted in terms of their 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House took that 
opportunity, and we travelled. We travelled this province; we 
went from community to community; we were not afraid to 
meet the media in every community. We travelled in our own 
constituencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, what did members opposite 
do with that opportunity, with the opportunity to go out and to 
talk to the people of this province? What did they do? Well they 
hid in this room. They came in here day after day, hiding in this 
room. Well I’d have hidden,  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1718 
 

Mr. Speaker, if my agenda was to privatize SaskPower. I’d 
hide, and I’d hide for a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they had the opportunity; 
members opposite had the opportunity. We gave them the 
opportunity to go, to meet their constituents, their own people, 
to meet constituents in other constituencies. Did they take that 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker? No, they sat in this House. They sat 
in this House and hid from the people, Mr. Speaker. I would 
say, Mr. Speaker, in those two weeks, in those two weeks 
democracy in this province flourished in a way it hasn’t for 
years and years and years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve brought with me today just one letter, just one 
letter from two residents of the town of Brock, and that letter 
begins this way. Written to our opposition, this letter begins this 
way: 
 

We wish to thank you for the longest bell-ringing in 
Canadian parliamentary history. 
 

We wish to thank you. These people who live in Brock, 
Saskatchewan, they write and say: 
 

We wish to thank you for the longest bell-ringing in 
Canadian parliamentary history. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And why? Why? Because, and I quote from 
their letter: 
 

. . . because we object to SaskPower privatization and to 
the Devine government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — They know what it’s all about. They know 
what it’s all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I believe that 
in a debate where a member is quoting from a letter, he has to 
table that letter? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’ve heard the member’s point 
of order, and we’ve had a little delay because I wanted to get 
the exact citation for the member. Rule 327(6), indicates that: 
 

A private Member has neither the right nor the obligation 
to table an official, or any other, document. 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have tabled in this House well over 90,000 signatures — 90,000 
signatures. Every one — and there’s more to come, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s more to come — every one of those residents 
in Saskatchewan, their signature asking this government to stop 
its privatization of SaskPower. Now a lot of good it seems to 
have done. They’re not listening, Mr. Speaker. We can table 
petitions, we can table letters. What alternative do we have but 
to ring bells, Mr. Speaker? What alternative does an opposition  

have in the light of this kind of arrogance? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this letter from the residents of Brock, and these 
writers write to this opposition saying: 
 

We wish to thank you for the longest bell-ringing in 
Canadian Parliamentary history (and why?) because we 
object to SaskPower privatization and to the Devine 
government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — To go on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

This is a very bad Bill, and Mr. Devine and his party must 
listen to the people of Saskatchewan. He’s not even getting 
support from many who voted for the PCs, and he’s losing 
many members due to this Bill. 
 
 We can see . . . 
 

These are the residents of Brock saying: 
 

We can see, if this government goes against the people, a 
change of government will have to come. Good luck (they 
say) and keep up the work. We want to thank you . . . 
 

These residents of Brock say: 
 

We want to thank you for the longest bell-ringing in 
Canadian parliamentary history . . . 
 

They understand, Mr. Speaker, they understand that that 
bell-ringing enabled democracy to flourish in this province, and 
they understand that the rule change proposed to limit 
bell-ringing has one goal, and one goal only, and that’s the 
privatization of SaskPower. If you can’t do it through the front 
door, then you do it through the back door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of this province were given an 
opportunity to speak on this issue, they spoke with clarity. They 
spoke with clarity. And, Mr. Speaker, of course because the 
issue was given the focus by the bell-ringing, it attracted not 
only provincial media attention but national media attention. 
 
It attracted the attention of national pollsters. Had the bells not 
been ringing, I don’t suppose that the major dailies in our 
province would have commissioned the major poll that they 
did. But because the bells rang, because the issue was focused, 
because the discussion was happening, the major dailies in our 
province — and I refer to the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix 
— the major dailies commissioned a poll. That poll records the 
public opinion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to quote at length from this poll, but 
very germane, very germane to this debate was the opinion of 
the people of Saskatchewan saying that only 22 per cent of 
them, only 22 per cent supported what the government was 
doing; about 11 per cent, a very low percentage undecided; and 
a massive percentage, two-thirds of Saskatchewan people 
supporting what the  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1719 
 

opposition was doing in opposing SaskPower and in ringing the 
bells. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member has been using 
repeated arguments on SaskPower as the reason for the bells 
ringing. And arguments are permitted, but repeated arguments 
of the same argument aren’t permitted. They’re referred to as 
tedious repetition in rule 25(2), and I would like to bring that 
rule to the hon. member’s attention because I’m sure he’ll agree 
that much of his speech has centred around that one argument. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much. I sincerely hope that 
that argument has been made; I hope that argument has been 
made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — That argument very succinctly being that this 
whole thing arose because of the government’s intention to 
privatize SaskPower and that this motion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the hon. member . . . I’ve 
brought it to his attention, and I think in a reasonable manner, 
and I believe that he should respond in a reasonable manner and 
go on to another argument, not simply take the opportunity to 
repeat the same argument. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s the hon. member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just wonder . . . To clear 
this up, and I do this in the spirit of co-operation, but I wonder 
if you could make a ruling on whether or not it’s in order to talk 
about Bill 21, which is the Bill that the bells rang on, An Act to 
amend The Power Corporation Act. That’s the Bill that the bells 
rang on. I just wonder, is it not clearly appropriate and in order 
and germane to the discussion to speak to that Bill, which is, in 
fact, the power corporation Act. That’s why the bells rang for 
17 days. The letters that we’re reading would indicate that the 
public understand that. We understand that they’re connected, 
and I wonder, what is your ruling due to the issue of whether or 
not those two are connected? 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order. The 
discussion of the Bill is not in order. Reference to the issue . . . 
he has made many, many repeated references. That’s my ruling, 
that the rules do not allow for a member to make the same 
argument over and over, which is what the hon. member has 
been doing. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On another point of order. If I could get 
clarification on my point of order. My point of order was, can 
you speak and connect the Bill to the bell-ringing motion? 
That’s what I was asking, not whether or not you could repeat 
over and over again, but is it within the rules to connect the two 
of them? That was my question, and I want you to rule on that 
particular issue. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the hon. member, if he’s 
listened to this debate and previous one, knows that that 
connection has been made on different occasions  

and it has been permitted. However, the repetition of the same 
connection, same argument, is not permitted, which is the point 
I’m trying to make — which is the point I’m trying to make. 
 
Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, on that point of order, and the 
House Leader has brought this up several times, but he seems to 
want to have it both ways. On one hand he will argue that he is 
referring to the SaskPower on the point of order, and on the 
other hand he argues about SaskEnergy. I don’t think he can 
have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member doesn’t have a point of 
order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for your 
ruling. And, Mr. Speaker, I will move on; I will move on then 
because there are many, many, many arguments that should 
convince all members in this House to vote this proposed 
motion down. 
 
I’ll turn then to what I see are the five important reasons why 
this motion as it exists now before us, the five important 
reasons why this motion is inappropriate, or in another phrase, 
why I feel this motion is wrong. It is wrong, first of all, because 
in my view — and inappropriate — because it is unilaterally 
made. It is a motion of a rule change proposed unilaterally by a 
majority government. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I will want to argue that this motion is 
inappropriate because it is a rule change proposed during the 
heat of battle, in the midst of what is obviously a strenuous 
conflict. I think that makes this motion inappropriate — the 
timing of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll want to argue that, on a third point, this 
motion is inappropriate or wrong because it sets a wrong 
precedent. It sets a precedent that no one in this House can live 
with. For that reason I’ll argue this motion is inappropriate. 
 
I will argue that this motion is inappropriate because it’s 
coming day after day at the exclusion of other important 
government business. It’s being introduced in this House day 
after day at the exclusion of other important business. 
 
And let’s be clear who sets the agenda in here, Mr. Speaker. It 
is that group of men and women . . . it’s the Premier, the 
Deputy Premier, and their House Leader, I guess, whoever it is 
these days. They set the agenda in this House, and day after day 
they bring this motion and so, therefore, I will argue that that is 
inappropriate because we are excluding other important 
business. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will want to argue that it’s 
inappropriate because it does not set out to review the entire 
rule picture in this legislature. It sets out to change but one. And 
if we are going to be dealing with rules, then let’s look at the 
whole package, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at the whole package, 
because obviously from time to time  
  



 
June 7, 1989 

 

1720 
 

the rules of this Assembly must be amended and changed to 
meet the needs of the new day. And so I feel this motion is, on 
that basis, inappropriate and wrong because it seeks only, it 
seeks only to change one rule when we should be looking at the 
entire functioning of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


